[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah342)  [Next](oah344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXII

1\. JEHOVIH spake to Lika, saying: These are My ways; reveal thou Me
unto them. They that know Me not, shall be made to know Me; My labors
shall rise up before them, and their understanding shall be opened.

2\. They shall know what I mean when I say I will destroy or I will
build up. I have heard man in his vanity, that judgeth Me. His eyes are
on the earth only, and in houses and riches. Because I take them away
from him, he complaineth against Me.

3\. I gave man an example in his own child that delighteth in sweets,
and idleness, and vain pleasures. Man taketh these from his child,
saying: Behold, they are not good for thee, save in great temperance!

4\. Wherein have I injured thee, O man? Wherein destroyed I aught that
contributed to thy spirit? Wherein have I suffered destruction to come
upon thee, whilst thou followedst My commandments? Why shalt thou
complain because I laid great cities in ashes? Sawest thou the millions
of drujas thou wert holding down in darkness by thy evil habits?

5\. I am not in anger, nor pull I down, nor burn I up any place in a
passion. As thou goest forth to destroy a row of houses to stay a great
conflagration, shall the people murmur? For thy hand is stretched forth
to do a good work for the whole city.

6\. My heavens are magnified cities, and when a mortal wing offendeth,
behold, I clip it short. They are all Mine; and none can question My
authority with Mine own, which I wield for the resurrection of the
whole.

7\. Thou hast wept because of the destruction of the books of great
learning of the ancients; but thou knowest not thine own words. Saw I
not, O man, that thou wouldst never wean thyself from the doctrines of
the dark ages <span id="page_514a">p. 514a</span> if the books of great
learning were not destroyed!

8\. In all ages of the world thou hast been bound to the ancients; thou
art forever searching backward for wisdom; and to the angels of the dead
who pretend to be ancients. I behold the latter, and that they are
drujas.

9\. I send wise angels down to them to deliver them out of darkness. And
they come and bear the drujas away from thee, for thine own good and
theirs. My wise angels suffer mortals to burn up the books of the
ancients; for I command them to make thee open thine understanding to
the living present.

10\. Jehovih spake to At'yesonitus, and through him to the twelve Gods
of deliverance, saying:

11\. Go forth, My son, in wisdom and power. Thy labor requireth great
strength and strategems. For thou shalt find the drujas fast bound to
mortals and to mortal habitations (houses). As a drowning man clingeth
to a log, so cling the drujas to mortals. As a delirious man, mad with
drunkenness, flieth in fear from his best friends, so will the drujas
fly from thee, and thy hosts who shall attempt to deliver them.

12\. They will inspire their mortals to dread an innovation of the
ancient doctrines. Yea, the twain, not knowing it, will bind themselves
together with great tenacity.

13\. But thou shalt deliver them apart nevertheless, by stratagem, or
persuasion, or with a strong hand. And when thou hast them separate,
thou shalt surround the drujas with flames of fire, and carry them off
to the boats, which are bulwarked with fire. And thou shalt deliver them
in the places My Son, Yussamis, hath ready prepared for them.

14\. Thou shalt not only deliver the drujas, but cause mortals to hate
them.

15\. Mortal kings shall issue edicts against magicians and prophets and
seers and priests; and the consultation of spirits shall come to an end.
And man on the earth shall turn to his own soul, which is My light
within him, and he shall cultivate it and learn to think for himself.

16\. At'yesonitus prepared a record to give to mortals, and it was by
inspiration so given. And the nature of the record was to teach mortals
to be guarded against drujas, and know who was afflicted with them.

17\. This, then, that followeth is said record, even as it standeth to
this day in the libraries of heaven, to wit:

<span id="page_515a">p. 515a</span>

18\. The man that saith: I pity my neighbors, they are surrounded with
drujas!

19\. The man that saith: Fools only believe in obsession!

20\. The man that saith: There is no All Person!

21\. The man that saith: My way is wisdom; thine is wicked!

22\. The man that saith: Let no one dictate to me! I will have nothing
but liberty to the uttermost!

23\. The man that saith: As the priest thinketh, so do I!

24\. The man that saith: That thou hadst my knowledge!

25\. The man that saith: The ancients were wiser than we!

26\. The man that saith: The ancients were fools!

27\. The man that saith: Whoso seeth not as I do is a heathen!

28\. The man that saith: Whoso worshippeth not my God is wicked!

29\. The man that saith: Wisdom is book-learning!

30\. The man that saith: There is no wisdom in books!

31\. The man that saith: My book is sacred; it containeth the sum of all
revelation and inspiration!

32\. The man that saith: There is no inspiration, nor words thereof!

33\. The followers of the ancients only.

34\. He who will have nothing to do with the ancients.

35\. He who ignoreth rites and ceremonies and prayers.

36\. He who dependeth on rites and ceremonies and prayers.

37\. Whoso denieth the Ever Present Person.

38\. Whoso followeth the counsel of angels or men.

39\. Whoso will not learn from the counsel of men and angels.

40\. Whoso feeleth prayers and confessions to be good for others, but
not necessary for himself.

41\. Or saith: I will lead and supervise; be thou my servant!

42\. Or saith: Behold my rights!

43\. Or: Behold my earnings!

44\. Or: Behold my possessions!

45\. Or talketh of himself and his experiences.

46\. Or tattleth of others.

47\. Or judgeth his brother, or criticiseth him.

48\. The self-righteous, who saith: Behold me, I am holy!

<span id="page_516a">p. 516a</span>

49\. Or who desireth not new light, or saith: The old is good enough!

50\. Whoso laboreth for himself only.

51\. Whoso laboreth not for others in his wisdom and strength.

52\. That seeketh his own ease.

53\. That considereth not others' welfare more than his own.

54\. The hypocrite preaching one way and practicing another.

55\. That speaketh not openly his doctrines, lest his words profit not
his earthly means and associations.

56\. At'yesonitus said: For these are all as much under the bondage of
drujas as is the drunkard, or harlot, or murderer. And after death their
spirits float into the same hada of darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](oah344.md)
