[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah349)  [Next](oah351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_462b">p. 462b</span>

### Chapter III

1\. WHEN Yokovrana went to the temple to do sacrifice, the high priest
besought him to consult the oracle in reference to the child, and for
his kingdom's sake. And he so consulted the oracle, and the angels of
Ormazd said unto him: O king, thou, before whom all people fear, hear
thou the angels of heaven and be wise, for thy kingdom's sake, and for
Capilya. Behold, thou hast maintained the custom of thy forefathers, and
caused to be slain on the altar of thy God, Dyaus, twelve young men and
twelve virgins for every day of the twelfth new moon, that by blood thy
God might triumph on the earth, and that thou mightst be the most feared
of kings. And thou hast subdued all the regions of the rich earth to
honor thee and thy laws.

2\. Therefore, the God of heaven saith thou shalt no longer pursue the
sacrifice of human blood, but instead thereof make sacred the blood of
the lamb, which shall be called the Lamb of thy God. And in the day of
thy first sacrifice, thou shalt bring Capilya to the altar, and sprinkle
the blood of the lamb thou hast slain upon his head, as a blood offering
to thy God. And he shall be called CAPILYA, THE LAMB OF HEAVEN.

3\. To this the king assented, and Capilya was accordingly sprinkled
with the blood of a lamb, which was sacrificed in the altar of the king.
Thus ended the first of the evil edicts of the evil Gods of Vind'yu; and
from that time after mortals were no longer sacrificed to the Gods, by
consent of the kings.

4\. Capilya was called Yokovrana's son; and he was taught all things
which it was lawful in those days to teach a prince; and because he was
prepared for the throne, he was made acquainted with the kings and
governors of all the tributary cities and countries in the land of
Vind'yu.

5\. Of the matters of Capilya, hereinafter revealed, know ye that in all
things he was directed by the angels of Jehovih (Ormazd).

6\. When Capilya had attained maturity, he besought the king for leave
to travel, saying to the king: Is not the greatest wisdom that which
cometh by <span id="page_463b">p. 463b</span> the eye and the ear? And
is it not wise that he who may some day become king should acquaint
himself with his kingdom whilst he is yet young? For then, he will not
only see and hear better than if he were old, but he will have time to
weigh the nature of the government, as to its best adaptation to the
people.

7\. To this the king replied: Thou art already wise, my son; thou
knowest sufficient of the earth and her people according to the laws of
the ancients. Therefore to travel for wisdom's sake would be great
folly. Thine eyes and ears are too sharp already; better is it for thee
that thou seest not the people of thy kingdom. For the time may come
when thou shalt need to use great severity upon them; therefore, to be
strange with them, thy sympathy will not lead thee away from justice.

8\. Capilya said: Thou reasonest will, O king; and because thou art
wise, have I no credit in being wise also. For it must be true that a
son hath his wisdom from his father. And since thou hast so wisely put
me off with thy arguments, answer me this: Is it not profitable to a
young prince, before he hath the cares of a mighty kingdom, to go abroad
and enjoy the pleasure of the world?

9\. The king said: There are but three pleasures in all the world:
eating and drinking is one; sleeping is another; the presence of women
is the third. Why, then, shall a man go abroad?

10\. Capilya said: And yet thou hidest the true reason as to why thou
desirest thy son not to travel.

11\. The king said: If thou tell me the true cause, then shalt thou go
whithersoever thou desirest.

12\. Capilya said: First, then, I will say to thee that I rejoiced
because thou didst deny me; for I so loved thee, O king, that I knew no
joy but to remain with thee. And, moreover, thou so lovest thy son, thou
wouldst not have him go far from thee?

13\. The king was so delighted with this answer, he said: Of a truth, O
prince, thou hast guessed aright. And if thou find it in thy heart to
leave me for a season of travel, then will I indeed bear with thy loss
until thou returnest.

<span id="page_464b">p. 464b</span>

14\. Capilya traveled for nine years, and he went to the uttermost
extent of the land of Vind'yu, east and west, and north and south. And
because his nurse, who was, in fact, his real mother, had told him
thousands of tales about the persecution of the Faithists, and their
sufferings, he sought to obtain information of these scattered people,
but as yet he knew not he was of that race.

15\. At the end of nine years Capilya returned to Yatinghadatta, rich in
knowledge as to the inhabitants of Vind'yu. And when he came before the
king, Yokovrana, where he was received in great honor, he related the
knowledge he had obtained of the country, its extent and grandeur, and
its hundreds of great cities and innumerable people. To all of which
wisdom the king lent a willing ear; and he declared Capilya was the
wisest and most learned man in all the world.

16\. And now was come the time when God, Son of Jehovih, came to
establish Jehovih, and begin the deliverance of the Faithists, and to
collect them together in the places designed for them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah351)
