[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah388)  [Next](oah390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter X

1\. GOD said: Here is wisdom, O man: To be observant of all things and
adapt thyself thereto on Jehovih's side.

2\. To obtain great learning that applieth to the resurrection of thy
soul in comprehending the works of the Almighty.

3\. To suffer not thyself to be conceited in the wisdom of the moderns
over the ancients, nor of the ancients over the moderns.

4\. The Creator created man wisely for the time of the world in which
man was created.

5\. Thou art for this era, and not for the past.

6\. The ancients were for the past era, and not for the present.

7\. To know the <span id="page_565">p. 565</span> present; to be up with
the signs of the times, this it is, to see Jehovih's hand.

8\. Make not a God of riches, nor of thy supposed sciences and learning.

9\. For in the time thou seest men doing these things, behold, that is
the time of a cyclic coil in the great beast.

10\. Thy God and thy Savior shall surely be swept away.

11\. Make Jehovih, the Creator, the idol of thy soul; neither setting up
this or that as impossible.

12\. Opening up thy understanding to find the tree of light and
righteousness of soul.

13\. Admitting that all things are possible in Jehovih's hands.

14\. Then thy God shall surely not be swept away.

15\. Look about thee, O man, and learn from the Sons and Daughters of
Jehovih, the march of the Almighty's kingdoms.

16\. Who shall make a system or a philosophy like Jehovih? What hast
thou found that is infallible?

17\. The truth of yesterday is not a truth to-day; the truth of
yesterday is the truth to-day.

18\. Thou shalt come to understand even this.

19\. To learn how to live; to rejoice, and to do good, and make thy
neighbor rejoice also, this is wisdom.

20\. Let these be thy loves and the glory of thy speech, and thou shalt
learn to prophesy concerning the ways of Jehovih.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate 49](oah390)
