[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah29)  [Next](oah31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

1\. ON the second day after the house of Moeb was completed, and all the
members were in their respective places, Jehovih spake through God,
saying:

2\. Now is the beginning of the second resurrection. Even as the
corporean putteth off the corporeal body, and is born a spirit, becoming
the first resurrection, so are ye, putting away individual self and
becoming an organic community, the beginning of the second resurrection.

3\. As they of the first are for individual self, so have I bound them
close on the face of the earth; as they survived on the earth on
corporeal food, so have I made them to survive in the lowest heaven on
atmospherean food. As Moeb hath risen above these conditions, so will I
exalt the foundations of the house of Moeb higher up from the earth than
Hored, and Moeb shall be the lower house of My kingdom.

4\. The voice of Jehovih departed and God saluted Ha'jah in the name of
the Father. And a great light enveloped the house of Moeb, and the
es'enaurs chanted a hymn of praise. Thereafter God arose and stood in
the throne of Jehovih, saying:

5\. Hear ye O all ye people of heaven above and heaven below, the house
of Moeb in the beginning of the second resurrection is founded in
Jehovih's name. Proclaim ye the words that have gone out of my mouth, to
the east and west and north and south, and to the swift messengers of
the arcs of the firmament above.

6\. Glory, glory be to Jehovih! Boundless and Almighty Creator, Present,
and full of love, wisdom and power, glory to Thee forever and ever,
amen!

7\. The house of Moeb chanted a proclamation. The swift messengers
assumed their respective globes of light, and began to ascend in every
direction, carrying the word to the exalted spheres.

8\. And God crowned Ha'jah as the sub-God of Hored, and he was
proclaimed to all the quarters of heaven and earth. And the history of
his name exists to this day as Jah, amongst mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](oah31.md)
