[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah33)  [Next](oah35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVIII

1\. JEHOVIH spake in the arc of O'wasti, in the Orian field of Hon'she,
in the etherean heaven. Jehovih said: The time of the earth is at hand;
the deliverance of her first-born will fall at your doors. Come forth, O
My sons and daughters, receive ye them from My hand.

2\. Onesyi, high aspiring Goddess of Hon'she, and the thousand
counsellors, gathered in a host of five millions of souls, emancipated,
and to them the dignified Onesyi spake, saying:

3\. Unlike all harvests heretofore delivered to us from other corporeal
worlds, Jehovih sendeth us the first-born of the earth. Let us rejoice
and glorify Him, O my beloved. Send forth to the boundaries of Hon'she
and proclaim the hosts of earth upraised. Provide them with mansions and
quarters, ye that remain at home. And ye that volunteer to go to the
earth to receive them, come quickly.

4\. Onesyi said: Swift messengers have just come to me from the arc of
Wan; Etisyai will be there. She it was who bestowed Jehovih's crown on
the first God of the corporeal earth. Her hosts, a million strong, go by
the way of Tiviyus, and pray we meet them in O'wea. And thou, Wistaw,
shall sit on my throne. I will to the earth, to receive the thirty
million newborn, the glorious gift of Jehovih.

5\. Onesyi said: The young virgin earth hath given birth. O the joy of
the firstborn! I will take with me a host of singers, a million strong.
Their voices shall have power and sweetness to win the love and
adoration of all the thirty millions. The glory of Jehovih's works shall
shine so brilliantly upon them that all past trials shall be forgotten.
Hasten, O ye Gods and Goddesses! Let down the curtains of <span
id="page_35">p. 35</span> fire! Here begins the play of Jehovih in the
management of a new world!

6\. Now gathered together men and women, long raised up in the
emancipated heavens, whose wills were potent over a'ji and nebulæ, and
swift in appropriating what Jehovih had fashioned in the firmament. And
they built a ship, the size of which was equal to the width of Hored,
and filled it within with angels of the rank of Gods and Goddesses, many
of whom had been brought forth into life before the earth was created,
and whose native corporeal worlds had gone out of existence. And they
let down curtains from the ship, and the curtains were like flames of
fire, and they reached downward, equal to the breadth of the earth.

7\. These Gods and Goddesses were as a unit in will, and potent and
swift workmen, and the ship was laden, and on her course through the
vault of heaven. Past the a'jian fields of Che'wang she rode swiftly.
Soon the hosts of the much-loved Etisyai were seen in a smaller craft,
highly polished and swift, making way for O'wea.

8\. Up goeth a shout of joy from millions of throats, then a song of
delight; heaven is joyful in Jehovih's boundless dominions. And now the
twain approach O'wea; and they slacken speed and near each other, nearer
and nearer, till the ships touch and are joined by skilled workmen.

9\. Forth leap the two Goddesses, Etisyai and Onesyi, and in no
stateliness or ceremony, but like children in whom love is transcendent,
they fly to each other's arms, amidst the outburst of joy from the
countless throng. Yet onward moves the etherean ship, majestic and
meteor-like, steadily taking course to the new earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](oah35.md)
