[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah304)  [Next](oah306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIX

1\. JEHOVIH spake to God, His Son, in Craoshivi, saying: Prepare thou,
for the fall of ji'ay in atmospherea. The earth and her heavens enter
Loo-sutsk, seventy years in the rates of seven hundred; forty years in
five hundred; twenty years in a'ji! Be thou advised; for Craoshivi shall
fall to thirty, and Hored be buried in the earth. Call thou My Son,
Ahura, and reveal My words!

2\. So God, in Craoshivi, advised his High Council, and also sent
messengers in haste of Vara-pishanaha, to Ahura, and acquainted him.
After this God propounded in Council: Anuhasaj, what can Craoshivi do
for him? Thereupon the members spake at great length, more than a
thousand of them.

3\. So God decreed: A commission to wait on Anuhasaj and inform him of
his danger, and offer to succor and save him. This that followeth is the
message thus sent, to wit:

4\. To thee, O Anuhasaj, greeting in Jehovih's name, and by our love
assured. Thou art adjudged to be in perilous condition. Behold, one
hundred and thirty years' pressure will fall on the heavens of the
earth; Craoshivi will go down to the depths of hada. Reach up thy hands,
and I will come and save thee and thy kingdom. Wilt thou withdraw thine
armies and permit the resurrection of thy lowest grades?

5\. Anuhasaj answered this in these words: Who art thou that thus
assaileth my peaceful kingdom? Thou pretended son of the Void
Nothingness? Call thou on me as becometh one with thy small kingdom, and
if thou need help for thyself, or for thy paupers, I will give unto
thee!

6\. Thereupon God returned this answer, to wit: Be thou patient with me,
O brother: If it be that I am proved to be in darkness, and thou in the
light, I will make thee ample amends. If on the other hand I be in the
light and thou in darkness, I will say naught that would wound thee. If
thou wilt apply thyself diligently to solve the place of the earth and
her heavens thou wilt find in truth the coming pressure whereof I told
thee. Think not that my words are spoken at random, but try them by
prophecy and by mathematics.

7\. As to the coming danger, it is an easy matter to estimate. A
thousand years ago, when thou first established thyself and thy heaven,
Hored possessed an average grade above fifty, all told. And there were
four thousand millions of them.

8\. In two hundred years thou hadst six thousand millions, and the grade
was raised to sixty-five. In the next two hundred years the number was
nearly doubled, but the grade had fallen to forty. And in two hundred
years later the inhabitants had nearly doubled again, but the grade had
fallen to twenty-eight. In the next two hundred years, the increase in
numbers was at the same rate as the decrease in the grade.

9\. Now behold, thy twenty-eight thousand millions, more than half of
whom are in Hored, are below grade ten. And when thou didst first
possess Hored, a ten grade could not survive thereon. Think not that
some accidental thing will raise so great a weight.

10\. Look into this matter, as to what thou hast done! Thou hast
persuaded thy hosts not to look up to Jehovih and His kingdoms, and lo,
they incline downward to the earth. Yea, they have already filled the
earth with war and destruction.

11\. Thou shalt not hope to throw these things on thy Gods, for they
will turn against thee and accuse thee. At present they are content to
found kingdoms of their own. But they will also come to an end. Because
they have seceded from thee, let it be evidence that all the highest
grades will follow in the same way.

12\. As for Craoshivi, her lowest grades are above fifty, and therefore
self-sustaining; her highest grades are ninety-nine and her average
eighty-eight. And hundreds of millions of these are such as my Lords
have rescued from thy bondage; others, such Faithists on the earth as
thy false Gods put to death for refusing to bow to thee. And have they
not proved it <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> is better to suffer
death than to renounce faith in Jehovih? Otherwise they had now been
within the company of thy slaves, toiling in darkness.

13\. Yea, my kingdom is made up of those that were despised and abused;
and of those that thy Gods slew in war, chaotic and mad. For my asaphs
followed thy cruel wars and gathered in the spirits of the slain, whom
thou wouldst not have. Thou callest them poor still. Why, so they are;
they are washed white as snow; and because they have been taught to keep
on casting aside all accumulation, save knowledge and goodness of heart,
in which they are rich indeed.

14\. They would come to thee now in pity to take thy people by the hand
and deliver them away from thee and darkness. And if thy slaves be not
delivered away from thee, they will surely, soon or late, turn upon thee
and cast thee into hell. I pray thee, therefore, assume thou conversion
to Jehovih, and cast thy kingdom upon Him whilst thou mayst. For I have
the power and the means to deliver thee and thy slaves. Yea, I will give
thee a new name, and hide thee away, that they cannot find thee. And
thou shalt be one with my in my holy place.

15\. To this Anuhasaj made no reply, and so the matter remained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](oah306)
