[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah350)  [Next](oah352) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. THE word of Jehovih (Ormazd) came to Capilya, saying: Son of heaven,
hear thou the Voice of the Ever Present! Capilya asked: How sayest Thou?
The Ever Present?

2\. Jehovih (Ormazd) said: Behold Me; I am not of the king's laws; I am
the Maker of kings. They have made a law against Me, the Ever Present.
They have scattered My people. They have denied My people the right to
obtain knowledge.

3\. Capilya said: Mine eyes and ears have proved these things. What
shall Thy servant do?

4\. Jehovih said: Thou shalt deliver the slaves unto freedom, and
provide them places to dwell together, according to the laws of the
ancients.

5\. Capilya said: O Ormazd (Jehovih), why hast Thou put this upon me,
Thy servant? Why gavest Thou not such matters into the hands of the
Vrix?

6\. Jehovih said: Thou art thyself of the race of Faithists, and have
been prepared for this labor from the time of thy birth. Go thou and
find <span id="page_465b">p. 465b</span> thy nurse that cared for thee
in infancy, and when thou hast her alone, say to her: Nurse, the voice
of heaven hath come to me, saying: Capilya, thou art of the race of
Faithists: how sayest thou? And the nurse will say to thee: My son! my
son! Alas me! Thinkest thou I would by thy death, or thy mothers death?
For is not such the law?

7\. Capilya went and inquired of the nurse, and she said to him: My son,
my son. Alas me! Thinkest thou I would be thy death, or thy mother's
death? For is not such the law? Capilya answered: Such is the law. But
tell me the truth, and I swear unto thee, both under the name Dyaus and
under the name of thy God, Jehovih (Ormazd), that thy words shall be
secret with me, as the God's will. Am I an adopted Vrix?

8\. The nurse said: Behold, thou hast loved me all thy days; from mine
own breasts wert thou fed. Shall I, then, lose thy love, and so die of a
broken heart?

9\. Then Capilya made oath before the Gods, and thereafter she answered
him, saying: I am thy mother, O prince! The angels of the Ever Present
came to me in the moment thou wert born, and carried thee into the
queen's arms; and the king knew not even to this day but thou wert his.

10\. Capilya said: Why hath this been done unto me?

11\. The nurse said: Hearken, O prince! The king's wife was barren; the
king desired a son who should be heir to the throne.

12\. Capilya interrupted: And thou barteredst thy flesh and flood with
the queen for this?

13\. The nurse said: Patience, O prince! I am of a race that owneth only
One King, the Ever Present! Respect me, therefore, till thou hast
learned the whole truth. The angels of Ormazd came to me before thy
birth, saying: Alas, the Chosen People are persecuted and abused,
scattered and despised; but because they are faithful and most virtuous,
the Ever Present will come and deliver them. Then I said unto the
angels: What is this matter to me? Behold, I am myself but a servant,
and can do nothing.

14\. Then the angel answered, saying: Thou shalt have a son, and shalt
call <span id="page_466b">p. 466b</span> his name Capilya; and he shall
be the deliverer of thy people. For which purpose he shall receive great
learning. But because great learning is denied to thy people, thy son
shall be adopted by the queen, and the king, believing it is his own
son, will render unto the child learning and power also.

15\. And I said unto the angel: Flesh and blood of me are nothing if I
can thereby serve Jehovih (Ormazd).

16\. Capilya said: Since thou committedst me to thy God, then am I
indeed his. Now whilst they were yet talking, Jehovih spake to Capilya,
saying: I am not come to give new doctrines unto men, but to rescue My
people from bondage, and to restore equal rights unto the inhabitants of
the earth. For this purpose wert thou, O Capilya, sent into the world.
Because thou wert of the race of the Faithists My voice hath come to
thee.

17\. Because the king imagineth thou art his son, and loveth thee
dearly, thou shalt not suffer from his hand. Go, then, whither I will
lead thee, and it shall be testimony to thee, that I am the Ever
Present, moving them by means of the spirit to come to thee.

18\. In due time the prince departed from home, not advising the king of
his purpose; and he went as Jehovih led him, and came to Hosagoweth,
near the river Vesuthata, where there was a forest, with meadows
interspersed, and he found a camp of four families of wandering
Faithists, and they were famished with hunger, and were ragged.

19\. The prince, seeing they feared him, said: Be not afraid; I come not
to persecute or drive you hence. As ye perceive by my dress, I am a
prince, judge ye not me to be your enemy, come to destroy you. For, by
the same power ye were led hither, am I come also. This land do I
bequeath to you, to be yours forever. Cease ye, therefore, traveling
about, but begin and till the soil.

20\. Yatithackka, the rab'bah, said: How sayest thou? Thou wert brought
hither by the same God? Then, of a truth, thou knowest the signs and
pass-words?

21\. Capilya said: None of these things have I learnt; but even as there
is a legend amongst thy people that one would come of Jehovih and
restore His chosen people, so declare I unto you, I am he. That thy
Ruler is <span id="page_467b">p. 467b</span> my Ruler; take me in
private with thee, O rab'bah, and the Ever Present will give the signs
and pass-words, and thus prove me.

22\. Moreover, I say to thee in prophecy, ere three suns have risen and
set, there shall come to this place hundreds and hundreds of thy people.
Now when the rab'bah had examined Capilya, and found that he had the
signs and pass-words, he wondered exceedingly. The prince then caused
wood and stone to be laid in the form of a crescent, and its size was
sufficient for seats for one hundred people. He said: This is the altar
of Jehovih (Ormazd). Let us sit this night, for the Father's voice is
with me.

23\. During the day, many more came; so by night there were one hundred,
men, women and children, and the prince commanded them to sit about the
altar of Jehovih. And presently the Voice spake in the midst of the
altar, saying: This is My Son, of whom it hath been prophesied, one
would come to restore My people. Behold, I am the Ever Present, and not
in the figure or image of a man, but I am the All Space and Place, doing
My will through My angels and through the souls of men. Be ye steadfast
in righteous works and love toward one another; and most just to a
fraction with all other peoples. With you will I establish Myself, even
as in the ancient days with your forefathers.

24\. Capilya then appointed the oldest rab'bah as chief of the altar;
and this was the first established family (community) since many a
hundred years, that was assured by a prince that they should not be
driven off.

25\. On the next day the prince took the people a little way off, about
half an hour's walk, and he said to them: Build ye here another altar,
for yet, ere night comes, there shall come others even here. Let the
Ever Present have an altar provided unto them. Accordingly the people
fell to in faith, and built another altar; and when it was finished, and
the sun gone down, there came many wanderers, Faithists, to the place.

26\. Capilya said unto them: Come ye to the altar of Ormazd, for he
desireth sacrifice of all whom he blesseth. And they went in and sang,
and prayed, giving thanks to God. Jehovih <span id="page_468b">p.
468b</span> said: Suffer him I have sent unto you to build three more
altars at like distances apart; for I will bring My people together for
three places of sacrifice.

27\. On the next day there came many more wanderers, who had escaped
from the province of Anassayon, where a war was being carried on against
raiders from Tubet, the high mountain region. And Capilya built altars
for them also; and to them he also appointed rab'bahs and chief
rab'bahs.

28\. Now, behold, they were without food, and many had been famished for
many days. Capilya, perceiving that some of the people were suspicious
of him, said unto them: Whoso hath faith in me of Jehovih, let him stand
with me this night, for the Father will manifest unto us.

29\. Not more than forty came to the place designated; for they feared
Capilya was an imposter. And when they were assembled, Capilya tried
them, and found of a truth they had faith. And he said unto them: Stand
in a circle and join hands, and I will stand in the midst. Yet I know
not what the Great Spirit will do for us.

30\. And when they were thus standing, Jehovih sent a cold wind, and
there came down from heaven an abundance of Ahaoma, sufficient to feed
the whole of the people for many days. Neither knew any man of what
ahaoma was made; but it was savory and nutritious.

31\. And the people came and ate, and also gathered up the ahaoma, and
carried it home. Capilya said unto them: Because Ormazd hath done this,
go ye into the altars and return thanks unto Him.

32\. And the people did as commanded; and from this time forth not one
of them lacked faith in Capilya. And thereupon he said unto them: This
place shall be called Maksabi, for it is the first colony (Tarag-attu)
in all the world where the Father hath fed His people with His Own hand.
So the place was called Maksabi, which, in Vedic, would be Suta-ci-ci (I
speak with food!).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah352)
