[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah360)  [Next](oah362) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

1\. IN these days in Egupt there were houses of records, where the
affairs of the state, and of the king and governors, were recorded; and
there were recorded also the births and marriages and deaths of people.

2\. The languages of the learned were Fonecean and Parsi'e'an; but the
native languages were Eguptian, Arabaic and Eustian and Semis. The times
by the learned gave two suns to a year, but the times of the tribes of
Eustia gave only six months to a year. Accordingly, in the land of Egupt
what was one year with the learned was two years with the Eustians and
Semisians.

3\. God said: My people shall reckon their times according to the place
and the people where they dwell. And they did this. Hence, even the
tribes of <span id="page_497b">p. 497b</span> Israel had two calendars
of time, the long and the short.

4\. To events of prophecy there was also another calendar, called the
ode, signifying sky-time, or heavenly times. One ode was equivalent to
eleven long years; three odes, one spell, signifying a generation;
eleven spells one Tuff. Thothma, the learned man and builder of the
great pyramid, had said: As a diameter is to a circle, and as a circle
is to a diameter, so are the rules of the seasons of the earth. For the
heat or the cold, or the drouth or the wet, no matter, the sum of one
eleven years is equivalent to the sum of another eleven years. One SPELL
is equivalent to the next eleventh spell. And one cycle matcheth every
eleventh cycle. Whoever will apply these rules to the earth shall truly
prophesy as to drouth and famine and pestilence, save wherein man
contraveneth by draining or irrigation. And if he apply himself to find
the light and the darkness of the earth, these rules are sufficient. For
as there are three hundred and sixty-three years in one tuff, so are
there three hundred and sixty-three days in one year, besides the two
days and a quarter when the sun standeth still on the north and south
lines.

5\. In consequence of these three calendars, the records of Egupt were
in confusion. The prophecies and genealogies of man became worthless.
And as to measurements, some were by threes, some by tens, and some by
twelves; and because of the number of languages, the measurements became
confounded; so that with all the great learning of the Eguptians, and
with all the care bestowed on the houses of records, they became even
themselves the greatest confounding element of all.

6\. Jehovih had said: For two thousand years I gave My enemies a loose
rein; and they have the longest line of kings in all the world; and yet
in the midst of their prosperity they fall down like a drunken man. Even
their language is become like a pearl that is lost in a mire.

7\. Jehovih said: Because the kings of Egupt have outlawed My people,
and denied them the right to obtain great learning, behold My people are
divided also. One tribe hath one speech, another tribe another speech,
and so on, till they can not now understand one another; save, in fact,
in their rites, and signs, and passwords.

<span id="page_498b">p. 498b</span>

8\. Yea, the kings have perceived that to keep My people in ignorance is
to keep them forever in bondage. But I will raise up a leader, Moses,
amongst My chosen, and I will send him even into the house of the king,
and the king shall give him great learning; he shall master all
languages, and be capable of speaking with all My people.

9\. Because the Israelites (Faithists) worshipped not the Gods and
Lords, but the Great Spirit only, and because they resented not injury
done by another, they had been limited into servitude by the Eguptian
laws, which had stood for fifteen hundred years. These laws were called
the Sun laws, after the manner of the division of the Osirian system,
which was:

10\. The sun is a central power; its accompanying planets are
satellites. In like manner the king of Egupt was the Sun King, and his
sub-kings (governors) were satellites. Osiris, the highest angel in
heaven, was the Sun God, that is, God of Gods; for all other Gods were
his satellites. He revealed certain laws to mortals, and these were the
Sun laws; and all minor laws were satellites. A Sun law extended over
all of Egupt, but a satellite law pertained to the minor affairs of a
city or province; but it must conform to the Sun laws. For in those days
the spirits of darkness taught that the sun once whirled so fast it cast
off its outer extreme, and so made the earth, and moon, and stars; and
this was the accepted philosophy of the learned Eguptians of that
period. Because the worlds run in circles (orbits), the circle was the
highest measure, or sun measure; and the diameter of the circle was
called, the ode, a Fonecean word, signifying short measure. And this
name, ode, was applied to the Israelites in satire, as the Anglo-Saxon
word, odius, is used to this day. But the Israelites made sweet songs
and called them odes also.

11\. Amongst the Sun laws were the following, to wit: The God of Gods
(i.e., Osiris) decreeth: Whoso boweth not down to me shall not partake
of me. Behold, mine is the sign of the circle! My enemies shall not
receive great learning.

12\. They shall not hold sun places (be employers), but be as servants
only all their lives. And these signs shall discover them:

13\. If they worship not me, but the Great Spirit;

<span id="page_499b">p. 499b</span>

14\. If they deny that the Creator is in the image of a man;

15\. If they circumcise, and will not serve as soldiers;

16\. Then their possessions are forfeited already; nor shall they
possess houses in their own names; nor send their children to the
schools; for they shall be servants and the servants of servants
forever.

17\. Under the Eguptian laws it was accounted a sufficient crime of
idolatry to worship the Great Spirit, Jehovih, that the Israelites were
not even admitted to the courts to be tried for an offence, but fell
under the jurisdiction of the master for whom they labored, and his
judgments were unappealable.

18\. Now at the time of the birth of Moses, there were in Egupt thirteen
millions of inhabitants; and of these, four millions were Faithists
(Israelites), more or less. For amongst the Israelites not all were of
full faith, but many, to shirk the rigors of the Sun laws, professed to
be worshippers of God (Osiris), and they would also enlist as soldiers,
and otherwise connive in the ways of men, for sake of favors.

19\. For which reason the Sun King (Pharaoh) feared the time might come
when the Israelites might revolt against the Sun laws or become soldiers
and confederate with foreign kingdoms for the overthrow of the Eguptian
dynasty.

20\. For more than three hundred years the God Baal and the Goddess
Ashtaroth had driven the foreign kingdoms to war; and in consequence of
these wars the Faithists had fled into Egupt, and even accepted
servitude rather than be slain elsewhere.

21\. Jehovih had said: Behold, mine enemies in killing one another,
frighten off My chosen. Now will I lead them into Egupt together and
give unto them a great leader, and he shall restore My doctrines unto
them, and I will afterward deliver them into lands of their own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](oah362)
