[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah371)  [Next](oah373.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV

1\. CHINE said: One man waiteth till he is rich, before helping the
poor; another man waiteth for the angels to inspire him, and give him
wonders, before he teacheth the unlearned; another waiteth for the
multitude to join in first; and yet another waiteth for something else.
Beware of such men; or put them in scales where straw is weighed.

2\. The sons and daughters of Jehovih go right on. They say: It is the
highest, best! I will go in! Though I do not accomplish it, yet I will
not fail (my part).

3\. Consider ye the foundation of things at all times. Jehovih saith: I
created all the living to bring forth their own kind. Be ye perceiving
as to whom ye marry, considering as to the All Highest inspiration
common to your choice.

4\. Neither judge ye the All Highest inspiration of any man or woman by
their words, but by their works. For the raising up of the world shall
be mostly accomplished by the fruit of judicious marriage.

5\. Chine said: I declare a bondage unto men that they know not of, for
it belongeth in the next world; which is the begetting of selfish
offspring in this world. For whilst their heirs are in darkness they
themselves cannot rise in heaven.

6\. And like unto this, I also declare a glory in heaven to them that
wed in self-abnegation, who do good unto others constantly and with
delight; for they bring forth heirs to glorify Jehovih in good works
also.

7\. To this end was the mark of the circumcision given unto your
forefathers, lest the Faithist women be led astray by idolaters. And
yet, with all precautions, many fell, being tempted of the flesh. And
their heirs descended lower and lower in darkness, until they lost sight
of the All Person, and believed not in Him.

8\. The hand hard with toil will insure a better heir than the dimpled
hand of a proud woman. The latter hath a soul of passions and her
offspring will have souls like a mixture of gall and sugar; though they
be sweet, they will prove to be bitter in time to come.

9\. Consider thy heir; show him a house with a head, orderly. That he
may grow up understanding the discipline of earth and heaven.

10\. The father shall be master in all things; and the mother shall be
vice-master in all things, to rule in his absence.

11\. For each family shall be a kingdom of itself; but no one shall be a
tyrant, though he have precedence in all things.

12\. Sit not down by the table to eat until all stand about; and when
they are seated, thou shalt say: In Thy praise, O Jehovih, receive we
this, Thy gift; be Thou with us unto Thine own glory, forever, amen!

13\. For the chief virtue of the words lieth in the discipline of the
young mind; holding him steadfast after the orderly manner of the angels
in heaven. And because he repeateth it with thee, he learneth to honor
thee with good rejoicing.

14\. And when the sons and daughters are yet small, thou shalt teach
them to work; inspiring them above all things not to fall into idleness,
which lieth at the borders of hell.

15\. But overtask them not, nor give them pain; remembering they are to
be thy glory, which Jehovih bestowed unto thee to be in thy keeping, not
for thy self-aggrandizement, but for their own delights and holy
pleasures.

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

16\. For they shall sing and play, and clap their hands and rejoice and
dance, for these are their thanks unto the Creator; and the earth shall
be glad because they came into the world.

17\. Remember thou that labor shall be delight, and toil a great
delight; to have it otherwise to thy children and to thyself is to
prostitute man to be as a beast of the field. But thou shalt bring them
into groups, and their labor shall be a frolic and full of instruction.

18\. And even thy little ones shall learn that thou art but a brother,
an elder brother, and one of the same Creator's children; teaching them
that one who hordeth and keepeth things in his own possessions is as a
cannibal that eateth his kindred, flesh and blood.

19\. Above all things thou shalt teach them to keep holy and pure the
body created withal; for herein lieth health and strength. To be foul is
to be sick, to be sick is to be foul. Behold the heathen and idolater,
the feeders on flesh and blood; in the time they boast of health they
stink as a carcass; their flesh is congested and puffed up, their breath
like a kennel of dogs. How can their souls be pure or their
understanding clear? They have made themselves a festering stink-house
for the spirit to dwell in.

20\. And they say: Bah! I see no Jehovih! I know no All Person! I deny
the soul of things! Where is the spirit? I can not see it. Or the sound
of its voice? I can not hear it. And there be a Great Spirit, let Him
come before me! I would see Him. Yea, in their filthy bodies they say
this. Let them be pure and they will understand the vanity of such
words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](oah373.md)
