[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah327)  [Next](oah329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. ONWARD sped Lika in his airavagna, with his eight hundred millions;
through the sea of Enea-Wassa, the etherean realm of Haog-sa-uben;
shining like a meteor in its flight, the ship of fire of eight hundred
millions. On every side, the Jehovihian worshippers' vessels, tens of
thousands, coursing as many ways, some fast, on missions of quickened
labor; some slow, as traveling school-ships, exploring the great expanse
and glorious richness of Jehovih's provided worlds, always ready for the
newborn; each and all the ships as studded gems in the etherean sea,
moving brilliants playing kaleidoscopic views, ever changing the
boundless scene with surpassing wonders. And all of these, by signs and
signals, the story of their place and mission revealing to the
high-raised etherean souls, ships and men, as quickened living books of
fire, radiant with the Father's light and history of worlds.

2\. On Lika's ship, as on all the others, every soul, hundreds of
millions, enraptured, stood in awe and admiration of the ever-changing
scenes; some in silence, absorbed in thought; some posing with upraised
hands; some ejaculating gleefully; and some in high <span
id="page_472a">p. 472a</span> reverence to Jehovih, uttering everlasting
praise; every soul its full bent, being the full ripe fruit of the
diversified talents as they first shone forth in corporeal life.

3\. Onward sped Lika's airavagna now in the Roads of Nopita, now in the
a'ji'an Forest of Quion, most rich in adamantine substances, arches,
stalactites and stalagmites, and in forming and dissolving scenes, a
forest, a very background in the etherean worlds for the over-brilliant
crystal regions of light. And here, too, the tens of thousands of ships
of Jehovih's chosen; and on either side the great roadway lay the Fields
of Anutiv, inhabited by countless millions of etherean kingdoms. Along
the road for hundreds of thousands of miles, stretched up the hands of
millions and millions of souls, waving banners and flags to their
favored ships, going to some native star, from which Jehovih brought
them forth.

4\. Then changed the course of Lika's airavagna, by his commands sent
through the comet Yo-to-gactra, a new condensing world, already with a
head of fire four thousand miles broad; a very ball of melted corpor,
whirling like the spindle of a filling spool, forever winding unto
itself the wide extending nebulae. Here were coursing along, hundreds of
thousands of school-ships, with students and visitors to view the
scenes, most grand in rolling on, now round, now broken, now
outstretched, this ball of liquid fire, whirling in the vortex, thirty
million miles long. To balance against which vortex many of the ships
tossed and rolled, dangerously, had they not been in skilled hands; and,
as they were, causing millions of the students on many a ship to fear
and tremble, perceiving how helpless and stupid they were compared to
the very Gods who had them in charge.

5\. Not long did Lika loiter to view the scenes, or to indulge his eight
hundred millions, but stood his course again for the red star, the
earth; coursing the Fuassette Mountains, where the God, Vrilla-Gabon,
built the Echosinit kingdom, whose capital was Exastras, the place where
the Niuan Gods assembled to witness the first starting forth of the
earth. Here, halting awhile, and adown went Lika's recorders, to gather
from the Exastras libraries the earth's early history and the grade of
her creation; a copy of which obtained, the recorders hastily returned,
when onward again sped the airavagna, now making course across the
Plains of Zed, in the midst of which lay the great sea Oblowochisi,
<span id="page_473a">p. 473a</span> four million miles across, and this
also studded over with thousands of etherean ships.

6\. And now across to Rikkas, the place of the Goddess, Enenfachtus,
with her seven thousand million etherean souls, whereupon Lika and his
hosts cast down millions of wreaths and tokens, and the while, the music
of the two spheres mingled together in Jehovih's praise. Here, across,
the distance was three million miles.

7\. Now, all the while before, the red star stood upward, inclining
upward, but here in horizontal line began to stand, gleaming in more
effulgent flame. And in the course, where Lika's airavagna should go,
the Goddess, Enenfachtus, had previously upraised a hundred thousand
pillars of fire to honor him and his company; which great respect Lika
and his hosts answered with holy salutations.

8\. After this, came the ji'ay'an Forests of Hogobed, three million
miles across, and close for lack of etherean air and inspiration. Here
stood the Province of Arathactean, where dwelt the God, Yew-Sin, with
thirty thousand million newly-raised Brides and Bridegrooms from the
star Kagados. Over these regions Lika sped swiftly, and then to the open
sea, Amatapan, on the Vashuan Roads.

9\. Then a sail of two million miles, in the uninhabited regions of
Samma, when he reached Chinvat, the bridge on the boundary of the
earth's vortex beyond the orbit of the moon.

10\. And, halting not, but now coursing on a downward plane, made
straight toward the swift-rolling earth, whose speed was three-quarters
of a million miles a day. Through the high-floating plateaux of
atmospherea came Lika with his fire-ship, with his hosts, eight hundred
millions, came his ship like a meteor, huge as a continent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah329.md)
