[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah336)  [Next](oah338) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI

1\. IN the same time that Anuhasaj was delivered out of hell, so was
Anubi, and from the self-same knot. And he was carried on the same
calyos to Hao-yusta, the same heavenly place. And he was also in chaos,
knowing nothing, only screaming: I am not Anubi. I am not the Savior. I
am plain Chesota! (his real name).

2\. And he also saw not and heard <span id="page_495a">p. 495a</span>
not, but was wild, desiring to fly away. And they held him fast, and,
after the same manner they delivered Anuhasaj to reason, they also
delivered Chesota.

3\. And when both of them were well restored to sound reason, though
still timorous, Ahura took them in his own otevan and carried them to
Theovrahkistan, before Lika, for judgment. And great was the time when
they came; and especially the desire of the inhabitants to look upon
Anuhasaj, the most audacious God that had ever dwelt on the earth or in
her heavens, and, withal, the much-loved friend of Ahura.

4\. When they came before the throne of Jehovih and duly saluted, Lika
said: Whence come ye and for what purpose, O my beloved?

5\. Ahura said: Hell hath delivered up the bound. My friends are before
thee. Then Lika said: In Jehovih's name, welcome. Whatsoever the Father
putteth into your souls, that utter ye and be assured of His love,
wisdom and power.

6\. Anuhasaj said: That I am delivered out of hell it is well; that I
was delivered into hell it was well likewise. Give thou me Jehovih's
judgment. My purpose before thee, is to register my vows unto Jehovih,
that my record and thy just judgment may be carried to the heavens
above.

7\. Lika said: My judgment upon thee, Anuhasaj, is that thou shalt judge
thyself!

8\. Anuhasaj said: Most righteous judgment, O Jehovih! But knowest thou
not Jehovih's voice?

9\. Lika said: Thou asked for a great heavenly kingdom. Behold, Jehovih
gave it thee. As soon as order is restored, thou shalt have thy kingdom
again.

10\. Anuhasaj said: I want it not.

11\. Lika said: Thou shalt not say, I want this or that; but say that
thou will do whatsoever Jehovih hath given into thy hands. When thou
hast raised up thy whole kingdom, behold, thou wilt also be raised up.

12\. Anuhasaj said: Alas me, this is also just. Show thou me the way; I
will henceforth labor for the thousands of millions who were my kingdom.

13\. Lika now bade Chesota (Anubi) speak. Chesota said: I called myself
Master of the Scales and Savior of men. Whoever called on me,
worshipping me and De'yus, alias the Lord God, I accepted; whoever
worshipped me not, nor De'yus, nor the Lord God, I cast <span
id="page_496a">p. 496a</span> into hell, saying: Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting torments.

14\. What, then, O Lika, shall be my judgment? For, behold, I cast a
thousand millions into torments.

15\. Lika said: Judge thyself.

16\. Chesota said: Alas,the pains I gave can never be called back and
undone. Have I, then, no hope?

17\. Lika said: Whom thou hast pained, go thou to, and by thy good deeds
hereafter done to them, so win their love that they will call thee
blessed! When all of them have accepted thee, behold, it shall be well
with thee.

18\. Chesota said: O endless task! And yet, it is just. Teach me, then,
O Lika, how to carry out this great judgment.

19\. Lika then asked for Anuhasaj to come forward and be crowned; and
when he approached the foot of the throne Lika came down and said:
Anuhasaj, Son of Jehovih, God of Hao-yusta, thee I crown in Jehovih's
name, unto his service forever. Be thou with him, O Jehovih, in wisdom,
love and power.

20\. Anuhasaj said: Into Thy service, O Jehovih, I commit myself
forever! Give me of Thy love and wisdom and power that I may glorify
Thee and Thy kingdoms.

21\. Lika stretched up his hand, saying: Light of Thy light, crown of
Thy crown, O Jehovih! And the light was formed in his hand, and a crown
came out of the light, and Lika placed it on Anuhasaj's head. The latter
then sat down on the foot of the throne, and Lika took his hand, saying:
Arise, O God, and go thy way, and the Father be with thee!

22\. Thereupon Anuhasaj and Chesota saluted and stood aside. And then
Ahura saluted and stood aside also; whereupon Lika granted a day of
recreation, during which time the visiting Gods departed for Hao-yusta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](oah338)
