[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah325)  [Next](oah327) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

1\. VETTA'PUISSA, in Lika's etherean regions, made glorious by Jehovih's
light, and by His purified Sons and Daughters, whose heavenly mansions
matched unto their great perfection, was now quickened with great joy.
The trained hosts of Jehovih's Son, Lika, knowing he was to take
recreation by a journey to the red star, the earth, to deliver her unto
holiness and love, provided music and heralds and trumpeters, millions
of performers, to claim their reverence and rejoicing.

2\. The fire-ship, the airavagna, now adorned in splendor, was brought
into its place, and the vast hosts for the journey entered into it. A
roadway was preserved for Lika and his companion Chiefs and
Chieftainesses. First to lead, of the Rapon hosts, were the
Chieftainesses, Yanodi and Thazid, and they walked arm in arm. Next
after them came Lika, alone. Next came Rebsad and Thoso, arm in arm.
Next came Miente and Hors-ad, arm in arm. Then Oshor and Yihoha, arm in
arm. Then Gwan Goo and Geehoogan, and after them Rehemg and Antosiv.

3\. Loud swelled the music as the Chiefs marched forth; more than a
thousand millions in concerted song to Jehovih; and echoed by the
far-off trumpeters. And when the Chiefs entered the ship, followed by
the ship's laborers and firemen, all was motionless till the music
ceased.

4\. Lika walked upon the High Arch, and stretching up his hands to
Jehovih, said: I go forth in Thy name and wisdom and love and power, O
Jehovih! Thy great heavens which thou hast made full of glory shall bear
me up; the spark Thou gavest unto me will I keep quickened in Thy sight.
Thy hand is upon me. Thine arm encompasseth my ship of fire. In Thee I
know it will rise and course these worlds, to the red star, sail with
Thy hosts triumphantly unto labor for Thy glory.

5\. Arise, O palace of the firmament; by the power of Jehovih that
dwelleth in me, upward! onward! arise!

6\. And now with one will the hosts joined in, and the laborers and
firemen stood to their places. A moment <span id="page_470a">p.
470a</span> more, and the airavagna raised from its foundation, steered
toward the red star, and moved forth over the Fields of Vetta'puissa. A
hundred thousand banners and flags floated and waved from every side on
the great ship of heaven, and was answered by more than ten hundred
thousand more in the hands of the hosts below.

7\. The es'enaurs of the ship struck up a quickened march, joined by the
millions beneath, whilst the great multitudes tossed up their hands and
shouted in prolonged applause. Thus went forth Lika, Son of Jehovih, to
the red star, the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah327)
