[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah352)  [Next](oah354.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. FOR three years Capilya traveled over the land of Vind'yu, east and
west and north and south, establishing the Faithists wherever he found
them; and he donated to them whatever lands laid waste and not tilled;
but he touched not any land whereon other people dwelt and tilled the
soil.

2\. And it came to pass, the servants in the provinces fled from their
masters and went and dwelt in the places of Jehovih, to so great an
extent that the governors and sub-kings complained against Capilya, and
he was reported to Yokovrana, the king in chief, Capilya's
foster-father. And the king sent a commission summoning his supposed son
to the capital, to answer the charges against him.

3\. When Capilya was before the Royal Council, and demanded by the king
why he had come, Capilya said: The servant of the great king answereth;
his words are bound words. Whatsoever cometh out of Capilya's mouth,
Capilya holdeth as his. There be such as maintain that man, whose tongue
is moved by the spirits of the dead, is irresponsible for his words.
Capilya creepeth not through so small a hole. To be master of one's
flesh, and desires, and passions and words, these are great gifts
indeed. Capilya professeth these. Therefore, Capilya bindeth himself in
every word.

4\. Know then, Most Royal Council, servants to our Great King,
Yokovrana, Capilya was summoned here by the king, to answer certain
charges made by members of the Royal Council. These charges prefer that
Capilya hath founded certain colonies which have attracted away the
servants of <span id="page_473b">p. 473b</span> the sub-kings and of the
rich, and thereby sowed disobedience in the remainder.

5\. Capilya is come to answer these charges. Hear ye, then, Capilya's
answer: Capilya being heir to the throne besought the king for leave to
travel, and the king said unto him: Whatsoever the soul observeth that
may be good for the United Kingdoms, do thou. Said not the king this?

6\. Yokovrana said: Yea, my son. Thereupon Capilya said: When Capilya
traveled near and far, for nine years, his heart was sick because of the
misery of the poor and the glory of the rich. He beheld many forests and
many plains where no man dwelt; and he said to himself: Let the poor
come hither and live. Yet he called not any poor man. Was it, then, an
evil for Capilya to say this to himself?

7\. The king said: Surely not. Then Capilya went on: After a long season
of idleness, Capilya went the second time to travel, and when he came to
the forests and plains, behold, the poor were gathered together, and yet
more coming. So Capilya went amongst them to show them how to dwell
together wisely. Was this an evil in Capilya?

8\. The king said: Nay; of a truth it was good. Then Capilya said: In a
little while they discovered it was good for them to dwell together and
to help one another; and the news spread abroad, whereupon the servants
of the governors, and the rich, ran away from them. Is it not just to
say of the king and governors and rich men that they are driving their
servants away from themselves, because of hardships which are greater
than the hardships of the Gods?

9\. The king said: A good proof. But why sayest thou, the Gods? These
people for the most part believe not in the Gods. And many of them, I
hear, are believers in the Great Spirit! Capilya said: Thou sayest
truly, O king. But that is their matter, and not Capilya's. The king
said: Thou art right, my son. But how sayest thou of education? Shall
not the laws be maintained?

10\. Capilya said: Art thou the king? or merely the servant of the dead?
Shall Capilya call him father who is only a servant to carry out the
laws of the dead? If so, then hath Capilya sinned against the law. But
hear ye, <span id="page_474b">p. 474b</span> who are of great learning;
do ye obey one law of the ancients and not another? The law of the
ancients was that with the death of the king all laws died, and whoso
became king afterward must need make new laws of his own. The law
against educating the Faithists is a law of the ancients. Let Capilya's
accusers find which they will; for if they stand by the laws of the
ancients, then, indeed, have we no laws, and no king nor sub-kings. If
they repudiate the laws of the ancients, then Capilya hath not sinned
against any law.

11\. Yokovrana said: Thou art acquitted, Capilya. The laws of the
ancients can not bind thy king nor the king's kings. Touching these
matters, then, the Royal Council shall make new laws. And since Capilya
hath not contravened any law, neither shall the new laws interrupt the
orders of the state as they now are.

12\. Because of Capilya's presence in the Royal Chamber, the power of
Jehovih and His angels was great in that house.

13\. After this manner, that followeth, were the speeches of the
sub-kings and governors: To permit great learning to the Faithists is to
overthrow Dyaus and his reigning Gods and Lords; for by great learning
will the Faithists ultimately become members of the Royal Council;
therefore, at all hazards, great learning must be prohibited. Great
learning is inimical to good servitude.

14\. Jehovih said to Capilya: Be thou present when these laws are
passed; for by this means My holy angels will rule over the Royal
Council for the good of all men.

15\. For one hundred days the Royal Council discussed the matter, but
the angels of heaven kept them divided as to opinion and belief, so that
no law was passed by them. Now after they had thus wasted much time to
no purpose, Capilya asked permission to speak before the king and
Council as to what was wisdom in the government of the nations; and it
was granted unto him. This that followeth is, then, the substance of
Capilya's speech.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah354.md)
