[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah491)  [Next](oah493.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX

1\. THE Lord said: Aside from the orderly kingdoms of God, there were
seven false kingdoms in hada, ruled over by false Gods and false
Goddesses. Chief of these were Baal, with four thousand million angel
slaves; Ashtaroth, false Goddess, with three thousand million angel
slaves; Hi'lizar, with three thousand million angel slaves; Sodonius,
Goddess, with two million angel slaves, and then came Fue-Sin, Hrivatza.
Beside these there were six hundred false Lords and Lordesses, who had
occupied the mortal temples of worship, and the oracle temples.

2\. But the latter were driven away from mortals by command of God, that
they might be induced to seek resurrection.

3\. And God foresaw that the travel of the earth would cause her to pass
through an a'ji'an forest of four hundred years, and that darkness would
be upon the lower heavens.

<span id="page_670">p. 670</span>

4\. And God sent down to the earth angel inspectors and numerators and
recorders to prepare the record of mortals for the libraries of heaven.
And there were of inspectors, four hundred thousand angels; of
numerators, twelve thousand; and graders, ninety thousand; of recorders
and scribes, forty thousand; and of bearers, six hundred thousand.
Besides these were the messengers, heralds and musicians, of whom there
were sixty thousand.

5\. Such was the army sent down to the earth according to God's command.
And they were in charge of Toyvraghah and Yulis and Hagonte and Rufus.

6\. And God called up the great mathematicians, Yahimus, Menres,
Fargawitha, Howitchkal, Jemima, Jordan, Molakka, Kossitus, Makkas and
Agebon; and God said unto them:

7\. The time of the fall of a'ji on the earth is at hand. Compute ye the
regions of the earth where it will fall most; and having determined, go
ye to the mortal prophets who are in su'is, and cause them to prophesy
unto the inhabitants of the earth.

8\. The mathematicians saluted and departed for the earth, as commanded
of God.

9\. Now when God foresaw that darkness was near at hand, for a period of
four hundred years, he commanded his Holy Council and his heavenly
kingdoms to pray to Jehovih for the space of one day, for wisdom and
strength.

10\. In answer to their prayers, there came a swift messenger from Lika,
Orian Chief, Son of Jehovih; he came from Takuspe, in the etherean
worlds, in an etherean arrow-ship, with thirty thousands. His name was,
Yotaportas, God of Eriasa, in the plains of Woo'Sin. And when he had
come before the throne of God, duly saluting, he said:

11\. In Jehovih's name I come, greeting by His Son, Lika. God said: In
Jehovih's name I am blessed by thy presence, God of Eriasa, Nirvanian
Host. What wouldst thou?

12\. Yotaportas said: By command of Jehovih, through His exalted Son,
thou shalt withdraw thine emissaries from the kingdoms of Baal and
Ashtaroth, and from all kingdoms on the earth, whose mortals pay
obedience to false Gods. A'ji of four hundred years will reign upon the
earth and her heavens. It is so determined and provided by the Holy
Etherean Dispensers of roads in Vragapathon. Of which matters I am sent
to thee that thou mayest be duly provided therefor.

13\. The time is also now at hand when the I'hins, the sacred people,
the mound-builders, will cease to dwell on the earth. The darkness which
is necessary to the earth will be too much for them. The heavens that
have heretofore received their spirits shall be dissolved, and the
plateaux thereof removed to the outer rim of the earth's vortex.

14\. The Lords' reports showed there were at this time on the earth two
million three hundred thousand I'hins. Of these, seven hundred thousand
inhabited Egupt and western Arabin'ya; two hundred thousand inhabited
Chine'ya, the Jaffeth of the ancients; and the balance, for the most
part, inhabited North Guatama and toward Hon'ya-pan.

15\. Such, then, were all that remained of a people that once covered
over the whole earth, more than a thousand million of them.

16\. God declared a day of recreation in honor of Yotaportas; and the
angels of heaven had great rejoicing.

17\. And on the day following, Yotaportas, with his hosts, departed for
Eriasa, in etherea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](oah493.md)
