[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah494)  [Next](oah496.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. GOD, Son of Jehovih, through his Holy Council, in Paradise, his
heavenly seat, now decreed:

2\. To the Faithists of Arabin'ya, Ebeneezer captain, with five million
angels as a protecting host. To the Faithists of Chine'ya, Luiwatha,
captain, with ten million angels as a protecting host. To the Faithists
of Vind'yu, Li Chong, captain, with eight million angels as a protecting
host. To the Faithists of Guatama, Manito, captain, with ten million
angels as a protecting host.

3\. And to each of the captains I give authority to draw additional
armies from the Lords who hold dominions in the regions where they may
be.

4\. But it so happened that the lowest heavenly plateaus were also
engaged in wars.

5\. And in less than a hundred years of a'ji many of the Lords were
without kingdoms, and, with a few chosen friends, were become
involuntary wandering spirits, scattered about in all the heavens of the
earth, or upon the earth.

6\. God saw this, and he called out to them; through his messengers he
called unto them, saying: Having lost your kingdoms, why will you lose
yourselves? Is it not better that ye fall to, in the remaining kingdoms
and by your steadfastness, help to maintain faith in Jehovih in the
hearts of the less learned?

7\. But satan (self) gained access to their souls, saying to each one of
them: Thou, who hast been Lord of the hosts of heaven! Thou, take a
place like a common laborer! Thou wouldst be laughed at! The
non-resistant policy is good enough in times and places of peace. But
now is war. And war can only be overcome by war. If great De'yus was
overcome and cast into hell, why not our God also? So they heeded not
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah496.md)
