[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah490)  [Next](oah492.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. JEHOVIH hath said: I gave to man legs and feet to walk; arms and
hands to work; eyes to see, and ears to hear; and, withal, the capacity
to reflect and comprehend and understand.

2\. I gave none of these capacities to man to lie dormant or to be
useless. Neither can any man advance to My highest kingdoms if crippled,
or weak, or uncultivated, in all or part of these talents I have given
him.

3\. But he shall be perfected in all particulars before he is
capacitated for companionship with My exalted ones.

4\. The Lord said: It mattereth little what kind of workmanship a man
doeth; for one may till the soil, and thus train his hands and arms to
full development; and another may weave, or spin, or forge iron, and
also attain full development. It is not the kind of labor, but the
development that comes of useful practice, which maketh every talent to
stand upright in heaven as a glory to the Creator.

5\. For there be servants on earth, who neither read nor write, that are
better developed in their talents and members than many of the rich, and
kings and philosphers.

6\. And when they die and enter my heavenly places, the ranks and caste
in my kingdoms seem to them to be upside-down. The rich man, or the
king, or the pleader (lawyer), or priest, or the philosopher, may be as
a helpless child, whilst he who was as a pauper on earth may be as a
very God over them to lift them up.

7\. Neither is the preference to the rich, nor the poor, nor to the
philosopher, nor the fool; for any of these may be as dwarfs in some
talent or part, whilst also any of these may be a most perfect man in
spirit.

8\. So, God established, through his high-raised officers, schools and
colleges and factories, heavenly, adapted to the spirits of the dead,
even as similar places are established on the earth for mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper IX](oah492.md)
