[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah421)  [Next](oah423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Qadeth Iz;

OR, DIVAN SEAL. (See plate 14, p. 310)

 

<span id="img_61300"></span> ![](img/61300.jpg)  
Plate 77.--IZ AND ZERL.

 

1\. NA'AH or na'ok, house. Sho'ah. rich country. Ba'a, evil. Aman,
steadfast. Eden, foundation. Sam'-Or, the three sacred lights; thus, Sam
three, Or, light.

2\. Le'bab, heart. Re'gel, foot. Be'ged, clothing. Dad, breast.
Gad'ta'ah, the hand showeth the way as this <span id="page_614">p.
614</span> tablet showeth; i.e., this is my hand. Ekef, palm of the
hand.

3\. A'bad, destruction. E'dam, man. A'yin, eye, and also to perceive.
O'zen, ear, to hear. Taf, family. Resh, head.

4\. Off, the birds or feathered tribes. Le'bashed, to be clothed. Toff,
timbrel; also psalmist. Mits'vah, the enforced law, the established, the
authority of judgment. Ay'in, conceit, the hidden enemy in one's own
heart; they were puffed up in their conceit and would not hear.
Ar'bag'ebul, the four quarters of the world (Kii).

5\. Sef'fer, scroll, book or tablet. Aven'ibi, the belief that man was
once a bird. The worship of certain birds because it was believed man
sprang from them, hence Aven'ibi, the idolatry of birds; the philosophy
that led to the idolatry of animals. Aheba, the adorable love. Ya'sha,
upright. Alef, foremost. Man or maun, vessel.

6\. Ra'o, the evil, the entity evil. As Ra, death, is to mortal things,
so is Ra'o to spiritual. Mira, a lamp. Mi'qut'so, angular, corner.
Kar'tugh'nuin, magician; one with familiar spirits. Maqatteroth, an
utensil for burning incense. Nasag, to ascend.

7\. Te'ke'ua, supplication. Otsar, storehouse against famine; also place
for treasures. Ra'ka, kingdom or king and his people, or father and his
family. Aboda, to labor or to make brick; also brick dried in the sun
(ado'da). Zemar, music, written notes of. Nat'sack, chief musician.

8\. Asuk, a pot. Yat'sar, potter. Barzel or tubal, iron. Os'ka'gar, sun,
moon and stars as a whole. Penak, summer and winter. Gu'sa'touin, out of
all things comes some good.

9\. Lechen, bread, or bread-basket, or food, or food-basket. Asen, evil
hand, or power to cast spell. Assogen, evil foot, or power to walk
around one's house and so cast evil on the house and family. E'o'ten,
the All Provider, the sign of offering. Edan, prophecy. Hoe'dan, angel
visitation, or the manner of prophecy.

10\. Edam'ah, country, or the earth or the lands. E'lo'ih, Jehovih.
Ba'ra, the created world. Ofel, darkness. Or, light. Eo'sor, organized,
i.e., the light and darkness were created, and all things on the earth
became organized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fonece](oah423)
