[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah462)  [Next](oah464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SUAT.

1\. YESAIN, mighty sheds of Le, ye towering strength in etherea, sing to
the Almighty. And ye, C'taran and Hituns, thou, Stalacti, visiting place
for the congregations born of other planets.

2\. Shout loud and long to the Ever Present, O ye plans of Palla and
forests of Sethawan, ye golden triumphs fashioned in the Arches of
Hiatusa and Nor.

3\. Remember Him in praise, O ye swamps of Ludz and place of toil of the
Orian Chief, Hazu, with his four thousand million etherean hosts, making
the Roads of Semetatosa. <span id="page_657">p. 657</span>

4\. Unto the Person of the Almighty, sing, thou, Orub, thou habitation
of twelve million cities of Gods and Goddesses. Sing in praise and
rejoicing for the red star, the young earth.

5\. And thou, O Seeing, thou paradise of Goddesses of ten million
cities, sing to the Person of the universe, Jehovih; sing Him an anthem,
Whose Voice resteth on the young earth.

6\. Sing ye, O Yissain and Wartz, the etherean worlds of the seven
cross-roads of the seven traveling sun-worlds with their millions of
stars floating in the breath of the Almighty!

7\. Proclaim the Creator forever, O Hoesonya and Saffer, and thou great
etherean light, Mos, and ye mountains of Galeb; and thou, Yonetz, thou
place of the million lakes!

8\. Sing in praise of Jehovih, O ye toilers with Thor, Son of the
Almighty! Praise ye Him, O ye etherean angels of Ogonavesta; send forth
the glad song forever and ever!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: YAT](oah464)
