[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah417)  [Next](oah419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tablet of Biene

(Poit.)

1\. A'SU (Panic). A man in aboriginal state; before he used words;
before he congregated. A very young child; one that knows no word of
expression. The race of man in its first age, as applied to Corpor (the
earth). A'su, the first habitable age. A circle with a central point.
According to the place of A'su on the tablets so shall the interpreters
understand. (Poit.)

2\. M'asu (Panic). With words came war. In congregating men, the liberty
of one interfered with another. Mas'su (Kii). A circle with the four
evil corners. Let no man say, I will not sow on the earth, lest I be
bound; but be ye fruitful and multiply; for this is the fullness of
earth and heaven. (Abraham.) The symbol of M'asu was given to the
married, but to the barren the high priest gave S'pe (Gau). Jehovih
said: Call not any man evil; but call ye him unripe fruit (Kosmon).
Because man cut himself off from Me and choose war, condemn him not, but
deliver ye him (Moses).

3\. Ex'su (Panic). Nation against nation. A symbol of threat; one king
against another. Anra'mainyus sent the symbol of a circle with four
cross-corners and a point, over all the earth. (Vede).

4\. Ugh'sa (Panic). Standing armies. Is not justice accorded to him who
is mightiest? (Fus). They not only waged war, but in times of peace they
maintain armies ready for more war. Come, therefore, away from them, ye
that have faith in Jehovih, and I will deliver you into another country
(Abraham). Rather than that ye be impressed in war, come whither I will
lead, and dwell in peace (Brahma). A symbol of standing armies (Gau).

5\. Ugh'gad or U'ghad (Panic). A war to establish a certain Ghad (God).
Ye not only desire to make slaves of men on earth, but to bind them unto
your Ghad after death. (Craosha to the druks.) They fight for the king,
being his slaves; they fight for their Ghad, being his vermin (Brahma).
An evil man saith, I will war for Egypt, for this is my country; but I
say unto you, all countries are Jehovih's (Moses). Be not slaves to any
country, nor to any king, nor to a Ghad, but serve the Great Spirit.
(Abraham.) A nationality, a symbol. (Gau.)

6\. Ort'n (Panic). By the sea; or sea-land.

7\. Ort'm (Panic). By the forest; or forest-land.

8\. Alef (Panic). A new beginning. Those that were delivered from evil
spirits were given Alef as a sign of power (Poit). Alef was a gift of
the high priest (Zarathustra). A letter of the Ebra alphabet. When a man
desires to reform himself from drunkenness, the Miji gave him Alef, a
strengthening symbol (Brahma).

9\. Iga (Panic). Ego (Latin). I, myself (English). A profile of the eye
and ear. An emblem of the sounds ai and e (Gau), or i and e, or e, or g.
Two equivalents to portrait of an eye. In hieroglyphs, a radical.

10\. Om (Panic). The negative of Jehovih. The female. That that
projecteth is positive. That that receiveth

<span id="page_606">p. 606</span>

 

<span id="img_60600"></span> ![](img/60600.jpg)  
Plate 73.--TABLET OF BIENE.

 

<span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

is negative (Gau). Let those that desire to receive spiritually ask of
Om; and those that go forth in might return thanks to Eolin
(Zarathustra). Power cometh not by supplication, but by going forth;
spiritual gifts come not by going forth with might, but by waiting in
supplication (Brahma). Nevertheless the ALL ONE is but ONE, but with two
attributes (Kosmon). Brahma said: O OM, give thou to my soul; O EOLIN, I
am going forth to labor; be thou with me. (Vede.) The ever present OM,
the ever present ELOIH, said: Two attributes gave I, the All-self, to
every man-self, the Om and the Na (negative and positive), that he might
hold discourse within himself. (Vede.) In seeking a wife, see to it that
OM is her transcendent virtue; otherwise she will be as a thorn in thy
side. (Abraham.) Until a man have OM in the ascendent he shall not hear
nor see the Great Spirit. (Zarathustra.) Let your young men seek
employment that calleth not forth NA, but rather OM. (Brahma.)

11\. Tae (Panic). A representative man. The universal prayer of mankind.
Also one who is chosen by etherean spirits for an earth cycle; as
Zarathustra, Abraham, Brahma, Moses, Capilya, Confucius, etc. I provided
for the nations in their darkness, saith Jehovih. For I bring the earth
into a light region in the firmament, and I send My etherean angels to
deliver them out of darkness and bondage. In My name raise they up men
with eyes to see and ears to hear, and I proclaim unto all the
inhabitants of the earth (Kosmon). Mankind.

12\. Sih (Panic). One whose faith is low. One whose spirit acknowledgeth
the gift of spirits, but not the All Person. Three persons have I found;
one believeth only in earthly things (material); one in spirits of the
lower heavens (spiritist), and one who hath faith in the All Creator
(i.e., the Faithists). (Confucius.) They all rise to the destiny they
have chosen. (Confucius.) The worshiper of a Savior is Sih (Vede). The
worshiper of a God born of a woman is Sih (Vede). Save a man put away
the Sih that is in him he can not rise to My emancipated heavens, saith
Jehovih. Save a man put away the Pan (materialism) that is in him, he
can not rise even in the lower heavens; but his spirit after death
remaineth in his own house, saith Jehovih. A symbol of a horizontal
spear.

13\. Yi (Panic). A hollow crescent. Emblem of wisdom. A badge of honor
bestowed by a high priest (Vede). One of the sacred sounds in the Vedic
language. \[Not pronounced Wy, but Yi'h.\] Tu'shiy'a (Fonece).
Tushiy-yah (Hebrew). The secret pass-word to the dark chamber (Kii).

14\. I'yi (Panic). Life, per se. I'yii (Zerl). Chiy (Gau). Ka'y (Fus).
Cha'iy (Fonece). Chai (Ebra). Chai (Hebrew). Tc'yi (Vede). Hy'id'n
(Chine). On'yi'h (Algonquin). A tree without substance. Tree of Life. A
place of registry; a family record. The origin of I'yi (life), who
knoweth? (Panic.) Jehovih said: Infants had gone to heaven before the
earth was, and had grown to be wise men and women, but they had not
tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Life; and when the earth was ripe
unto giving mortal birth to man these angels alighted on the earth.
Jehovih said unto them: Eat ye not of the Tree of Life, lest in that day
ye become bound to the earth. In that day angels could clothe themselves
with corporeal forms by majesty of their own wills, and in innocence
they mingled with the people A'SU, who were of the earth, and they were
tempted for Wisdom's sake, and did eat of the fruit of the Tree of Life,
and they beheld their own nakedness. Jehovih said: By the love ye bear
unto your own heirs ye shall be bound to the earth six generations. And
it was so. (Abraham.)

15\. Vil or Vril (Panic). Earthly desire in abstract or per se. By
indulgence in begetting shall man be bound after death; by not
begetting, how shall he know all the earth? (Vede). Earth-desire is not
evil, but S'pe shall rule over him (Zarathustra). Earthly inventions
being to gratify earthly desires, are they good? (Confucius.) Jehovih
saith: Seek to do all possible things; for this reason have I given
earthly desires. (Gau.) Shall a man not eat and drink and sleep? Now I
say unto you, there is an earth body and a spirit to all men, and
whatever ye do unto one for its good, rendereth good to the other, and
whatever ye do unto one for its injury, injureth the other also.
(Moses.) If the spirit man maketh the corporeal man to move, doth it not
also make the desires of the flesh? Is the flesh capable of desire? If
so, is not flesh father to spirit?

16\. Ope (Panic). The central cause; love. By love only moveth any man;
even in anger he moveth not but by the love that appeaseth it (Abraham).
The All Good, to be (Fonece). Tob (Ebra). OE (Chine). Gu'oe (Algonquin).
The good that bringeth together, Hy'yope. (Vede.) If man love not, he
would not congregate, and would <span id="page_608">p. 608</span>
therefore war not. But since he delighteth in war, I will be ruler over
him to that end (Anra'mainyus), i.e., satan. Man would not give but
because he loveth to do so. What honor, then, shall a man take to
himself for helping his neighbor? (Confucius.) Did not the Great Spirit
make all things by giving? What but love actuated Him? Wherefore, then,
shall man applaud Him? (Confucius.) By glorifying the Father for his
love, do we not all grow in love? And is not this the highest virtue?
(Confucius.) The fool saith: Why shall I praise the Creator? Had He not
gratified His love by creating, then would He not have created. This
does not concern me; to find what will make men loving and good toward
one another, is that not the greatest wisdom? Therefore I honor the
wisdom of the ancients in singing praise to the Creator. (Confucius.)
Though a man can not love all men, is it not wise that they who love one
another, having some virtues alike, shall become a people unto
themselves. (Moses.)

17\. Hah'nd or Han'hd (Panic). A hand (English). A symbol of values.

18\. Sow (Panic). A foot. A symbol of values.

19\. Mouh (Panic). A symbol of values. Mouth (English).

20\. Fi'i (Panic). A symbol of values.

21\. Hiss'ong (Panic). A serpent's head and tongue. A symbol of values.

22\. Iod or Ghad or God (Panic). A figure or form. A female figure
unlike anything under the sun (Poit). Both male and female made they
their Iod'ha, and stood them by the roadside (Iz). In the infant age of
the world (Iod, God) was made of wood or stone (Gau). In the time of
Seffas they placed him in the sky (Gau). Anything that is worshiped,
having form or figure (Ceremonies of High Noon). Ghad (Aribania). A man
with spirit gifts. Gad or God, a man who denies he had a natural father.
In those days the king persuaded the people that their sire was the
Unseen Creator, and all the kings were called Gee'od (Vede). Because ye
have made idols of kings, calling them Gods, so call ye the All Light
God (Abraham). Whoever saith the Incomprehensible is God, blasphemeth
before Him. (Zarathustra.) Is He small like a man? (Gau.) They have
blasphemed, calling their Iod'a the Elohim, the Creator (Aribania). I
say unto you it is equally blasphemous to bring the Mighty One down to
form and figure like your God (Heleste). They seek to confound the
unlearned by persuading them that Eloih and their god is one and the
same person (Fus). Have not many spirits appeared within the temples,
saying: I am God, and ye are in my keeping? Yod, a mortal king. Yod'a,
king spirit in atmospherea (Gau). As it hath been declared of old so do
I now declare unto you, which is, that the lower heavens are next to the
earth, and are full of kingdoms, and the kings of these are Gods
(Heleste). God, a tyrant in atmospherea; for as a king is on earth, so
is a God in the lower heavens, and so is a Lord. Whosoever saith, Before
thee, O God, I bow my head, selleth himself to Osiris (Moses.) Whoever
amongst you doeth sacrifice to the Lord are of his dominion; suffer none
of my people to marry therewith (Abraham). Have not many of the tyrants
of I'em (Hades) returned to earth and proclaimed themselves Lord and
God? What more testimony requireth any man that none of them are the All
Light? Is not E-O-Ih wider than all the earth? (Fus.) We swear unto
thee, O Jehovih, that we will not call on the name, nor worship, nor
adore any person or thing called God or Lord, but Thee only, O Jehovih.
(Moses' ceremonies.) Moses being old, said: Above all things preserve
the sacred pass-word, E-O-Ih, inviolate; neither suffer it to come to
the unlearned lest they be confounded by the subtlety of the God of the
Egyptians. Was it not because the unlearned desired a form or figure to
worship that the Lord (Osiris) ruined Egypt, making slaves of the
Egyptians, both on earth and in his kingdoms in Haw-we? (The lower
heavens.) But that the Levites may be friendly with me suffer them to
worship the Lord their God. Moses, being about to give up his soul,
said: I feel a thorn pricking my side, and I know it is the Leviticans.
They not being eligible to the secret rite (Elohim), will in time to
come possess the country and substitute their Lord God for the Great I
am, the All Eloi Iod, a stone figure by the roadside without sexual
parts, and it is called God (Egypt). Theos and Zeus (Greek and Latin). A
being that is worshiped, said to be in the figure of a man. He has a
throne in the lower heavens. Dyaus, like the Yod of the ancient
idolaters, hath become a king in one of the corners of the lower heavens
(Vede). O Om, thou All Present and Boundless, will man on earth ever
distinguish? O NAOMA, forms and figures must die! (Vede.) God (English).
An idol in heaven said to be in the figure and form of man sitting on a
throne. <span id="page_609">p. 609</span> He is believed by people in
darkness to be the Creator of all things. They ignorantly blaspheme
against the Great Spirit, Jehovih (Kosmon), calling Him God.

23\. Oan (Panic). Faith in man only. Sign, two men leaning against each
other. Persons who have risen in intelligence, but not in Es. Faith in
man only. One who believes man is the highest of all things in the
world. One who believes there is no person or thing of personality but
man. They being Oans indulged in ----, although they were men only,
saying: There is none above us to see us or to command (Fus). They said:
Shall I not indulge in whatsoever I choose, being an Oan? (Chine.) Onan,
one whose philosophy is in his own conceit; an indulgence (Kii). I do
solemnly swear before this order, Oan, that I will never pray to, nor
ejaculate to, nor of, nor for any person, save man; and especially not
to the Gods nor Lords of heaven, nor to the Unknown, and Imperishable.
(Rite of Sodom.) Ho'an, that that leads to Ugh'sa, particularly lust.
The impulse of the flesh they called the highest, M'oa (Gau). They threw
aside their clothes, going naked like the A'su of old, saying: Is not
all indulgence my heritage? (Miac.) They fell from industry and decency,
saying: We shall have no forms nor rites, being free. And they became
the prey of spirits of idleness and lust, who feast on sinful mortals
(Egypt). Spirits of lust came to the Onans and reclothed themselves in
mortal forms and indulged in lust with them, and Moses forbade them from
coming amongst his people. (Aribania.) The Cow'ans said: Let us go
stealthily to the tent of Moses and his priests and learn the secret of
his spirit power. The Cow'ans said: Why shall man follow Moses? Are not
the spirits who come to us as good as his? (Akia.) Yo'anyi said: If I
love meat I will eat meat; if I love strong drink I will have strong
drink; if I love sexual indulgence then will I have sexual indulgence.
Who can restrain me? Are not my desires well created? I should not deny
them? (Vede.) And the druks came upon the Yo'anyi, for their philosophy
had divided them amongst themselves, one against another, and their
progeny became Tur'anyi (Turanian).

24\. Bi (Panic). Two in one. A sign in the order of O'an, in mockery of
Ahnra'mayda.

25\. Nu (Panic). Organs of sex. They said: All the living are begotten
by indulgence; to worship the organs of indulgence is the highest
worship (Aribania). Is not the All Creator but NU? And they made images
and idols of Nu and set them by the roadsides, both in their cities and
in the country. Yea, they made small images of Nu, and their women and
children went into the market-places selling them. Egypt in time of
Moses. (Gau.) Some of them having shame in their souls made another
image of Nu and gave it head and horns. (Kii.)

26\. Fus (Panic). An enforced religion. By sword and by fire am I
established (Fus). The court language of a period. The written law.

27\. Yom (Panic). An idol made the heathen to represent Om (Vede). Yom,
profane (Fonece). Also Gom (Panic). Goddess of lust. (Fonece).

28\. E'hote (Panic). A sign, and not real. As a picture of a foot is not
a foot; a picture of the sun is not the sun. (Gau).

29\. Ih'o (Panic). Upward, a written sign.

30\. O'ag (Panic). Downward, a written sign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tablet of Kii](oah419)
