[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah48)  [Next](oah50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. ALL the first best angels of atmospherea were brought away from the
earth and housed in Yeshuah, being placed at school and in factories new
made in heaven. These were I'hins.

2\. The second first-best spirits were brought also, but placed in
hospitals and nurseries.

3\. Of those who had advanced to receive the second resurrection, God
<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> said: Build an etherean ship and take
them to Theistivi, in etherea.

4\. So it came to pass there were two hundred millions raised to the
second resurrection, of the grade thirty-five. Theistivi lieth betwixt
etherea and Seven A'ji, which is the lowest of the etherean heavens next
to an atmospherean abode.

5\. God said: Two qualities have I left in Yeshuah, first and second.
These shall be the new kingdom after I am ascended. From these I will
raise up a God and Lords, and they shall rule over the lower heaven and
the earth; and they shall bequeath to others after them to rule in like
manner.

6\. Thus was founded the second light of Jehovih on the fruit of the
earth. God's etherean hosts became as a training school to raise up a
God and Lords and marshals and es'enaurs, and all other officers, and
men and women, for a lower heaven. God said: Yeshuah shall not approach
nearer the earth; nor shall it be as Hored, where spirits of darkness
might easily approach.

7\. One hundred millions of spirits did God and his Lords and
fellow-laborers bring from the earth to Yeshuah, and they were placed in
a brotherhood apportioned in the places suited to their talents. And God
divided the time of study, and of recreation, and of music, and of
discipline, marching, and so on, suited to all the people; and it was a
place of order and glory.

8\. For without discipline there is nothing; and discipline cannot be
without ceremony; nor ceremony without rites, and forms, and established
words. Is it not a foolish soldier that saith: Behold I am wise! I need
no discipline nor manual of arms. What more is he than one of an
untutored mob?

9\. God said: As I drill them in heaven to make them a unit, so give ye
to mortals rites and ceremonies, that, coming into heaven, they go not
back to their old haunts and fall in darkness. Whatever tendeth to
harmonize the behavior of individuals is of the Father; the opposite
tendeth to evil. Better is it that men march to the sound of one
monotonous word, than not to march at all; the value lieth not in the
word, but in bringing in unison that which was void. A fool saith: I
need not pray, there is no virtue in words. But his soul groweth up at
variance with Jehovih. Neither is there more virtue in the prayer or the
words, than in marching (sacred dance) before Jehovih; for whatever
tendeth to unite men in one expression of soul in harmony, is Jehovih's.

10\. Sacred dances and rites and ceremonies were established in Yeshuah
in the name of Jehovih; and the new heaven became a place of delight.

11\. God said: Teach my chosen to labor hard and wisely; and to dance
with energy, and to sing with strength and fullness of soul. For what
more is there in any man or woman than to learn to put forth? And what
more pitiful thing is there in heaven than a man or woman who hath but
dragged along?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah50.md)
