[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah493)  [Next](oah495.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. AND now came earth and heaven into the a'ji'an forest of Aghanodis,
and the pressure was upon all sides of the earth's vortex, even beyond
Chinvat.

2\. And the heavenly kingdoms were stirred up; and the nations of the
earth were in trial.

3\. In the great city of Paradise, heavenly seat of God, were the
multitudes of angels, the thousands of millions made to look upward,
outward, to know the Almighty.

4\. As a'ji driveth the weak angels of heaven to seek a lower field, so
doth it on earth drive polluted nations to war and to avarice and to
death.

5\. When yet but the second shower of a dozen years had fallen, mortals
in many nations of the earth rushed into war. And even the Faithists
began to clamor for kings and standing armies, with great captains and
generals, to lead them on to mortal dominion.

6\. The Israelites made a mortal king, and by their behavior , said:
Rather man than Jehovih. Behold, we will have the Lord with us to fight
our battles!

7\. And Baal, God of the idolaters, heard and saw, and gloried in the
course; and he hastened to the scene with millions of his angel slaves
to inspire the Israelites to glory in the Lord and God, whom he assumed
to be.

8\. And millions of the Israelites fell beneath his power and became his
spiritual slaves. The others, still steadfast in the secret oral rites,
remained true to the secret name and Person, Jehovih (E-O-Ih).

9\. The which Ashtaroth saw; and, first time of all, after two thousand
years friendship to Baal, she became jealous and filled with vengeful
wrath.

10\. She said: I see now how this traitorous God hath planned to beat me
in the regions west of Heleste and Uropa. By the flesh of my thighs am I
sworn, this thing shall not be! I will send a <span id="page_672">p.
672</span> hundred million warring angels down to Babylon and Tyre and
Yedmon and Luce, and inspire their mortal kings to make war on the
westward cities, the strongholds of Baal. And as to impoverished Egupt,
I will send thither mortal armies sufficient to destroy everything in
the land thereof.

11\. Yea, I will send my legions also amongst the Israelites, and
inspire them that I, Ashtaroth, am the only true Lord and true God. I
will divide them up as a broken bundle of straw, and cast them to the
four winds of heaven.

12\. On the other hand, Baal said: Because of my success, I know
Ashtaroth will be jealous and full of anger; therefore, I will place a
standing army betwixt her heavens and mine; and if she but dare to
molest me, I will send my millions against her heavens and despoil her
utterly, that she may be cast in hell!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah495.md)
