[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah408)  [Next](oah410.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. LET ethe stand as one; ji'ay as two; a'ji as three, and corpor as
four. To ethe give motion one hundred, or ninety-nine (as the case may
be); to corpor give zero, that is, no motion (of itself); to ji'ay give
sixty-six; to a'ji give thirty-three.

2\. Ethe, being the time of light, is named dan; ji'ay, the time of
fevers, epidemics, plagues; and a'ji the time of wars, dashing forth
with power and grasping; mi, the earth being the subject.

3\. There is still another period to all corporeal worlds, LUTS. In the
time of luts there falleth on a planet condensed earthy substances, as
clay, stones, ashes, molten metals dessiminated, and so on, in such
great quantities that it can be compared to snow-storms, piling up
corporeal substance on the earth in places to a depth of many feet, and
in drifts to hundreds of feet.

4\. Luts was by some ancient prophets called UZ, because it was a time
of destruction. If luts followed soon after a se'muan period, when
portions of the earth were covered with se'mu and rank vegetation, it
charred them, penetrating and covering them up. Thus were made, for the
most part, the coal-beds and oil-beds in the earth.

5\. Luts belongeth more to an early age of a planet, when its vortex is
more extended, and when the nebulous clouds in its outer belt are
subject to condensation, so as to rain down on the earth these corporeal
showers.

6\. The time of dan is the opposite of this; and although it is the time
of spirituality amongst mortals, and the time of prophecy and
inspiration, yet it is the time the earth is rapidly giving off its life
force, and its moisture; rapidly growing old.

7\. Consequently the two most important periods for the prophet's
consideration come within thirty-three and sixty-six, or, as they of old
said, man and beast. In which measure man is divided into two parts (man
and beast), and there is ever a percentage in his behavior inclining to
one or the other, and they correspond to the vortexian currents of the
earth.

8\. The student must not consider merely individuals, but nations and
peoples belonging to continents. And the relationship that cometh of
a'ji or dan, or their percentage, must have reference to such nations or
peoples as manifest to its influence.

9\. Thus, suppose a grade to run below thirty-three, but not as low as
twenty-two, and such a people fall under a'ji for a period of sixty-six
years, or even more, war, destruction, death and lust will come upon
that people. But suppose the same fall of a'ji come upon a people graded
above thirty-three, to sixty-six, war and intellect, with oratory, music
and remarkable men of genius will result. But, to carry it still
further, the same fall of a'ji coming on a people above sixty-six, they
will manifest in multitudinous Lords, Gods and Saviors, and <span
id="page_587">p. 587</span> in superstitions, rites and ceremonies,
which will all more or less pertain to sexualisms.

10\. The prophet is thus enabled to determine, by the vortexian
currents, the rise and fall of nations, and to comprehend how
differently even the same showers and shadows of the unseen worlds will
affect different peoples. And the same rules apply in the manifestation
of dan; according to the grade of a people, so will they receive its
light. If below thirty-three, they will become magicians and prophets
without virtue; if above thirty-three, but below xixty-six, they will
become self-opinionated malefactors, running into licentiousness for
self-sake. But if above sixty-six, they will become true prophets,
abnegating self for sake of righteousness.

11\. Let the student compare the Faithists of Capilya in India with the
Cojuans of the same country; and the Faithists of Moses in Egupt with
the Eguptians of the same country. The Faithists of both countries
advanced, but their persecutors both went down to destruction. The peace
of the Faithists held four hundred years; and then both peoples began to
choose kings, which was followed by nine hundred and ninety years of
darkness.

12\. So that whether the vortices show approaching light or approaching
darkness the prophet must bear in mind the grades of peoples. Any given
light amongst mortals as to the past, will thus show the date of its
occurrence; whilst the heavenly lights will equally foreshow what will
come upon any people.

13\. It is not sufficient for man to know how to prophesy; but to learn
how to overcome the elements of his surroundings. As previously set
forth, there are regions of drouth on the earth, which man must learn to
overcome, by causing rains to fall. He shall provide explosive gases
high up in the air, which shall break the wind currents, establishing
vortices from the upper regions downward.

14\. And when an epidemic is prophesied to a city, man shall dissipate
the falling se'mu, and thus save it from destruction.

15\. The inoculation, or vaccination, of flesh with poison, to save it
from poison, is to use the battle-ax of satan. Man shall learn the
higher law; to save by virtue instead of vice.

16\. As to the grades, the student is referred to the Book of Es.

17\. Prophecy is not guess-work. Absolute rules govern all things. A few
individuals in a nation, or of a people, are a small matter. Nor must
the prophet swerve one jot or tittle by the pretensions of a people. As
for example: the Brahmans, the Buddhists, the Mohammedans and the
Christians, all profess faith in their respective Gods and Saviors; but
their professions are false. Their faith is in soldiers and standing
armies, and in implements of destruction. The prophet must not,
therefore, suffer himself to hearken to individual explanations. He must
grade them in their entirety; whether they manifest below thirty-three,
or above sixty-six, without regard to pretensions.

18\. When the student hath completed his tables of orachnebuahgalah,
with the history of the period, and taken the measure of grades of the
different nations and peoples of the earth, he will find that he can not
only foretell the future, but he can discover the past history for an
equally long period of time.

19\. And when he hath thus completed two cycles, he can find a third,
and then a fourth, and so on, until all the past history of the earth is
delivered up to his understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah410.md)
