[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah431)  [Next](oah433.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Baugh-Ghan-Ghad

(Alias Baugh-gan-ghad.)

1\. BAUGH-GAN-GHAD said: I go forth. All who follow Me, are of Me. By
will only is anything accomplished. That which I desire, I do. Without
Me nothing is done. My name is MIGHT.

2\. B-G-G. said: Fear is failure. I am without fear. I am the All Es,
incorporated on the low earth, having no fear. (The All Es gave forth,
having no fear. By this created He the creation. Like a lion goeth He
forth. The sun is under His feet; so is the broad earth. Whatsoever
liveth or is dead (inanimate objects), fleeth before His breath. Even
Death cometh and goeth by His command.)

3\. B-G-G. said: Go forth, My sons and daughters, multiply, fearing
naught. Inasmuch as ye do these things, so will I exalt you. Inasmuch as
ye do not these things, I will bind and enslave.

4\. B-G-G. said: Think not I choose a weak man or a coward to be king. I
choose only the valiant, that fear not. Think not that I exalt the weak
in heaven and make them Gods over mortals; I choose the slayer of men
and the death-dealing.

(At this part of the service the initiates march before the throne.)

5\. B-G-G.: Who dareth My power? Down on your bellies and crawl like
serpents before My throne! Down and speak! I command!

6\. FIRST INITIATE: By Rux I swear! I will not down!

7\. SECOND I.: By Him who standeth above the Sun, I will not down.

8\. THIRD I.: Nor I, though thou drinkest my blood.

(Similar ejaculations from other initiates.)

9\. B-G-G.: Then must I from My throne of skulls descend to raise the
seat another row. Bring here my battle-ax (to servant). (The ax is
brought, and the Master, clothed in a lion's skin, with a serpent's skin
coiled about his head, descendeth from the throne, and seizing the
battle-ax, falleth upon the initiates, who have been previously drilled.
During the ceremonies, some of the initiates are killed outright,
generally not intentionally. A cellar is underneath, and over this the
boards are made to trip. The Master knoweth this, and (the initiates not
knowing it) hath the advantage. The fray of skill lasteth about an hour,
during which the initiates are mostly sent below.)

10\. B-G-G.: Ha'oot! Ha'oot! With Ghads I fought. With Ghads I am king
and brother! Come forth, fallen foes, and live triumphantly! With
brothers like these I will go forth and gather skulls to build another
temple. (The servants help all that are alive out of the cellar, and if
they are well and strong they are spared, but if they are maimed bodily,
they are slain with the battle-ax. All that thus fail to take the first
degree, have their skulls scraped and added to the throne, or
judgment-seat. During the ceremonies, and along with the initiates, are
two or more who have been previously initiated, and these of course are
spared.)

11\. FIRST I.: To Thee and none else, I swear everlastingly. Thine be
forever the place of skulls. (Ug'sa'sa) (Golgotha.)

12\. B-G-G.: Know, then, ye Iod'a (Gods), I am descended from
Baugh-ghan-ghad, the All Spirit of Light and Power. By Him incarnate in
Mi, virgin of the corporeal world, My blood is fed by the souls of men.
In the days before the flood of waters My Sire built a temple a hundred
goo'en square; with skulls built he it, and feasted on their souls,
uprising in the firmament, above the sun, companion of the stars. On the
spirits of mortals slain, His spirit feasted full of rich strength, till
all the world bowed down and called Him Master!

13\. ORUHK (the choristers from behind, concealed): All hail! All hail!
O Master, man and chief of blood! We come from the abode of flying
wolves and lions and bears, upraised in the Osk'oe (sky) rocks that feed
the black earth, the thrones of mighty Ghads! Great Baugh-ghan-ghad
called us forth; for the clang of thy battle-ax shook the stars, saying:
Down! Down, O ye Ghads, to Mi (mother earth). My holy begotten Son, king
of <span id="page_628">p. 628</span> men, doth feed His throne with dead
men's skulls! Behold, O King of Men, these thy valiant fighters, from
their birth, are reared as brother Ghads! O, slay them not, but teach
them that he who would rule in heaven must begin on earth, and send his
neighbors bellowing down to dust! Bring them before the altar, smoking
in their blood, and on the ark (a chest which containeth incense) let
them mingle in covenant with the Everlasting Son!

 

<span id="img_62800"></span> ![](img/62800.jpg)  
Plate 88.--DISTANT VIEW OF THE TEMPLE OF BAUGH-GHAN-GHAD, IN GA'HAITE,
11,000 YEARS B.K.

 

(The marshals now conduct them before the altar, whence they cast down
their battle-axes, and they join hands, encircling the ark. From the
east, west, north and south the high priests come forth out of recesses
in the walls of the temple, and the priests in twos and fours bear
torches and approach the altar and the ark, chanting for the glory of
Baugh-ghan-ghad, the All Powerful Creator of heaven and earth. The
Master and the initiates take of their blood, which issueth from their
wounds, and mingle it together, and lick with their tongues the
commingled blood, saying: Drink ye it in remembrance of me and of
Baugh-ghan-ghad, my Sire, the Creator, doing all things for His glory!)
(And now come the Aha'da, bringing forth strips of flesh from the thighs
of those who were slain in the ceremonies, and they bring them to the
Master and he putteth the strips of flesh under his own thigh, and all
the initiates put their hands under his thigh also, for this is swearing
an oath by the thigh, and they say: I put my hand under this thigh, and
I am sworn. Thereupon the Master taketh the strips of flesh and eateth
thereof, and handeth of it to the initiates, saying: This is the flesh
of my body, eat ye of it in remembrance of me and of Baugh-ghan-ghad,
for in my blood and the flesh of my body have I established the
esa-au-gau-hoi (Church militant) over all the world! Thereupon the
initiates take the flesh and eat thereof.)

14\. KOHEN (The chief priest): On this tablet write ye your names in
blood, and by these bones and skulls swear ye.

15\. INITIATES: On the tablet write we our names in blood, and by these
bones and skulls we swear.

16\. KOHEN AND INITIATES (together): To keep sacred the oath under the
thigh; to preserve the holy words of the feast of flesh and blood, for
coming generations, that the Light and Glory of Baugh-ghan-ghad, the
Creator, may shine forever. Amen!

(The M'ghan, the women, now come forward, having cloth about the loins,
and they bring the dead men and place their bodies on the altar of
sacrifice, which hath been previously heaped up with dry wood, and when
the fire is lighted the M'gau march around the altar of fire, singing
and clapping hands. Presently there appeareth in the smoke and the foul
smell of the burnt flesh the Ogs'uk (evil spirits), so that many can
behold them, and they eat of the smoke and of the foul smell, which are
the food of spirits of darkness, and when they have feasted
satisfactorily they take of the smoke and of the foul smell, and carry
them away to hada to their companions, of whom their number is endless.)

17\. MASTER: Hioot'a! Hioot'a! Behold, my Sire appeareth in a cloud of
smoke and fire. Bow down your heads, M'ghan'a (the women), and invoke
His mighty power!

 

<span id="img_pl87"></span> ![](img/pl87.jpg)  
Plate 87.--TABLET OF BAUGH-GHAN-GHAD.

 

<span id="img_pl89"></span> ![](img/pl89.jpg)  
Plate 89.  
SECTIONAL VIEW OF GOLGOTHA TEMPLE 11,000 YEARS BEFORE KOSMON.

 

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

18\. KOHEN'A (the high priests): O thou Almighty Baugh-ghan-ghad,
Creator of heaven and earth, appear! appear! Thou that slayest all and
feasteth thereon, appear! appear!

(Presently the chief of the Ogs'uk maketh a light in the midst of the
black smoke, showing a face of fire, and it is a man's face; but the
body he showeth is dark, and of the form of a lion. And now the people
march around about within the temple, beating together their battle-axes
and spears of wood, and clapping their hands, singing the while. The
Master revealeth himself in the lion's skin, and ascendeth His throne of
skulls, and he is no longer called Master, but Baugh-ghan-ghad.)

19\. B-G-G.: As My Sire reigneth in heaven, so reign I on earth.

20\. INITIATES: Hail, Holy Father, Baugh-ghan-ghad! Hail, Holy Son,
Baugh-ghan-ghad!

21\. B-G-G.: I command the earth!

22\. I's.: The Son commandeth the earth.

23\. B-G-G.: I command the mighty waters.

24\. I's.: The Son commandeth the mighty waters.

25\. B-G-G.: I command the air above the earth.

26\. I's.: The Son commandeth the air above the earth.

27\. B-G-G.: For these are Mine to keep forever.

28\. I's.: For these are the Son's to keep forever.

29\. B-G-G.: I am the Holy Esa-au-gau-hoi. (Church militant.)

30\. I's.: The Son is the Holy Esa-au-gau-hoi.

31\. B-G-G.: My holy labor is to subdue nations and tribes of men.

32\. I's.: The Son's labor is to subdue nations and tribes of men.

33\. B-G-G.: I make treaties or break them when I will.

34\. I's.: The Son maketh or breaketh treaties when he will.

35\. B-G-G.: For all things on the earth are Mine.

36\. I's.: For all things on the earth are His.

37\. B-G-G.: I am immaculate, and can not do wrong.

38\. I's.: The Son is immaculate, and can not do wrong.

39\. B-G-G.: Right and Wrong must be judged by me.

40\. I's.: Right and Wrong must be judged by the Son.

41\. B-G-G.: By My will do I make Wrong right, or Right wrong.

42\. I's.: By the Son's will maketh He Wrong right, or Right wrong.

43\. B-G-G.: I am the All Holy Standard.

44\. I's.: The Son is the All Holy Standard.

45\. B-G-G.: I can not err. I and My Father are one.

46\. I's.: The Son can not err. The Son and the Father are one.

47\. B-G-G.: I now demand a thousand skulls.

48\. I's.: The Son demandeth a thousand skulls.

49\. B-G-G.: Baugh-ghan-ghad demandeth a thousand skulls.

50\. I's.: Baugh-ghan-ghad shall have a thousand skulls.

51\. B-G-G.: Baugh-ghan-ghad demandeth a pool of human blood for His
Son's silver boat.

52\. I's.: Baugh-ghan-ghad shall have a pool of human blood for His
Son's silver boat.

53\. B-G-G.: Go forth, my brother Iod'a (Gods), and bring the skulls and
the blood, for this is the time of the sacred solemn feast!

54\. I's.: We will forth and bring a thousand skulls and the blood for
our King. All hail! Mighty King of Men! All Hail!

(The Master now riseth to his feet, with his battle-ax outstretched,
menacingly. The initiates upraise their axes and spears menacingly also,
and walking backward, depart out of the temple.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Emethachava](oah433.md)
