[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah39)  [Next](oah41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

# First Book of the First Lords

BEING COTEMPORARY WITH THE BOOK OF SETHANTES, SON OF JEHOVIH. THAT IS TO
SAY, AS SETHANTES WAS GOD OF HEAVEN, SO IN THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME HIS
LORDS HAD DOMINION ON THE EARTH, AND THIS IS THEIR BOOK, EVEN AS THE
PRECEDING ONE WAS GOD'S BOOK.

### Chapter I

1\. IN the beginning God created the heavens of the earth; and the Lord
made man upright. And man was naked and not ashamed; neither knew man
the sin of incest, but he dwelt as the beasts of the field.

2\. And the Lord brought the angels of heaven to man; by his side took
they on forms like unto man, having all the organs and attributes of
mortals, for it was the time of the earth for such things to be.

3\. And it came to pass that a new race was born on the earth, and these
were called I'hins, because they were begotten of both heaven and earth.
Hence it became a saying: The earth conceived of the Lord.

4\. And the name of the first race was Asu (Adam), because they were of
the earth only; and the name of the second race was I'hin (Abel),
because they were capable of being taught spiritual things.

5\. And the Lord said: Of all that live on the face of the earth, or in
the waters thereof, or in the air above, that breathes the breath of
life, man only have I delivered unto knowledge of his Creator.

6\. And the Lord spake unto the I'hin, through his angels spake he to
them, saying: Go hide thy nakedness, for it is the commandment of God.

7\. And The I'hins were afraid, and they clothed themselves, and were no
longer naked before the Lord.

8\. And the Lord commanded the angels to give up their forms, and to be
no more seen as mortals. And it was done. And the Lord said unto them:
Because ye brought forth life, which is in flesh and blood, ye shall
minister unto man for six generations on the face of the earth. And it
was so.

9\. And that man may continue to walk upright, ye shall teach him the
law of incest, for man of himself cannot attain to know this.

10\. Neither shall ye permit the I'hins to dwell with Asu (Adam), lest
his seed go down in darkness.

11\. And man was thus inspired of the Lord, and he walked upright, and
prospered on the earth.

12\. But after a season man became conceited in his own judgment, and he
disobeyed the commandments of God.

13\. And he strayed out of the garden of paradise and began to dwell
with the asu'ans (Adams), and there was born into the world a new race
called Druk (Cain), and they had not the light of the Father in them,
neither could they be inspired with shame, nor of heavenly things.

14\. And the I'hins were grateful to the Lord, and they gave sacrifice
in burnt offerings. And they said unto the Druks: Go ye and sacrifice
unto the Lord, and he will prosper you. But the Druks understood not;
and they fell upon the Lord's chosen, and slew them, right and left,
taking their possessions.

15\. And the Lord said unto the Druks: Because ye have slain your
brethren ye shall depart out of the place of God; and that ye may be
known to the ends of the earth I put my mark upon you.

16\. And the mark of the Lord put upon the Druks was the shadow of
blood, which, being interpreted, is WAR.

17\. And the Lord God said: By this sign shall the tribes of Druk and
their descendents be known unto the end of the world.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

18\. And woman, being more helpless than man, cried out with fear,
saying: O Lord, how shall I bring forth unto thee, and not unto the sons
of death?

19\. And the Lord said: Because thou hast brought forth in pain, and yet
called on my name, behold I will be unto thee as a shield and protector.
For I will also put a mark upon the I'hins, my chosen, so thou shalt
know them when they come unto thee.

20\. And the Lord commanded the male I'hins, old and young, to be
circumcised, that woman might not be deceived by the Druks. And the
I'hins circumcised one another, old and young; for it was the testimony
of the Lord unto woman that seed of their seed was born to everlasting
life.

21\. And the Druks (Cain) went away into the wilderness, and dwelt with
the asu'ans and with one another.

22\. God said: A boundary line will I make betwixt the tribes of Druks
and the I'hins; and this is the line that I the Lord God make betwixt
them:

23\. The I'hins shall labor and clothe themselves, and I will abide with
them; but the Druks shall wander in the wilderness, neither laboring nor
clothing themselves.

24\. And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah41)
