[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah425)  [Next](oah427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ho'ed

INVOCATION readeth:

1\. Mithra said: Ye that invoke Me, the Swift, Shining, with sword
uplifted. Invoke me on the Tablet of the sun, and the world, and the
crown, high raised. Bow down low and say:

2\. Behold, the rose, deep rooted in the earth. Jehovih riseth in
majesty of All Light. His colors no man maketh, nor knoweth any man the
cause. This subtle perfume, whence cometh it, and whither goeth it? What
power fashioneth it, and propelleth it?

3\. O Thou, unseen Om! Is my spirit like perfume? Whence cometh it, and
whither goeth it? Give me of Thy Mithra, O Om!

4\. Make my heart look upward to Thee, Thou all Pure, Heavenly! Wife,
and Spouse and Mother! Thou that cometh, I adore Thee!

5\. The corporeal world hast Thou, O Jehovih, placed in the midst of the
lowest places, bringing forth. Bind my soul not to it, Thou All
Going-forth.

6\. My heart no longer looketh downward; my corporeal passions have I
subdued. Yea, even the diamond binds me not, the highest shining
corporeal thing.

7\. Thou, O Corporeal Sun, burning and full of flame, that bringest
forth the corporeal, growing harvests, hear me proclaim the All Eye that
createth, <span id="page_619">p. 619</span> making the souls of men.
Thou, O Corporeal Sun, that makest of the things that are made, what a
glory is thine! But far off, and nearer than Thou art, O Sun, is
Jehovih, Who createth without things that are made, the All First
Creator. He goeth forth, Jehovih. He cometh Om, the Bride and Mother,
nursing with full breasts.

8\. O thou Moon, hear my upward soul aspiring above all corporeal
things! Thou, my Love and Majestic and ruler of waters and winds, I
adore Thee. But a greater, the All Great Om, fed thee. From her breasts
wert Thou, O moon, high upraised. Eolin, the Mighty, touched Thee with
his little finger and Thou hast sped on. Come Thou to me, O Om, spouse
of the Seen and Unseen.

9\. O ye Stars, full of shining in the high heavens. Who can measure
your far-off places? Who can see your great corporeal majesty? O what a
glory is yours, thrown in the high heavens! Thither, far, the soul of my
forefathers roam full of praise and prayer. Make me all pure, O Thou Om,
that I may ascend.

10\. Send forth Thy Crown, O Eolin, Creator of all moving things. O Thou
Incomprehensible and full of glory! Make me oblivious to all corporeal
things, and fill me with Thy going-forth forever.

11\. Make me to look not backward nor to myself, but to behold Thee, O
Jehovih, and Thy Lords and Thy Gods, strong in majesty and spirit
high-soaring, forever! Amen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chine. Zerl.](oah427.md)
