[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah410)  [Next](oah412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter X

1\. IT is not the part of this book to deal with spiritual matters, only
so far as enableth the student to begin etheic knowledge.

2\. First, then, there are two kinds of prophecy, or two ways to
prophesy. For example, the ant and the bee, and many animals, prophesy
in regard to an approaching winter. Even birds begin to fly toward
tropical regions whilst it is yet warm weather.

3\. These creatures prophesy by the direct action of vortexian currents
upon them. They feel what is approaching, BECAUSE THE UNSEEN CAUSE IS
ALREADY UPON THEM.

4\. Man can learn to acquire the same kind of prophecy. And this is
different from the prophecy herein before mentioned, because he
prophesieth in this last method without rules or calculations.

5\. To attain this kind of prophecy, the following discipline is
requisite:

6\. To live in the fields and forests, and study the action of unseen
forces upon himself; to eat not fish, nor flesh, nor any food that
cometh of animals; to bathe daily; to permit no passion to enter his
mind; to abnegate self and to wed himself to the Creator for
righteousness sake, and to do good; to discipline his mind, to remain in
any given direction on any subject, for days if necessary; to become
oblivious to pain. After which he shall receive anointment from one who
had previously attained the seership.

7\. To attain such prophecy is to forfeit sexual powers; to forfeit
appetite; to forfeit ambition for leadership and fame; to forfeit
concern for the opinions of the world. In fact, to become a Bridegroom
(or a Bride) to the Creator.

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

8\. Not all persons can attain to this; but some are born closely allied
to it.

9\. There is also another kind of prophecy, wherein man prophesieth by
spirits speaking through him. This is dangerous, for lying spirits may
come to him.

10\. Rather, let man seek to become one with the Father, making close
observations of the rules of vortexya; for in this he provideth for the
development of all his faculties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](oah412)
