[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah440)  [Next](oah442.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LORDS OF THE HOSTS IN HEAVEN

HEADS OF SPIRITUAL SOCIETIES IN ATMOSPHEREA, OF THOSE DAYS.

MAIDEASHENEA, Patishahaya, Ayathrema, Maidyarrah, Hamachapathmada,
Yemehataman, Aunviti, Haptanaihaiti, Ustavaiti, Cpenta'Mainyus,
Kshathra, Vahistoisa, Airyamaishya, Fshushamanthra, Hadhaokhta,
Cpenta-armaiti, Zaothra and Barecma, Mithra, Kamaqactra, Havanana,
Aarevahsha, Roethwiskare, Vohu-Kasha, Aiwyoonhana, Nairayo-canha,
Asha-vahista, Haome, Lord of Haoma rites, Frava-daiti, Lord of
Fravishes, Pailvish-hahin and Ustav, Beryejaga, Avathrema, Tistrya and
Yima, Son of the Sun, the All Light.

Of the second rank above these were: THE GODS OF THE UNITED HOSTS OF
HEAVEN.

The Creator, Chief over all, Yima and Mithra, Amesha, Cpentas, Havanyi,
Cavaghi and Vicya, Rapithurna. Fradotfshu and Zantuma, Fradatvira and
Dagyevma, Aiwicruthrema-Aibigaza, Fradat-vicpanum-hujyaiti, Vishaptatha,
Ish-Fravashi, Athwya and Kerecacpa, promoted by special decree.

In addition to the above, the oagas (Gathas) of Zinebabait (afterward
Lower India) the Zend, THE LORD GODS, that is, officers of kingdoms in
heaven and ruler over nations on earth.

1\. Khahnaothra, an Ahurian of the Zarathustrian period.

2\. Ardvi-cara, an Ahurian of the Zarathustrian period.

3\. Rashnu, a Fragapattician of the Yi-ha period.

4\. Haha-Naepta (Goddess) of the host of Fragapatti, of the Theantiyi
period. By the Ayustrians, Gathas meant Gods.

5\. Iaya-Haptanhaiti, special to Haptan, of the Hi-ga period.

6\. Ctatoa-Zacnya (Goe-howjhi), an Ahurian of the Fragapatti period.

In Ushtai-bhonyia-paria-vi-hyiyi and to their descendants, the Gujerati
and Huzvaresh, the Ahura, is omitted, as in the original. Thei and Aph
and the Creator, are called Armadz, or Ormazd, or Ormuzd.

Ahiram, betrayer of secrets, becomes in the lower heavens a confederate
with the Daevas, the drujas, the Kikas, the Paris and the Ughsa of the
Yi-ha period.

7\. Naotara, of Aphian period, an instructor, who gave many sciences to
mortals. These sciences and religious ceremonies were afterward called
his sons, and they are now called Fravashis. In addition to the sciences
this Lord God, through oracles and otherwise, revealed two hundred and
seventy kingdoms in the lower heavens, the most important of which are:
Zairi-vairi, Yukhata-vairi, Crisookhshau, Kerecaokhshan, Vyarez, Vanara,
Bujicravo, Berejzarsti, Tizhyarsti, Perethwarsu, Vezhyarsti, Naptva,
Vazhacpa, Habacpa, Victavaru and Frans-hanm-vareta. All of these
divisions, including the two hundred kingdoms, had spirits-in-chief
(Lord Gods) to each and every one who took up stations in the temples of
worship on earth, and employed thousands of spirit servants, whom they
allotted to the different mortals who came thither to worship, to be
their guides and guardians, day and night. Through the prophets and high
priests in the midnight worship, and also at dawn in the morning, these
spirits appeared in tangible forms, taking part in the ceremonies.

8\. Thrita, God of healing, the founder of a mortal race to whom he
revealed the secret remedies for all diseases. He enjoined that the
remedies should only be revealed from father to son on the death-bed,
and when the father thus revealed, he himself lost all power to heal.

9\. Hiac-kaus, Lord of the Seal of Heaven. He bestowed the power of
Ahura'Mazda on mortals, enabling the prayers of the living to redeem
from torments the spirits of their forefathers.

10\. Takma-wrupa, cunning. The entity cunning. Like a fox, whose
strength lieth in cunning. Like the wind. Like the air; subtle,
appearing mild; appearing nothing, yet full of deceptive poison. By
takma-urupa the successful man is successful. He bindeth apparent
goodness in his face, but his golden foot-stool is cunning, the air with
the golden tuft.

11\. Ashi-vanuhi, Goddess of dress. She was fourth Airon under Mithra.
The duties of her inspiration to mortal women were to clothe themselves
and to decorate themselves with gold and silver ornaments. She had
twelve hundred Goddesses under her, and they were allotted one day in
each month to speak and teach through the magicians and oracles and
prophets and high priests. Some of these spirits spoke through the seers
by entrancement, and some wrote on the sand-table. Prior to this period
Iranian women seldom wore clothes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Earthly History of the Faithists of the East](oah442.md)
