[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah486)  [Next](oah488) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. GIVE ear, O man, and be wise in thy judgment, of sure perception and
good discernment in the revelations of my words in the cycles past and
present.

2\. For I summed up all the Gods of the hadan regions of the earth, and
all their high officers in the plateaux and heavenly kingdoms thereof,
and I named them, GOD! And in their dominions with mortals I named them,
LORD! As one, even God, made I them in my past revelations on the earth.
That I might not confuse the judgment of men!

3\. And all the heavenly places of the earth, the atmospherean heavens,
which travel with the earth around the sun, I named, HADA, the
intermediate world, the lower heaven. Through which none can pass to the
etherean heaven till purged of self, and made spotless, pure and strong
in spirit.

4\. Of this hadan heaven, and of her Gods and their labors made I two
words, GOD and HEAVEN, and Eskra is the sermon thereof. In which ye
nations of the earth, and ye angels of heaven shall profit in spirit; as
by experience past, the future becometh fortified in wisdom and
strength.

5\. In which sermon all resurrection is of God, who is Jehovih's Son;
but to distinguish from which (God) I named all that desired not
resurrection in heaven, but loved more the earth, SATAN. And whoso loved
evil and practiced it, I named, SATAN; and whoso combined, as angels or
as mortals, to make anarchy, I named, EVIL WORKERS for hell.

6\. As God and heaven are of the resurrection, so are satan, hell and
the devil of the declension.

7\. To one or other, resurrection or declension, belong all men on the
earth, and to one or the other belong all the spirits of the dead.

8\. None can stand still; all the living are on the move forever.

9\. Jehovih is Life, Motion, Individual, Person! In proof of which, He
gave unto thee life, motion, individuality, person.

10\. To develop these four entities is resurrection toward Him, more and
more, which is heavenly.

11\. To neglect them, or pervert them, is to go away from Him, which is
declension, which can lead to entire destruction.

12\. No man can be life for another; nor motion, nor individuality, nor
person for another. For himself, and to himself, hath Jehovih created
him with these.

13\. Nor can any of the Gods, however exalted, give to or take away
these things.

14\. For even though the highest-raised angels may attain to turn the
earth over, or to dissolve it, as the air in the firmament, or create a
new earth, yet none of these can create life, or motion, or an
individual, or person.

15\. These are from Jehovih and in Him; and all angels, the Gods and
Lords, and generals and captains and chiefs in heaven are but the
brothers and sisters of mortals and the spirits of the dead.

<span id="page_667">p. 667</span>

16\. And yet, O man of the earth, and thou, angel of the heavens of the
earth, be not puffed up or make light of the Gods, or Lords, or Saviors,
or Chiefs of the heavens, for thou art compared to them but as a drop of
water is compared to the ocean.

17\. As a man amongst you employeth a thousand men to do his bidding, so
have I, your God, thousands of millions of angels to speak in my name.

18\. Put not off my words, saying: It is but your conscience speaking.
My angels speak to you in spirit, with my very voice and words, which
are Jehovih's also.

19\. According to the capacities and talents of such mortals as practice
my commandments, so do I appropriate them to assist in the resurrection.

20\. And in the same way do I allot my ashars to abide with you; to the
musician, angel musicians; to the philosopher, angel philosophers; to
the historian, angel historians; to the cosmographer, angel
cosmographers; to the revelator, angel revelators; even so unto all men
who seek to serve Jehovih by doing good.

21\. And these my ashars, which I place over you, are not individual
angels, merely acting and speaking their own notions, but are organized
companies of thousands of millions, who labor through a chief angel,
called Lord; and all of them are in concord with me and my kingdoms,
directed by my Holy Council, of millions of angels high in wisdom, which
is directed by me, your God, even as I am one with other Gods, who are
one with Jehovih.

22\. What my angels do in truth and wisdom, for righteousness sake,
these I ratify in heaven; what I do in heaven, my angels do and reveal
unto you in my name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah488)
