[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah40)  [Next](oah42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. THE time of the habitation of Asu was eight thousand years; and they
survived two thousand years after the time of the birth of the I'hins,
which is to say: Asu dwelt on the earth six thousand years, and then
conceived of the chosen of God; and after that survived yet two thousand
years.

2\. And Asu (Adam) disappeared off the face of the earth.

3\. And there remained on the earth the sacred people, the I'hins; and
the carnivorous people, the Druks.

4\. The I'hins were white and yellow, but the Druks were brown and
black; the I'hins were small and slender, but the Druks were tall and
stout.

5\. Now, because the Druks had not previously obeyed the Lord, but went
and dwelt with the asu'ans, there was a half-breed race born on the
earth, called Yak, signifying ground people; and they burrowed in the
ground like beasts of the forest. And the Yaks did not walk wholly
upright, but also went on all fours.

6\. God said: Because the Yaks cannot be taught the crime of incest,
behold they shall not dwell forever on the earth. So also shall it be
with the Druks, save wherein they cohabit with the I'hins, whose seed is
born unto everlasting life. But with the Druks, and their heirs that
spring from the Yaks, there shall be an end, both in this world and the
next.

7\. And the arms of the Yaks were long, and their backs were stooped and
curved. And the Lord said: Because they are the fruit of incest, and not
capable of speech, nor of eternal life in heaven, the I'hins shall make
servants of them.

8\. And that they may not tempt my chosen to bring forth fruit unto
destruction, they shall be neutralized in my sight. And the angels of
God taught the I'hins to make eunuchs of the Yaks; of the males and
females made the I'hins eunuchs of the Yaks, and took them for servants.

9\. And the Lord said: The Yaks shall serve the I'hins, and build and
sow and reap for them. And it was so.

10\. The I'hins were disposed to live alone, but the Lord called them
together, saying: Come and dwell together in cities. For it is meet that
ye live after the manner of my kingdoms in heaven.

11\. Build ye therefore unto the Lord your God; and my angels shall
dwell with you, teaching you to sing and dance for the glory of your
Creator.

12\. And man built unto the Lord, and established worship on earth after
the manner of heaven.

13\. Now it came to pass that the Druks came to witness the rites and
ceremonies of the chosen, but they took no part therein, neither
comprehended they the meaning thereof.

14\. And God said unto the I'hins: That ye may teach some of them of the
Lord your God, build ye within the house of worship an image of me; in
likeness of man build ye it. And I will manifest unto as many as are
capable of everlasting life.

15\. And the I'hins, men and women, with their servants, built images of
stone and clay and wood unto the Lord, and stood them by the altars of
sacrifice.

16\. And in the time of worship, the angels of the Lord came and
possessed the idols and spake therefrom, with audible voices spake
before mortals.

17\. And the Druks inquired of the I'hins as to the cause thereof. And
the I'hins said: Behold, there is a God in heaven, more subtle than the
air of <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> heaven. He it was that brought us
forth out of darkness. He speaketh in idol that ye may know he abideth
with his people.

18\. The Druks said: What saith he? The I'hins answered, saying: That
whosoever hath attained to remember God is in the way of everlasting
life.

19\. The Druks inquired, saying: How shall a man live forever? Behold,
ye that believe also die!

20\. The I'hins answered, saying: As the voice of the Lord is unseen but
potent, so is there a spirit in man unseen and potent, which shall never
die, but ascend to heaven to habitations prepared by the Lord.

21\. And many of the Druks pondered on these things, and their thoughts
quickened their souls within them, so that they brought forth heirs unto
eternal salvation.

22\. And the Lord said unto the I'hins: Because ye have done a good
thing, go ye abroad, by the roadsides and in other places, and build
images unto me and mine, and my angels shall bestow gifts and signs and
miracles.

23\. And the I'hins covered the roadways of the earth over with idols of
stone and wood and clay, and the angels of heaven descended to the idols
and established thereabout heavenly kingdoms.

24\. And when man came hither, and called on the name of the Lord, it
was as a password for the angels; and they wrought miracles, and
otherwise gave evidence unto man of the Unseen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah42.md)
