[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah472)  [Next](oah474.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RUX.

1\. THEN sang the bound heavens, the atmosphereans. First, Ghiovagna,
with her two million cities, in the plateau Wahaputosivi.

2\. Almighty Creator, hear Thy Daughter in the Hemsan-way, sweet cliffs
in the colleges of Tuan, with her thirty million students, swift
uprising. Marching onward in praise of Thee, my Creator.

3\. With ample material, O Thou Boundless, for Thy sixty million hosts
in jubilee. Striving onward in Thy praise, buoyant with love and
rejoicing in the lessons of the Omnipotent.

4\. With seven million factories to train the untutored es'yan the
purpose of the talents Thou createdst with all to be most shining lights
in building the house of the Almighty in rapturous industry.

5\. With her two million nurseries for the spirits of infants, full of
delight and songs to Jehovih! With fragrance and delightful plains and
forests and shining waters, created by Thee, Thou All Perfect.

6\. With my four million miles of roadways and atmospherean oceans,
wherein Thy high-raised angels teach the es'yans how to master the
elements Thou createdst, swift and mighty, proclaiming Thy power.

7\. O the songs and praises of Thy Daughter, Ghiovagna, the heaven of
four hundred million angels, swift in learning, pure in love, with a
choir a million strong to sing and chant to Thee on the waters of
heaven.

8\. O the songs of gladness, the shining robes of Thy loved ones,
Jehovih. The lessons of wisdom, the growth of talent, the dance and
merry-making, the learning to master Thy elements, O thou Almighty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GHOI](oah474.md)
