[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah477)  [Next](oah479.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LEF.

1\. O that I could sing the songs of Thy heavens. Thy sweet places of
delight, Hanoshea and O-chi-ma and Riviokim and Pethsiades and Yenades;
to find earth-words descriptive of their delightful holiness and
rejoicing in the Almighty!

2\. O that I could display their mountains and valleys and their wide
plains! Their shining waters and their forests and their stalactites and
innumerable high arches. Their thousands of millions of angels full of
joy and loveliness! Their wonderful music, poured forth in Thy praise,
Jehovih.

3\. Their dancing, millions in a dance; their boating and swift
excursions, like thoughts in unison flying forth, mighty in power,
gleeful and full of romance! High in the grades, spotless, pure, every
one a flower, a star, a diadem in the kingdom of the Almighty!

4\. O that I could sing of the order of Thy heavens! And of the
wonderful roadways from one to another! How Thou hast planted elements
in Thy kingdoms, ever trying the skill and knowledge of Thy angels!
Where genius and wisdom ever lead in Thy ways, Jehovih.

5\. Who but Thee, O Father, could create these never-ending varieties of
heavens! These wonderful plateaux, suitable habitations for the spirits
of the dead! Ever providing the higher to lift up the lower! In system
and good discipline displaying the wonders of the Almighty! <span
id="page_662">p. 662</span>

6\. O that I could sing in words to the understanding of mortals!

7\. And to such as had been called sinners and most wicked who had
become in time like diadems in Thy crown, Jehovih, sparkling, bright
with perfect holiness!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: E-O](oah479.md)
