[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah411)  [Next](oah413.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

RULES IN COLLEGE OF PROPHECY (PRIMARY).

1\. THE following signs are given in words, to wit: Flag, rising sun.
Salute the East! children of dawn. The signs are, first, the folded
hands; second, the soothe, and third, the supplication. O thou setting
sun! Response: In Jehovih's name! How many chiefs dwell in dawn?
Response: Three or more. How stationed, O Thou High Noon? Response: The
three lights are east, west and south. The smoke and fire rise from the
altar!

2\. Here followeth the SECONDARY (in the chamber above). The voice of
the east: How are the lines of living fire, O Noon? Response: As the
sun, WHICH IS THE LIGHT OF THE CORPOREAL EARTH, riseth in the east to
adorn the day; and ascendeth to the south at high noon as the glory
thereof, and setteth in the west, so, IN REMEMBRANCE OF JEHOVIH, are
stationed the representatives of a lodge of dawn. What is dawn? Three
years or more at the youth of a cycle.

3\. The students then present their tables and the college is declared
open in the words: In Jehovih's name, give ear to the Voice.

4\. With Moses and Capilya both the above were merged into one lodge.

5\. The second began with flag at High Noon: O thou Fire of Heaven! How
many chiefs (rab'bahs) mark the altar of Jehovih? Four or more. Thou
Setting Sun, speak: How stand the fathers? Response: My hands shield the
light of the All Seeing Eye! My heart I cast to the winds! As a circle,
divided into four quarters, is the symbol of the name Jehovih, thus
(making the signs), cloven twice across, WHO HATH DOMINION OVER ALL
THINGS, so are the four SIDES OF THE WORLD REPRESENTED BY FOUR FATHERS
in the chamber of light, in THE TEMPLE OF HOLIES, which is square with
east and west and north and south, FOR THE HONOR AND GLORY OF OUR FATHER
IN HEAVEN! How are they numbered? Three thirty-threes, and one
ninety-nine! Wherefore these signs of blood and death? They are the four
heads of the beast. They are always stationed in the four corners of the
lodge. Why in the four corners? Because of darkness upon them. They
profess peace, but practice war. How are they numbered? One, eleven, and
six hundred and sixty-six, the number of the beast. In Thy name are we
assembled, O Jehovih! Give us strength, wisdom and love, that we may
avoid the fatal numbers; and that we may glorify Thee and Thy dominions.
Amen!

6\. There is no such thing as separating science and religion. To obtain
knowledge and to do good; these are valuable.

7\. Without discipline knowledge can not be obtained; without discipline
little good can be accomplished. Forms and ceremonies must accompany
discipline; otherwise inharmony overcometh all. These are religion.

8\. To be not puffed up with self-concern; and to be willing to become
good; these are the foundations for a good prophet.

9\. But in all gifts, the rules of prophecy should apply. If a man be
gifted in music, he should study music, and not rely wholly on
inspiration (the vortexian tide). If gifted in healing he should study,
and learn to apply the researches of others, and not rely wholly on the
vortexian currents. If gifted in prophecy, he should also learn the
rules of vortices and planets. The combination of gifts with good
learning, this is the highest.

10\. He that healeth by laying-on of hands, only giveth off the vortexya
he hath previously received. Let him see to it that he replenish himself
by sunlight (so-called), and trees and herbs and ground to walk upon.
For giving away, without replenishing, will soon result in nothing.

11\. As a young child sleeping with a very old person loseth its
vortexya, becoming emaciated; or as a negative husband is devoured by a
positive wife; or a negative wife devoured by a positive husband, so is
the prophet consumed by the multitude.

12\. When a prophet hath attained to discharge vortexya, so as to make
raps at will, he is also subject to the presence of people from the
unseen worlds. And these people, spirits, or angels, use this vortexya
for a foundation for sar'gis.

13\. The ancient prophet caused the worshipers to sit in the dark,
because <span id="page_590">p. 590</span> all people give off the
negative current in the dark (which they received as positive in the
light), and bade them sit in crescent, whilst he sat betwixt the horns.
Wherefore the decrees of the prophet were called Tau. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36.md) In this form of the altar the prophet was
supplied somewhat with vortexya by the audience.

14\. It cometh to this: Vortexya is unseen power, but it is without
sense or judgment. Next back of this standeth the life of every living
thing; and next back of all standeth the Creator, Jehovih. All learning,
science and religion are but far-off stepping-stones to lead man up to
Him. To acknowledge this, and to call on him constantly, is to keep open
the road to receive His hand and hear His voice.

END OF BOOK OF COSMOGONY AND PROPHECY.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[590:\*](oah412.htm#fr_36.md) Bulls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate 62](oah413.md)
