[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah44)  [Next](oah46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. JEHOVIH spake to Ah'shong, saying: On the evening of the third day
shalt thou move thy etherean ship toward the earth. And when thou
arrivest within an arrafon <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) thou shalt
halt for another three days, that thy magnificence may awe the men and
angels of earth with the power and glory of My emancipated sons and
daughters.

2\. Ah'shong proceeded as commanded, and when he came within an arrafon,
halted for three days, and the magnificence of the scene overcame the
stubbornness of men of earth and angels in atmospherea. Again Jehovih
said:

3\. Proceed again, My son, and when thou art within half the breadth of
the earth, halt once more and make in the place thereof a plateau, and
it shall be the place of thy abiding for the time of dawn, which shall
be seven years and sixty days.

4\. And from this time forth My etherean hosts shall not remain in
atmospherea more than eight years in any one cycle. This, then, that I
give to thee shall be like every dawn of dan, some of one year, some of
two or three or four or more (years), as the time requireth.

5\. And thou shalt dwell in thy kingdom seven years and sixty days, and
the time shall be called the first dawn of dan, and the next succeeding
shall be called the second dawn of dan, and so on, as long as the earth
bringeth forth.

6\. And the time from one dawn of dan to another shall be called one
dan'ha; and four dan'ha shall be called one square, because this is the
sum of one density, which is twelve thousand of the earth's years. And
twelve squares shall be called one <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> cube,
which is the first dividend of the third space, in which there is no
variation in the vortex of the earth. And four cubes shall be called one
sum, because the magnitude thereof embraceth one equal of the Great
Serpent. <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md)

 

<span id="img_05000"></span> ![](img/05000.jpg)  
A, Atmospherea; B, Ethereans; E, Earth.

 

7\. Ah'shong proceeded again, and moved within four thousand miles of
the earth, and the voice of Jehovih commanded Ah'shong to halt in the
place, and found a new kingdom, using all things requisite to that end.
Jehovih said:

8\. Thy place shall be a distance away from the earth, that thy dominion
be not disturbed by the confusion of the fallen angels thereof. So also,
to as many as thou shalt redeem away from the earth and from mortal
contact, the distance of thy kingdom will prevent them returning.

9\. Ah'shong perceived, and he proclaimed what Jehovih had spoken to
him. And the hosts cast out fastenings to the plateau, that the kingdom
together with the etherean sea of fire might rotate with the earth and
its atmosphere. Jehovih said:

10\. Make strong the foundation of thy place, and erect ten thousand
pillars of fire around about; and in every direction provide roadways
and mansions; but in the midst thou shalt build the house of council,
wherein shall sit thy host of dominion during dawn.

11\. Ah'shong built the place as commanded by Jehovih, and when it was
finished, Jehovih said: Thou shalt call the place Yeshuah. And it was so
called, because it was a place of salvation. Again Jehovih said:

12\. Choose now thy council, My Son, and also thy sub-officers, and when
thou hast completed the list, leave in Yeshuah the sub-officers and
proceed thou, and thy council of one million men and women with thee,
down to the earth and heaven thereof, and cast thine eyes upon the
inhabitants, for they are in distress. And when thou comest to the place
of My Lords and My God, deliver thou them and bring them to Yeshuah, for
they need rest. And as many of the I'hins in heaven as are capable,
bring thou also away with thee, and give them into the care of thy
people.

13\. Ah'shong did as commanded, first selecting his council and his
officers, and then he and his hosts proceeded to the earth as had been
commanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[49:1](oah45.htm#fr_8.md) An arrafon is about 20,000
miles

<span id="fn_9"></span>[50:2](oah45.htm#fr_9.md) Philosophers have long
known that some certain measure of ethereal space must be equal to the
density of the planets for a balance of power. See tablets of
cosmological prophecies at the latter part of Book of Ben.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah46.md)
