[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah476)  [Next](oah478) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

### ORD.

1\. SO-TO-RAMUS sang next, and of her great plateau, Chik-ka-hoo-sa,
over the regions of Guatama, wide as the earth, high-raised in the
grades, with three thousand million angels, rejoicing in the heavenly
mountains, Hosanattabah and O-de-chi-che and Hakabda, with seventy
thousand high arches, and the delightful ocean, heavenly. Sociotes, with
three million ship-builders, well trained in the elements created by the
Creator.

2\. Wailing in her song, O Jehovih! Would that I had earth-words for the
glories of heaven! O that I could show my delightful places to mortals!
O that I could make comparison for the knowledge of mortals! How can I
make them comprehend the heavenly ocean, Sociotes, habitable within and
without; with sparkling waters, colored like a rainbow, for the ships of
angels.

3\. How can I make them comprehend the wonderful mountain, O-de-chi-che,
habitable within and without; with her thirty thousand high arches,
spanning shining rivers! O that mortals could comprehend! O that mortals
could see!

4\. With sixteen million miles of heavenly roadways, and the great lake,
Anapasivi, with its two million boats, teaching newborn angels how to
master the elements, far reaching in the firmament of heaven.

5\. With otevans to carry millions coursing along in the gardens of
heaven, created by Thee, Jehovih, full of delight, strong, powerful! My
most orderly heaven, teaching with song and high reverence to the
Almighty!

6\. O that I could reveal the glories of Farja, Thy Schliegashawaka, O
Jehovih! And the great delight of her eight hundred millions, gleeful,
rapturous in Thy praise; glorified by the love of the Almighty!

7\. O the forests of my heavens, Sotoramus, created by the Almighty,
delightful, awe-inspiring! O the fields of Tobosin and Suthagar and
Chaimus, the creations of the Great Spirit.

8\. After her, then sang the heaven, Chook-a-so-win, in the voice of
three thousand million angels, in her two million cities, high in the
grades, and well disciplined. Of her great cascades and whirl-pools,
dangerous places in heaven for inexperienced angels. And lauding
tunefully her great rivers and her colleges and factories.

9\. Next sang Fiatonadis, a heaven with seventy divisions on the plateau
Noyohertimus, with two thousand million angels, high in the grades;
lauding highly her factories and colleges and her es'enaurs, a million
musicians.

10\. Next sang Heoparsi, a heaven with one million cities, high in the
grades; with eight hundred thousand miles of roadways; with eight
hundred million angels of delight, rejoicing in their lives and
glorifying the Almighty.

11\. After that sang these great heavens: Hiawasse, Ho Chong, Hriden,
Sago Loo, Maison and Witcha-chaw-nowksin; lauding their thousands of
millions of angels; their millions of cities and places of delight;
their mountains and rivers; their lakes and valleys; their colleges and
factories, where angels are taught to master the elements created by the
Great Spirit, for the joy of His mighty heavens!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LEF](oah478)
