[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah465)  [Next](oah467.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_658">p. 658</span>

### JAUS.

1\. O that I could sing worthily unto Thee, in praise of the Arc of
Speta. For Thy Mightiness, O that I could find mortal words to magnify
Thy vast kingdoms.

2\. In Thy great Goddess, Cpenta-armij, and her mighty etherean legions
that came down to earth, O what a glory in Thy praise. Who can forget
Thy heaven, Terashish, Thou Almighty.

3\. And Haot-Saiti and Hodws and Lugga and Bonassah and Tule and
Speta-arc, with their ten million seas and their hundred million crystal
rivers in the arches of Woo.

4\. With their eighty thousand million high-raised Gods and Goddesses.
With their one hundred and sixty thousand million miles of etherean
roadways and capitals!

5\. And thou, Solastus plains, with thy twelve million arches in the
waters of Waltad; with seventy million ship-builders, the workers and
handlers of Thy immortal fire.

6\. And the etherean kingdoms of Hards and Iwalt and Kollenpoitaben and
Embralik and Loogan and Aftguy and Riv and Lurnzan, with their two
hundred thousand million miles of arches built unto Thee.

7\. Let them rejoice in Thy name, and in the fruit of the garden of Thy
Daughter, Cpenta-armij, for the harvest is ripened unto Thee.

8\. Thy Sons and Daughters answer to the echo on the mortal earth: There
is but one Almighty! Let us sing unto the Boundless, the Everlasting
Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NIV](oah467.md)
