[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah568)  [Next](oah570) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

OF RESURRECTION. IN THE WORDS OF GOD.

1\. WHETHER on earth or in heaven, the same rules apply unto both:

2\. He that serveth himself one-half, and serveth others one-half, shall
stand grade fifty.

3\. He that serveth himself three-quarters, and others one quarter,
shall stand grade twenty-five.

4\. He that serveth himself one-quarter, and others three-quarters,
shall stand grade seventy-five.

5\. He that serveth himself only, shall stand grade one.

6\. He that serveth others wholly, shall stand grade ninety-nine.

7\. And whoso serveth accordingly, himself or others, shall stand in
grade even as his works manifest.

8\. To serve one's self is to work for one's self; to strive for one's
self, to think of one's own self, as to what will profit one's own self
only.

9\. To serve others, is to do good unto others; to help them; to teach
them; to give them joy and comfort. This is the service of Jehovih.

10\. But there are some who are below the grades; who seek to do evil;
who seek to make others unhappy; who delight in crime and pollution.
These, if mortal, shall be called druks, and if spirits, shall be called
drujas.

11\. After such manner, in general, are the grades of my heavens of the
earth, atmospherea.

12\. Grade one is on the earth; grade fifty, midway betwixt the earth
and the emancipated heavens, etherea.

13\. Grade twenty-five is one-quarter way up from the earth, toward
<span id="page_761">p. 761</span> etherea; but grade seventy-five is
three-quarters way upward, toward etherea. And so on, relatively, grade
and place of ascent intermediately.

14\. But grade ninety-nine is the highest atmospherean grade,
preparatory to entrance into the company of the all pure in spirit.

15\. But good works alone are not sufficient to attain the highest
grades, for they require knowledge and capacity to unfold others.

16\. To accomplish which, those of the higher grades shall oft return to
the lower, and learn to lift them up. For this is that which calleth the
ethereans in the times of resurrections.

17\. Wherein the righteous, who are yet mortal, begin at once lifting up
their fellows.

18\. Which labor is to the spirit as exercise is to the mortal body,
that which giveth strength.

19\. Judge, then, thyself, O man of the earth, as to the place thy
spirit will rise in the time of thy death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah570)
