[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah557)  [Next](oah559.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI

GOD DELIVERETH THE FOUR FALSE GODS OUT OF THE FOUR HELLS.

1\. ES said: Now, was God, Jehovih's Son, master of the whole earth and
her heavens.

2\. And, behold, the era of kosmon was at hand.

3\. The light of the arc had fallen on the throne of God. Jehovih's
Orian Chiefs from the emancipated heavens had come!

4\. Paradise was like a new kingdom. A thousand million ethereans had
arrived to labor with God, in clearing away the hells of the lower
heavens, and in providing for opening the gates of the heavens for the
angels to appear unto mortals.

5\. Metahazi, Goddess of Alefad, in the roads of Loo, in etherea, had
brought back the armies of the inquisitions. Hativi, Goddess of the
Lutian swamps, in Wessatow plains, in etherea, was there, with Massecred
of Bow-gan-ghad. Monetzian, Goddess of Tuissa, was there, with the
persecutors of Zarathustra. Norwothchissa, Goddess of the forest of
Nidea, in etherea, was there with the persecutors of Brahma (the pure
and true) and the persecutors of Moses and Capilya.

6\. Besides these, there were forty-six other Goddesses, each with a
host of angels who had in the ancient times striven against Jehovih, in
favor of some false God.

7\. But now, in the coming of kosmon, behold they returned as pure and
exalted Gods and Goddesses.

8\. And God, Jehovih's Son, called forth all these one-time persecutors,
and he said unto them:

9\. Behold, there are four great hells and six smaller hells and
fourteen still smaller hells, still existing in these lower heavens.

10\. Since ye were once cast into hells, and afterward delivered by the
angels of Jehovih, go ye now, and deliver the hells of these heavens.
And bring ye the chief false Gods before me. My marshal will allot you
to the respective places, I have appointed unto you.

11\. Then went forth the Gods and Goddesses as appointed by God to
deliver the twenty-four hells of the heavens of the earth. And they took
with them unto this labor six thousand million angel laborers well
skilled in such matters.

12\. And, in thirty-four days, the hells were delivered, broken up and
gone. And from these hells, there were thus delivered more than seventy
thousand million angels; who were carried to the plateaux, prepared for
them by God, Jehovih's Son.

13\. And God had also provided unto them, in their new heavenly places,
divisions and sub-divisions, with generals, captains, overseers and
other such officers, necessary to prevent them running into knots and
hells again.

14\. Of the false Gods and Goddesses thus delivered and brought before
God, <span id="page_746">p. 746</span> in Paradise, for judgment, the
chiefs of them were: Ashtaroth, Dagon, Ashdod, Yotemas, Sathias, Goluth,
Plutoya, Itis, Hamgad, Moak, Hoar, Baal, Ennochissa, Kabalactes, Gabriel
and Looeamong. Besides these, there were seventy other false Gods and
Goddesses delivered, but who were not brought before the throne of God,
but were sent to hospitals, because they were in chaos.

15\. God had previously provided Paradise, through his Holy Council, for
the time of the judgment of the false Gods, that were brought before
him.

16\. So the Holy Councils were formed in crescent, so that the throne of
God laid betwixt the horns thereof, in order to promote the Voice.

17\. The marshals, then, brought the false Gods and Goddesses into the
arena of circle where the light should fall upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](oah559.md)
