[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah583)  [Next](oah585.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXII

THE FATHER'S KINGDOM ON EARTH.

1\. GOD said: I have heard thy prayer, O man: Thy kingdom come on earth,
as it is in heaven.

2\. Hast thou considered thy words? And art thou prepared for it? Hast
thou fulfilled the commandments? And lovest thou thy neighbor as
thyself? And hast thou done unto the least, as thou desirest thy Creator
to do unto thee?

3\. Now, behold, Jehovih hath sent me, thy God, to answer thy prayer.

4\. I demand of thee, that thou hast no favorite doctrine above thy
neighbor;

5\. And that thou art servant to no God, nor Lord, nor Savior, nor
church, unacceptable to any man in all the world.

6\. But, that thou servest Jehovih with all thy wisdom and strength, by
doing good unto thy fellow-men with all thy might.

7\. That, because thou art strong, or wise, or rich, thou understandest,
that thou shalt use these excellencies for raising up such as have them
not, believing, that Jehovih so provided thee to that end.

8\. Consider, O man! Thou hast a kingdom already. Wouldst thou have two
kingdoms?

9\. Behold, the kingdom of man hath its power in armies and ships of
war.

10\. The kingdoms of thy Father have not these, but love, wisdom,
righteousness and peace.

11\. I demand of thee, that thou shalt give up thy army and navy. Art
thou prepared to say: To whom smiteth me on one cheek, I turn the other
to be smitten also?

12\. Is thy faith still more in weapons of death, than in the Voice of
Everlasting Life? Esteemest thou thy army and navy more to be depended
on, than Jehovih?

13\. Art thou willing to sacrifice thy time and money and self-interest
for sake of Jehovih's kingdom?

14\. Use thy judgment, O man. Since the time of the ancients till now,
the only progress towards the Father's kingdom hath been through
sacrifice.

15\. What less canst thou expect?

16\. If thou sellest what thou hast, and givest to the poor, behold thy
neighbors will imprison thee for a madman.

17\. If thou abnegate thyself and labor for others, they will persecute
thee, and revile thee.

18\. If thou shouldst profess to love thy neighbor as thyself, they
would mock at thee.

19\. Therefore, I declare unto thee, O man, in the land of Uz the
Father's kingdom can not be.

20\. But thou shalt go hence; and, behold, I will go with thee, and with
thy neighbor, and show thee how to build, even as a kingdom in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](oah585.md)
