[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah584)  [Next](oah586) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_777">p. 777</span>

### Chapter XXIII

GOD JUDGETH UZ, COMMONLY CALLED THE WORLD'S PEOPLE.

1\. GOD said: I am not come in this era to judge the drunkard, the
harlot and thieves and murderers; these are known unto thee, O man.

2\. I am not come to repeat former judgments against whom all men
understand to be sinful; for, behold, I gave governments into the hands
of men, to deal unto such themselves.

3\. But I am come to the leaders of men; to kings, queens, emperors and
presidents; and to philosophers and men of learning, priests, rab'bahs,
cardinals and popes; and to merchants, bankers, manufacturers, farmers,
shippers, and hucksters.

4\. Such as pass unscathed before the laws and government of man, and
are reckoned passably wise and good before the world.

5\. And not even to such of these as are bad men in disguise, who escape
condemnation before the courts, by cunning and strategem.

6\. But I am come to the best of all of them, be they true Brahmins,
true Ka'yuans, true Budhists, true Kriste'yans, or true Mohammedans.

7\. Therefore, O man, hear the judgment of thy God against them: They
are not united and affiliated as brothers.

8\. But the best of all of them are as so many individual entities
pulling in different ways, every one for himself.

9\. The Brahmins are not communal; the Ka'yuans are not communal;
neither are the Budhists, nor the Kriste'yans, nor the Mohammedans;
neither the philosophers, priests, merchants, nor any one people in all
the world.

10\. There is no fullness of heaven amongst any of them. They are
divided into thousands of ideas and projects.

11\. Now, hear me, O man, and consider the wisdom of thy God: Satan is
wiser than any of these I have named.

12\. For satan hath made armies of soldiers communal. He hath discovered
the power of affiliation and discipline.

13\. Behold, a thousand soldiers are more efficient than ten thousand
men, unorganized.

14\. Judgment is rendered against the best of men in all the world,
because they are inorganic for righteousness, and for establishing the
Father's kingdom.

15\. This, then, is what befalleth the nations and peoples of the earth:
Alike and like the angels of heaven minister unto mortals (save wherein
thy God and his Lords provide especially otherwise), the inorganic
heavenly regions to the inorganic inhabitants of the earth.

16\. Now, behold, I said unto thee, in the olden times, try the spirits,
and see, if they be of God.

17\. For the angels who wander about on the earth know not my kingdoms,
and they deny me, and deny all order and system and discipline in heaven
and earth.

18\. And each and all such angels, coming to mortals, do so on their own
account, assuming any form and name they may find acceptable unto men.

19\. Such angels have not yet entered the first resurrection; nor belong
they to any disciplined kingdom in heaven.

20\. And all mortals, such as I have named to thee as the best and
highest of mortals, enter the es world (after death), only into the
inorganic regions of heaven.

21\. Neither can they enter into the lowest of my kingdoms until they
abnegate self and learn affiliation.

22\. Therefore, after death, they remain, for the most part, in their
former places: The merchant in his counting-house, the banker in his
bank, the shipper in his place, the philosopher in his place, the pope
in his place, the king in his, the farmer in his.

23\. Neither have they power or wisdom to go to any other place; and
they stroll about, like one that hath lost his master. Neither will they
affiliate with other angels; but, in stubbornness and moroseness,
persist in working out an individual identity, until they are broken
down in sorrow and darkness, which may be in a few years, or it may be
hundreds of years.

24\. And, then, my holy ones come to them, and carry them away to my
es'yan schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](oah586)
