[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah49)  [Next](oah51.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. WHEN all the first best spirits of the lower heaven, and such as
dwelt with mortals, were taken away and domiciled in Yeshuah, there were
left only drujas (spirits of darkness) on the face of the earth. For one
whole year God left the earth void of Jehovih's light.

2\. Mortals loved more to commune with the spirits of their kindred, who
knew little of heaven, than they did with ethereans who were wise and
holy.

3\. God said: What man or what woman have ye found who saith: Come ye
angels of Jehovih, tell me wherein I can do more good works, for I
thirst, and am hungry to serve Jehovih with all my wisdom and strength
in doing good to my fellows?

4\. Rather do they turn away from such, and drink in the tales of the
strolling druj, and so wrap themselves in darkness. For this reason
shall they find darkness in heaven and earth; and they shall be as one
who is sick and broken down in conceit.

5\. When the year of darkness was ended God sent pruners around about
the earth and in the lower heaven of the earth. Two millions of pruners
sent he forth, saying to them: Find all the evil spirits dwelling with
mortals, whether they be fetals or familiars, and gather them into one
place. Then find the spirits and fairies who have taken up caves and
waterfalls on earth as their abode, and bring them to the same place.
Then find the idiotic and chaotic spirits who dwell on battle-fields,
and bring them to the same place. Then find the lusters, who dwell in
old castles and ruined cities, and in houses of evil, and when they are
going out for raids on mortals, seize them and bring them to the same
place.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

6\. The ethereans went and collected all the evil spirits and the
spirits of darkness belonging to the earth, and brought them to a place
in atmospherea, and there were of them nine hundred millions.

7\. God said: Prepare a ship suitable to transport them to Hudaow, in
Ji'ya, and there provide them a kingdom to themselves, giving them a God
and Lords and proper officers to discipline and educate them for
Jehovih's kingdoms.

8\. Thus were they removed, and the earth and its lower heaven were
purified from evil spirits by the decree of God in Yeshuah, in the
second year of the first dawn of dan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah51.md)
