[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah522)  [Next](oah524.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XL

1\. NOT less were the trials of Ennochissa; for his sub-Gods also
revolted, and many of them assumed the names of the Saviors he had given
to Chine'ya. And he also sent an army of two thousand million angel
warriors down to the earth to destroy them, and break them up, and if
need be to capture them, and cast them in hell.

2\. Of these hosts, he made Yad'deth chief captain, giving him power to
select his own captains and generals. And it came to pass, that a
heavenly war ensued on the earth, in Chine'ya, betwixt the hosts of
Ya'deth and the rebellious sub-Gods and their hosts, which lasted
seventy years.

3\. And Ya'deth gained the victory, clearing away all the rebel angels
of the sub-Gods, and putting them to flight. Four of these rebel Gods
fled into Argos, to Athena, where they established themselves securely.

4\. Ennochissa now summoned Ya'deth and his victorious army to
Eta-shong, his heavenly kingdom. And when he was before the throne,
Ennochissa said unto him:

5\. Thou hast beholden the machinations of my brother Triune God,
Kabalactes, who hath falsely assumed the name, Budha, and proclaimed
himself the All Highest God, and his heaven the All Highest Heaven of
Heavens. Two things do I decree, this day and hour: An army of angels,
for the earth, of two thousand millions; and thou Ya'deth, shalt be
their commander, to do my will. And another army of angel warriors, for
my heavenly kingdom of Eta-shong; and for my kingdom of Damaya, over
Guatama.

6\. For my heavenly army, thou, Loo Wan, shalt be commander for
Eta-shong; and thou, Biwawotha, shalt be commender for Damaya.

7\. And to ye of heaven, I assign the care and protection of my kingdoms
with your armies. And ye shall wall your places around, and fortify me
on every side with angel warriors. Yet, menace not the angels of Budha,
nor of Looeamong. Nevertheless, if they offend, or are disrespectful of
me and my kingdoms, ye shall arrest them, and provide places of torment
for them, and cast them in.

8\. But as for thee, Ya'deth, thou and thy hosts shalt return again to
the earth, to mortals, and establish me as BRAHMA, which shall be my
name on earth and in heaven from this time forth forever. And thou shalt
possess <span id="page_704">p. 704</span> the oracles, and by all
possible means establish me amongst mortals, as well as in Vind'yu and
Chine'ya. And all who profess Brahma hereafter, shall be my subjects on
their entrance into heaven.

9\. And if it come to pass that Budha's mortal warriors fall upon the
mortal Brahmins, to destroy them, then shalt thou consider that Budha is
my enemy.

10\. And thou and thy angel warriors shall obsess every Brahmin to take
up arms, and war to the death every aggressing Budha. For Budha shall
learn that I, Brahma, rule these heavens in mine own way.

11\. So it came to pass, the four thousand million warriors of
Ennochissa (now falsely named Brahma), were selected, and apportioned
and marched off to their several places in great pomp and glory. To
describe even one of these armies, with their music and their implements
of war, their manual and procession, would require a large book. Then
their vessels of war; their implements of fire and water; their banners
and flags; and, above all, their enthusiasm. For many of them had been
warriors in earth-life, and knew no other trade, and now exulted in the
prospect of mortal blood and death.

12\. Of the sub-Gods of Vind'yu and Chine'ya, Jehovih said: For this,
alone, these things are good. For, in time to come, man of the earth
will look abroad over the earth and say: How came the Vind'yu Gods in
Roma? How came the Chine'ya Gods in Athena?

13\. For, since they will not be able to answer their own questions,
they will perceive, there must have been a heavenly cause that mortals
knew not of.

14\. For in time of the fulfillment of My revelations, it will not be
sufficient unto either heaven or earth to re-establish spiritual
communion; but it shall also be shown unto them that there are kingdoms
and principalities in heaven. And they are ruled over by both good and
bad Gods. Moreover, they shall understand that of a truth whoso
worshipeth Budha shall go to Budha to be his slaves; and whoso
worshippeth Brahma shall go to Brahma, and be his slaves.

15\. I will make it plain to them that to worship a spirit, though he be
a God, is but the giving of their own souls into bondage. For they shall
in that day understand that the Great Spirit, the Ever Present, is not
an idol in the figure of a man, sitting on a throne.

16\. Moreover, spirits and mortals shall perceive that to deny My
Person, will, soon or late, bring the doer into a trap from which he can
not escape. Give then to Ennochissa the name Brahma, for it is his
choice. And thou shalt perceive that the time will come, when he will
seek to throw aside even this name, and even his own person, in order to
escape hell.

17\. Thus was established the two false Gods, Budha and Brahma. And at
once there was a war in heaven, as well as on earth. And this was
virtually the end of the schools and colleges in these heavens, and also
the beginning of the breaking up of the factories and places of industry
in the two kingdoms, Eta-shong and Haractu, in atmospherea.

18\. As to the earth regions, Vind'yu and Chine'ya, this is how they
stood in that day:

19\. Chine'ya was so well established in the doctrines of Chine and
Ka'yu, that the people shunned war and idolatry. The Saviors had gained
but little footing. And now, when the Gods sought to inspire the people
to war, in order to establish themselves, Brahma and Budha, only the
most barbarous regions could be influenced.

20\. Brahma, the false God, now perceiving the potency of Ka'yu's books,
sent his angel warriors to inspire the Sun King, T'sin, to have all the
books in Chine'ya destroyed, in order to reduce the empire to ignorance.
Accordingly, the Sun King, T'sin, issued a decree, commanding all the
books and tablets of Chine'ya to be destroyed.

21\. Brahma said: I will have all, or destroy all. My angels shall not
let sleep in peace, any king or governor in all this land, until he
engage in the work of thus destroying mine enemy, Learning.

22\. And there were destroyed, in one year, more than five million
books, and one million tablets of stone and copper; being the
destruction of the books of the ancients, for upward of twenty thousand
years. Besides these, there were destroyed many of the books of Ka'yu,
but not all of them.

23\. In the meantime, the anti-war spirit of the people had cried out to
the Creator: O Father, what shall we do to avert war, and to preserve
the revelations of Thy holy ones of old?

24\. And Jehovih answered them, through God of Paradise, Jehovih's Son,
saying: Build ye walls against the barbarians. And your walls shall
stand as a testimony of what ye are willing to do, rather than engage in
war, even for self-preservation.

<span id="page_705">p. 705</span>

25\. Because ye have faith in Me, I will be with you even unto the end.

26\. And it came to pass that the Faithists of Chine'ya built stone
walls, the greatest buildings in all the world. And they stand to this
day.

27\. Jehovih said: Behold the works of My chosen. As long as these walls
stand, they shall be testimony of the struggle of My people, to maintain
themselves, by means of peace instead of war. And the walls shall be
monuments to the Faithists of this land, who have perished by the false
Gods, Brahma and Budha.

28\. Yea, the testimony of these walls shall be stronger, in time to
come, against Brahma and Budha, than though every stone were a sword and
spear. And the followers of My Son, Ka'yu, shall loathe them with pity
and hate.

29\. In Vind'yu also, did the machinations of Budha and Brahma work sore
mischief on mortals. In this country both of these false Gods decreed
the destruction of all books and tablets, save such as looked favorable
to their own doctrines. And there were here destroyed more than two
million books and one million tablets, of stone and copper.

30\. And the schools and colleges of the people were well nigh
destroyed, the whole length and breadth of the land.

31\. And in both, Chine'ya and Vind'yu, were there slain in war, in
order to establish the names of these Gods amongst mortals, more than
one hundred and forty millions of people, men, women and children.

32\. By the angel warriors of these two Gods were mortals thus inspired
in the work of destruction. Not only against the Faithists were these
Gods, but against each other also. And mortals were their victims, for
the glory and exaltation of the two heavenly kingdoms, Haractu and
Eta-shong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI](oah524.md)
