[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah561)  [Next](oah563) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XX

JEHOVIH OVERTHROWETH SLAVERY IN GUATAMA.

1\. ES said: In the olden times, and in the eastern countries, Jehovih
began His revelations. The western continent He left for the finishing
thereof.

2\. Now, when God looked abroad over Guatama, he saw four millions of
people in bondage, as slaves; and he saw that they must be liberated.
And so, God inquired of the chief mathematician in the Holy Council, one
Arak, saying: Who, of all the kings of earth, hath had the greatest
number of slaves?

3\. And Arak said: Xerxes, who dwelleth in Yope'gah, in atmospherea.

4\. God said: Send thou a heavenly ship for him, and for a thousand
million of his angels. And send also for the Argos'yan, Leonidas, and
for a thousand million of his angels. And, when they are brought here,
they shall descend to the earth, to these barbarians, and liberate their
slaves.

5\. Arak saluted, and departed, giving his instructions to the heavenly
marshals, who at once sent ships and messengers as directed.

6\. God, then, said: I will now recall the ashars, who hold guard over
these mortals; and, for a season, they shall dwell in drujan darkness.

7\. And this was accomplished, and straightway a war ensued betwixt the
owners of the slaves and the neighboring states.

8\. Then, came the Gods and angels, high in the grades, to witness the
play of mortal death, and to determine how best to win to liberty and to
Jehovih, the inhabitants of this great land.

9\. God had said: It is an easy matter to win in war; but to make
mortals see the triumph of righteousness, is not so easy. Therefore, be
discreet in appropriating testimony unto Jehovih.

10\. And, there rose up two million men in arms, pushing on in war on
every side, coursing the rich soil in mortal blood. And yet, neither
side had defined its principles, or taken stand for righteousness sake.
But went on in fearful destruction, laying in death tens of thousands,
and tens of thousands!

11\. Jehovih said: Send thou, thy Parsi'e'an and Argos'yan angels, down
to these mortals, and, by inspiration and by dreams and by visions, thy
angels shall say to them: Whoso professeth the earth, shall battle in
vain; but whoso professeth righteousness in My name, shall win. And
millions of angels descended, and tried to persuade them.

12\. But mortals would not hear. Even the chief general, on liberty's
side, closed his soul against Jehovih. Aye, himself, enforced slavery
with his mighty army.

13\. And years went on, and all the people began to perceive that,
without righteousness, there would be no end to the war.

<span id="page_750">p. 750</span>

14\. Jehovih had said: Only death can reach these people, or make them
behold my hand. Yet, thou shalt send thy angel hosts over all the north
regions and inspire them, to call out for liberty.

15\. Then went forth Xerxes and Leonidas, with their two thousand
million angels, to overspread the north, to inspire mortals to a more
heavenly stand, to make them see justice and liberty.

16\. And, for a hundred days, these angels dwelt with mortals; but many
mortals were too gross in the earth to comprehend. Then, Xerxes came to
New York, and took hence the guardian angels, those of holiness, and he
left the city in the hand of drujas. And, at once, the city was plunged
in hell, and the people were as a mad people, wild and fearful.

17\. Again, Jehovih spake in the Holy Council in heaven, saying: Let My
angels go once more, and inspire mortals to rise to the light of My
will.

18\. Again, the angels overrun the land, inspiring mortals day and night
to demand freedom for the slaves. And the Embassadress of Jehovih said
to her inspiring hosts of angels: Number ye the mortals, north and
south, as to their majority voice for freedom.

19\. Now, when the Gods numbered the mortals and graded them, they
discovered the majority had turned to freedom's side.

20\. Jehovih said to his Embassadress: Take thine own inspiring host,
and go down to the earth, to Washington, to Lincoln, the president, and
hold this matter up to him, that he may understand Me. For he is not
bound in doctrines. For which reason My angels made him president, and
for this purpose which I have in hand.

21\. And it shall come to pass that Lincoln will hear thee, and he shall
resolve in his own mind unto freedom for the slaves. But he will seek
for some external sign, fearing he may have mistaken the angels that
minister unto him. But I will provide a way for this end also.

22\. And the angels of Jehovih went to Lincoln in a vision, like a
dream, and they said unto him: Lincoln! Lincoln! And he answered and
said: Who art thou?

23\. And the angels said: Such as come in Jehovih's name for freedom's
sake. Behold, millions of his angels look down from heaven, and would
come to thy armies, if thou wouldst but proclaim freedom to the slaves.
Jehovih's hand is in this matter.

24\. Lincoln awoke, and was troubled with his dream.

25\. The next night, the angels came again, and re-told their words, and
added thereunto: The great majority of the country is ripe for this
matter. Thou fearest this is but a foolish dream. Behold, we will give
thee proof tomorrow.

26\. Lincoln awoke more troubled than before, but remembered, the angels
said: We will give thee proof to-morrow.

27\. Jehovih said: I will make this matter a testimony to this nation,
so that no man may gainsay it. And I will show also how My angels work
singly and in mighty legions.

28\. Now, at that time, there was living in Washington, a seeress,
Nettie Mainard, through whom spirits spake in her entrancement. And on
the day mentioned, the angels spake through her, saying to one Kase: Go
thou, and fetch the president into the presence of this woman.

29\. And Kase went to Lincoln, and told him what was said. And when
Lincoln was before the seeress, the angel of Jehovih entranced her, and
said unto him: We said, we would give thee proof to-morrow. Behold, we
repeat unto thee, Jehovih is in this matter. Save, thou proclaimest the
freedom of the slaves thou shalt not succeed. Do thou this, and the
enemy's armies shall melt away like snow in the sun.

30\. Lincoln's eyes were opened, and he went straight away, and
proclaimed freedom to the whole four million slaves.

31\. Xerxes said to Leonidas: Thou, great conquerer, thou shalt conquer
me again. Take thy thousand million angels, and go with the armies of
the north, and inspire them on to victory. Give them such strength and
courage as they have not before manifested. And, as for myself and my
hosts, we will go to the armies of the south, and we will inspire them
to believe they are conquered, and so make them flee before thy
soldiers.

32\. Thus, these great angel warriors allotted themselves to the work.
And, lo and behold, the northern armies ran forth over the enemy's
country as if war were but play; and the southern armies vanished,
disarming themselves, and returning to their homes.

33\. The slaves were free!

34\. Jehovih said: Let this be a testimony, that this land is the place
of the beginning of the kosmon era. There shall be no caste amongst my
people.

35\. Behold, I went to the Israelites, <span id="page_751">p. 751</span>
and in that day, I said: Keep yourselves as a separate people! For I had
work for them, which was to travel westward, and establish Me, the All
One. And they came westward, and fulfilled My commandments. Wherefore I
have blessed them.

36\. And I went to Chine'ya, and I said: Let the followers of Chine keep
themselves as an exclusive people; for I have a work for them; which was
to establish Me, the All One, and to demonstrate the most numerous
people in all the world united as one people, peacefully. And they have
accomplished their work. And I blessed them. And I went to Vind'yu also,
and established a mighty people with a multiplicity of Gods and
languages. For I had a work for them to do, which was to preserve My
revelations of some of the divisions in My heavens above; and to prove,
in after-time, things which I had revealed to the ancients. They have
accomplished their work also, and I have blessed them.

37\. But, in this era, I come not to an exclusive people, but to the
combination of all peoples commingled together as one people. Hence, I
have called this, the KOSMON ERA.

38\. Henceforth, my chosen shall be of the amalgamated races, who choose
Me. And these shall become the best, most perfect of all peoples on the
earth.

39\. And they shall not consider race or color, but health and nobleness
as to the mortal part; and as to spirit, peace, love, wisdom and good
works, and one Great Spirit only.

40\. Leonidas said to Xerxes: It will be revealed ere long that we have
been here with our angel hosts. As a testimony of this, let us allot a
number of our angels to remain a season with mortals. And they shall
inspire them to athletic sports peculiar to the Argos'yans and
Parsi'e'ans.

41\. To this, Xerxes consented, and they asked for six hundred thousand
angel volunteers; and they received them, and officered them, and
distributed them in such way that their inspiration should develop
mortals in health, strength and endurance, by means of athletic games.

42\. And it came to pass that the angels of heaven established athletic
games amongst this people, far and near. Jehovih said: Even in this
shall man behold the Cause of causes which lieth behind all things done
on the earth.

43\. And man searched as to the Cause of these things, and tried to
persuade himself of any cause but the true one!

44\. Jehovih said: I will show these people, that the chief causes of
great affairs amongst mortals come from the angels of My heavens.

45\. I come in kosmon not to free only the corporeal man, but the
spiritual man. I raised My hand against a God being founded in their
constitution; neither will I have them to fight battles for Me. The past
is past; angels and mortals shall be free!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](oah563)
