[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah573)  [Next](oah575.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. O man, remember thy Creator and praise Him. In this, thou art graded
by thy God.

2\. Who see not Him, are weak in spirit; who see Him in all things, and
hear His voice in the leaves, and in every herb, are strong in spirit.

3\. These are the grades of the resurrection of the souls of men.

4\. For what is the earth but a foaling nest, and the possessions of the
earth but chains of bondage.

5\. My heavens rest upon the earth; the place of the es'yan is in my
keeping. And the places of the grades of my heavens have I adjusted,
according to the inhabitants thereof.

6\. I people the heavens of the earth with the spirits of the dead;
according to their grade in their corporeal lives, so do I arrange them.

7\. To provide them unto everlasting resurrection, and make them to
rejoice in their being. These are the labors of thy God.

8\. For the beasts of the field and the birds and fowls of the air, and
for many animals that are companions to man, made I a place in heaven,
where their spirits should survive for a season.

9\. And this animal heaven I graded, one, in the order of my heavens.

<span id="page_765">p. 765</span>

10\. For I saw that man on the earth had delight in them; and I provided
unto him for his es'yan period, that he might rejoice in remembrance of
finding his loves.

11\. And I made the animal heaven to rest on the face of the lands of
the earth even the same as the place of the es'yan in grade one.

12\. Remember, O man, thy Creator gave to every animal a season on the
earth; but He limited them to a time to become extinct. Even so, and of
like duration made I a heavenly period for the spirits of animals
companionable to man.

13\. But for man I provided heavens above, where he should rise as to
place, even as he riseth, as to goodness and knowledge.

14\. Magnify thy perception, O man, that thou mayst comprehend the
kingdoms of thy God. Behold the example thy Creator sat before thee in
the fashion of the earth.

15\. In large bodies, He placed the lands; in large bodies, He placed
the oceans. Not in little hillocks of land and little puddles of water.

16.Even larger than these are the divisions (plateaux) of the heavens of
thy God; the heavens of the earth are separated by atmospherean oceans.

17\. I fill not the air of the firmament with angels scattered about;
but I give unto them regions habitable and home-like. And I grade them
suitable to the resurrection of the spirits of the dead.

18\. Consider the work of thy Creator, and the knowledge and symbols He
placeth before thee. Thou holdest up a lump of salt, and it is solid and
of dimensions; but cast it into water, and it is seen not, but dissolved
and lost as to thy perception.

19\. And thou beholdest the earth, which hath dimensions also; but the
ethe, thou seest not. As water is to salt the solvent, so is ethe to
corporeal things the solvent. By slow velocity holdeth the solid earth
its form; yet, in ethe, external to the body of the earth, the swift
velocity of corpor is magnified into dissolution. By vortices in ethe
are these things accomplished.

20\. In the atmosphere of the earth, there is sufficient corpor to make
many worlds like this habitable earth. And this corpor, which is in
solution (as to a mortal's eyes), floateth in the firmament of the
earth, in continents wide as the earth, and deep as the earth; and there
are thousands of them.

21\. And yet, O man, these are but the atmospherean heavens. These are
the dominions given into the keeping of thy God. These are my kingdoms
and my heavens for a season.

22\. As thou, O man of the earth, sailest thy ships abroad over the
ocean, and coming to a new land, going ashore, dost settle thy people
thereon, and it becometh a new kingdom, even so doth thy God in the
heavens of the earth, in the plateaux of this vortex.

23\. Remember the magnitude of thy Creator's works and the symbols He
sat before thee: Where the clouds float high, it raineth not; where they
drag on the face of the earth, it raineth daily.

24\. Consider the habitations of the resurrections of the dead which are
in the keeping of thy God.

25\. Even as to the square of the distance away from the earth, so are
the grades of my resurrections.

26\. According to the exaltation of man's soul, so shall he inhabit the
places I have made.

27\. According to his own soul's growth and development, so shall he
ascend in my kingdoms, outward away from the earth; grade unto grade
adapted I them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah575.md)
