[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah591)  [Next](oah593.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXX

GOD JUDGETH DOMINIONS.

1\. GOD said: Now, behold, a certain rich man coveted his neighbors'
children, and he went about and captured many of them. And withal he was
mighty above his neighbors, and none of them could regain their
offspring.

2\. And a certain rab'bah inquired of Jehovih concerning the matter. And
Jehovih answered him, saying: Whatsoever he coveted and hath taken,
suffer him to keep. What he hath taken exultingly shall be a bondage
unto him in sorrow, in time to come; for he shall provide according to
law.

3\. And it so happened that a famine came upon that land, and, according
to the laws, the rich had to provide unto the kin of their own
households.

4\. And, behold, the rich man's possessions were consumed by the
neighbors whom he had robbed, and great sorrow came upon him.

5\. Such, O man, is the way of the dominions of men. A mighty king
stretcheth forth his hand to possess his neighbor's kingdom, and Jehovih
giveth it unto him.

6\. And that king exulteth, saying: Behold my possessions and my power!

7\. Hear, now, the judgment of thy God, O man: Soon or late, all things
answer unto Jehovih in a way man imagineth not. Whoso coveteth and
receiveth, is bound unto Jehovih.

8\. And, when a king possesseth himself of a new country, he not only
receiveth its riches but its misfortunes also. The profits and losses
are all his.

9\. And the sins of the people are his, and are henceforth upon his
head.

10\. And, when a famine cometh upon that country, the king shall be
responsible therefor.

11\. And he shall supply every want of the people, or judgment shall be
upon his head.

12\. And for all of the newly acquired subjects, who may be in sickness
or distress, the king shall be judged.

13\. Moreover, judgment shall pursue that king into the es world; and
the subjects he took unto himself on earth shall be his in heaven to
redeem, and provide for, and educate.

14\. Neither shall he have exaltation in my heavens faster than the
lowest of his subjects.

15\. Behold, I not only bequeath the glory and joy of the Father's
kingdom on earth, but I reveal also the responsibilities which shall be
hereafter known to mortals.

16\. Man shall not only perceive the justice of my judgments, but he
shall realize the power of my hand upon kingdoms and empires.

17\. I show man not only the way of liberty, but the way of bondage. He
shall know understandingly the ways <span id="page_783">p. 783</span> of
my dominions, and the judgment that is upon him.

18\. For every one whom the king causeth to be slain, in order to
possess a new country, the king shall mete out rebribution until all his
enemies do pardon and forgive him.

19\. Behold, I have revealed the grades and rates; and such king shall
perceive, that his bondage can not be less than six generations, but may
be twenty or forty generations, ere he reacheth beyond the second
resurrection.

20\. And the same rules shall apply to every king and queen and emperor,
and every other ruler in all the world.

21\. The resurrection in heaven of each and every one of them shall be
with, and no faster than those they ruled over on earth.

22\. And they shall be responsible to all their subjects for deaths
resulting from wars, wherein the subjects were used for the glory and
power of the king. And for all famines, pestilences, and all other
injuries that come upon the multitude through any shortness in the
king's government.

23\. And for the poverty of the people, and for their ignorance and
crime; nor shall the king escape retribution for any good thing he might
have done, but did not accomplish.

24\. And for all the profit and service the king receiveth on earth from
his subjects, he shall render back to them an equivalent profit and
service, either on earth, or in heaven.

25\. Let not the king or other ruler, any longer flatter himself that
death effaceth the bondage of man unto his subject and neighbor.

26\. Behold, by opening the gates of heaven, I have also given you the
glory thereof; and, with it, I also give you the responsibilities.

27\. I have brought the angels to your door; they bring you news of
great joy, and bring you also the afflictions ye cast upon them.

28\. I told those of the olden time, that sword should answer sword; war
should answer war; and peace receive in peace.

29\. Such, then, is the judgment of thy God upon dominion; and this
shall be ratified in time to come by every ruler on the face of the
earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI](oah593.md)
