[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah530)  [Next](oah532) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLVIII

1\. THE Lord said: Whilst Looeamong, the false God, was yet bewailing,
behold, Thoth, his chief warrior God, came upon him, saying:

2\. Alas, O master, thy followers have no king or queen on earth to
protect them.

3\. Thy mortal Kriste'yan warriors, who drew the sword to establish
thee, have been slaughtered in Cardalia, Cyprus, Aitina, Thessalonica,
Dalmatia, Lacaonia, Napla, Selucia, Macedon, Galati and Scythia.

4\. In Thebes, six thousand Kriste'yan warriors were massacred by the
armies of the emperor Maximum, inspired by Baal.

5\. In Eocla, the Gods Jupiter and Ira inspired the king Hoethus to
slaughter three thousand seven hundred Kriste'yan soldiers.

6\. In Utica, the God Jupiter, with seven thousand angels caused three
hundred of thy soldiers to be burned in a lime kiln. And they were
soldiers battling for thee.

7\. In Damascus, two thousand seven hundred of thy warriors were cut to
pieces with the sword. And the only charge against them was their
fighting for thee. Yea, their sacred bull was taken from them and
roasted alive. And their bloody cross, which thou gavest them as a sign
of the battle-cry, was broken and burnt.

8\. In Crete, one thousand eight hundred of thy warriors, who had served
thee well in slaughtering pagans, were walled around with fire, and
roasted alive.

9\. On the plains of Agatha, where thy soldiers, three hundred and
eighty of them, were returning with their booty, having done thee great
service in destroying heathen temples, they were set upon by the
Gath'yans and destroyed, and for no other cause than that they served
thee.

10\. Looeamong cried out: Enough! Enough, O Thoth! I, too, will have a
mortal emperor.

11\. Descend thou again to the earth, to Hatuas (Constantine), and
inspire thou him to raise a mortal army of forty thousand men, and move
upon Roma.

12\. Behold, I will prove myself before <span id="page_713">p.
713</span> Hatuas, and he shall covenant unto me. Through him will I
drive Baal out of Roma. And, as I make myself Kriste of heaven, so will
I make Hatuas (Constantine) emperor of the whole earth.

13.Thoth then descended to the earth, to Hatuas, who was a su'is, and
could both see angels and hear them talk; and Thoth induced Hatuas to
raise an army of forty thousand soldiers, and set out for conquest.

14\. And when they had come to the plains of Agatha, even where the
Kriste'yans had been massacred many years before, behold, Looeamong and
his angel hosts appeared in the heavens above Hatuas' army, so that all
the soldiers thereof beheld the heavenly visitors.

15\. And Looeamong showed unto Hatuas, in the air of heaven, a true
cross, on which was written in letters of blood: IL'KRISTE.

16\. Nevertheless, there was no man present who could read the
inscription; and many were the conjectures thereon. In the evening,
Looeamong descended to Hatuas, and said unto him: This is the
interpretation of the sign and the cross I showed thee:

17\. IN THIS THOU SHALT CONQUER! Amd when thou arisest in the morning
thou shalt cause to be made a cross, of most excellent workmanship; and
thou shalt have it inscribed: THE KRISTE, OUR LORD, SON OF THE HOLY
GHOST.

18\. And this cross shalt thou cause to be carried at the head of thy
army. And thy edicts shalt thou call, bulls, and they shall be written
with lamb's blood, in remembrance of the sacrifice of the Jews in Egupt,
through which sacrifice the Father in heaven delivered them. For I am
Lord of heaven and earth.

19\. Accordingly, a cross was made, and highly decorated, and inscribed
as commanded, and Hatuas and his soldiers went forth with renewed
courage. And so great was their zeal, that everything fell before them.

20\. And now, that Looeamong's angels had an anchorage on earth, they
were in all respects the equals of angels of the pagan Gods. So that,
whilst Hatuas was victorious on earth, Gabriel, otherwise Thoth, was
victorious in heaven.

21\. And it came to pass in not many years, that Looeamong, through
Gabriel, captured Baal and all the false Gods in all the regions far and
near. And Gabriel took, along with the captured Gods, seven million and
six hundred thousand warring angels, and carried them altogether to
Makavishtu, in hada, and cast them into hell, where there were already
more than ten millions who were in chaos and madness.

22\. And Gabriel had the place walled around with fire and noxious
gases, so that none could escape.

23\. Such was the end of the earthly dominion of Baal, who had ruled
over mortals for evil, for upward of three thousand years. And, in fact,
it was the final termination of the earthly Gods that ruled over mortals
through oracles and pagan practices.

24\. The earth was now clear of evil Gods, whose chief labor had been
for thousands of years to capture the spirits of the recent dead, and
make slaves of them for the glory of the hadan kingdoms.

25\. Thus had Looeamong done a good service; for the earth and lower
heavens had now nothing to suffer from any Gods, save the Triunes.

26\. Looeamong inspired Hatuas, the mortal emperor, to call together a
council of wise men from all the kingdoms of Arabin'ya, Heleste, Parsi'e
and Uropa, to select from all the religious doctrines in the world, that
which was the wisest and best, that it might be established by kings,
emperors and governors by the sword and spear, so there should never
more be but one religion.

27\. And, in course of time, there assembled a council of seventeen
hundred and eighty-six learned men from all the regions named, and they
placed themselves under the rules and presence of Hatuas. And he
selected from them one hundred and forty-four speakers.

28\. As for the others, they were divided into groups of twelves,
besides a goodly number being appointed scribes and translators. But
many, having the appearance of Jews, were rejected altogether.

29\. Now, the council had brought with them, in all, two thousand two
hundred and thirty-one books and legendary tales of Gods and Saviors and
great men, together with a record of the doctrines taught by them.

30\. Hatuas, being under the inspiration of Looeamong, through Gabriel,
alias Thoth, thus spake:

31\. Search ye these books, and whatsoever is good in them, that retain;
but, whatsoever is evil, that cast away. What is good in one book, unite
ye with that which is good in another book. And whatsoever is thus
brought together shall be called, THE BOOK OF <span id="page_714">p.
714</span> BOOKS. And it shall be the doctrine of my people, which I
will recommend unto all nations, that there shall be no more war for
religions' sake.

32\. Thoth (Gabriel) and his angel hosts formed a circle around about
the mortal council, a thousand angels deep on every side, and extending
upward densely for a long way, and thence, by a line of light, extending
to Looeamong's throne, in Hapsendi, his heavenly kingdom.

33\. By day and by night, Thoth and his hosts watched over the mortal
council, over-shadowing their every thought and word.

34\. For four years and seven months the council thus deliberated, and
selected from the two thousand two hundred and thirty-one books and
legendary tales.

35\. And, at the end of that time, there had been selected and combined
much that was good and great, and worded so as to be well-remembered by
mortals.

36\. As yet, no God had been selected by the council, and so they
balloted, in order to determine that matter. And the first ballot gave
prominence to the following Gods: Jove, Jupiter, Salenus, Baal, Thor,
Gade, Apollo, Juno, Aries, Taurus, Minerva, Rhets, Mithra, Theo,
Fragapatti, Atys, Durga, Indra, Neptune, Vulcan, Kriste, Agni, Croesus,
Pelides, Huit, Hermes, Thulis, Thammus, Eguptus, Iao, Aph, Saturn,
Gitchens, Minos, Maximo, Hecla and Phernes.

37\. Besides these, there were twenty-two other Gods and Goddesses, that
received a small number of votes each.

38\. In seven days thereafter, another ballot was taken, and the number
of Gods was reduced to twenty-seven.

39\. In seven days thereafter, another ballot was taken, and the number
of Gods was reduced to twenty-one.

40\. Thus was the number reduced each ballot, but slower and slower. Six
days in the week were allotted to discuss the merits and de'merits of
the Gods. But many weeks elapsed towards the last, when the number was
not reduced.

41\. For one year and five months the balloting lasted, and at that time
the ballot rested nearly equally on five Gods, namely: Jove, Kriste,
Mars, Crite and Siva. And here the ballot changed not for yet seven time
more, which was seven weeks.

42\. Hatuas spake before the council, saying: Ours is a labor for all
the nations of the earth, and for all time. I know the angels of heaven
are with us in this matter. We have found five Gods, good and acceptable
before the world. What say the council, that the angels give us a sign?
For we all do know the angels' signs of these Gods.

43\. The council said: Well said, thou wisest of men! Such a God shall
be ours, now and forever.

44\. And immediately, there and then, LOOEAMONG AND HIS ANGELS GAVE A
SIGN IN FIRE, OF A CROSS SMEARED WITH BLOOD, AND IT RESTED ON A BULL'S
HORNS, even as a cloud of fire on a cloud of fire!

45\. Whereupon Kriste was declared GOD AND LORD OF ALL THE NATIONS OF
THE EARTH.

46\. And the council agreed thereto, unanimously, and, moreover, to
reject all the other Gods.

47\. The next question was, what mortal representative should be chosen?

48\. The first ballot brought out the following men: Zarasthustra,
Thothma, Abraham, Brahma, Atys, Thammus, Joshu, Sakaya, Habron, Bali,
Crite, Chrisna, Thulis, Witoba and Speio. Besides these, there were
included in the ballot, forty-six other men, who received a small number
of ballots each.

49\. God, Son of Jehovih, said: Behold, the Council of Nice balloted for
a twelve-month, as to what man heard the Voice? Sayest thou, Jehovih
sendeth His matters to a council of men?

50\. Hatuas said: The Gods will not let us choose any man. Now,
therefore, hear me: All the law-givers chosen by the Gods, have been
iesu. Now, since we can not make preference as to a man, let us say: THE
MAN, IESU?

51\. Thereupon, the name, Iesu, was adopted, and the sacred books were
written accordingly.

52\. God, Son of Jehovih, said: The Council of Nice sinned not, for the
doctrones set forth, as Iesu's, were for Jehovih.

53\. But, wherein their words made worshipful the names of Kriste and
the Holy Ghost, behold, that matter was with Looeamong.

54\. God said: My testimonies were previously with Abraham and Brahma
and Moses, and I spake not of Kriste nor of the Holy Ghost, I spake of
God and of the I AM.

55\. They have said: Whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man,
it shall be forgiven him; but, whosoever speaketh against the Holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him.

<span id="page_715">p. 715</span>

56\. Therefore, suffer ye Looeamong to bear his own testimony to the
kingdom whence it sprang. The Holy Ghost was his labor.

57\. Jehovih said: Had I weakened since the time of Moses, that I need
to incarnate Myself, in order to make man understand Me?

58\. God said: Sufficient unto a time is the work of Jehovih; because
the Triunes over threw the oracles and hundreds of false Gods and
hundreds of sacred books full of error and evil, behold they fulfilled
their time.

59\. Sufficient unto another time, even the present, is another work of
Jehovih, which is to establish His Presence with the living generation.

60\. Jehovih said: Behold, I created; and I am sufficient unto all men.

61\. In the olden times, man worshipped all the spirits of the dead, and
I cut him short, giving him many Gods; and, again, I cut him short, and
gave him three Gods, and then, three Gods in one.

62\. This day, I cut him short of all, save his Creator. Behold the
signs of My times, My preachers are legions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX](oah532)
