[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah555)  [Next](oah557) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

THE REPUBLIC ESTABLISHED.

1\. ES said: Since three hundred years, the loo'is of God's allotment to
the earth, had been providing the generations of men unto the coming
work of God.

2\. And through these had God, Jehovih's Son, raised up one thousand two
hundred men, to be directly under the inspiration of the second
resurrection, for establishing an emancipated government for mortals.

3\. And these one thousand two hundred men were raised to grades above
sixty, and some of them to eighty.

4\. Chief of these men raised up by God, to establish the foundation of
Jehovih's kingdom with mortals, were the following, all of whom stood
above grade eighty, to wit:

5\. Paine, Jefferson, Adams, Franklin, Caroll, Hancock and Washington.

6\. Into the hands of these seven men did Jehovih, through God, His Son,
place the leadership of the mortal hosts; and they were under the
guidance of Jehovih's Lord, Yotahiza.

7\. And the Lord caused Paine, to proclaim the new doctrines, as against
Looeamong and the sacred books, on which the inquisitions had been
carried out.

8\. These, then, were the doctrines of Paine, inspired by the Lord,
Jehovih's Son, to wit:

9\. One, the Creator, who is Almighty, matchless in wisdom, truth, power
and unity of purpose; the author of all things, on the earth and on all
other worlds, seen and unseen.

10\. That the soul of man is immortal and everlasting, and shall
ultimately attain to peace and joy in the heavens of the Almighty.

11\. That, according to man's good or evil deeds, words, thoughts and
actions whilst on earth, even so shall he inherit in heaven, light or
darkness, joy or unhappiness.

12\. That all the world is my country, and the same right alike to all
men.

13\. To do good, with all of one's wisdom and strength, is the highest
religion.

14\. That man hath a natural right, above all kings, priests and sacred
writings, to serve his Creator in his own way.

15\. That this is an age of reason, in which all men should be inspired,
to read and think, and judge with their own judgment and not through any
priest or church or Savior.

16\. That the doctrine of a Savior is unjust; that no honest man should
accept another's dying for him.

17\. That the so-called sacred books are not the writings of the
Creator; that their multiplicity of defects prove them to have been
manufactured by corruptible authors.

18\. That, in practice, the said sacred books have been used by
unprincipled priests to promote wars, inquisitions, tyranny and
destruction.

19\. That man should rise up in his might to embrace his Creator, by the
practice of good works, and by promoting brotherly love toward all men;
and by charity and independence elicit the protection, the pride and the
glory of the Almighty.

20\. The doctrines of God, Paine proclaimed publicly; and they were
printed, and circulated amongst the inhabitants of Guatama.

21\. And it came to pass, that they fell into the hands of such men and
women as had been previously prepared by God to receive them. And these
people applauded the new doctrines to so great an extent that the
colonies repudiated the Divine right (Divan laws) of kings to govern
without the consent of the governed.

22\. Looeamong, the false Kriste, perceived the design of God, Jehovih's
Son, and immediately sent down to the earth, to Guatama, two thousand
angel warriors, to overthrow Paine's doctrines, and to precipitate the
colonies into war against the home government in western Uropa.

23\. So, war in Guatama, on earth, and in the heavens thereof, set in,
mortals against mortals and angels against angels.

24\. The Lord, Yotahiza, now assigned the army of the inquisition, the
seven thousand angels sent of God, to be the protecting hosts to the
seven leaders of the Guatama revolt.

25\. Besides these angels, who were generals and captains of the hosts,
there were of non-commissioned angel officers, two thousand seven
hundred <span id="page_742">p. 742</span> and eighty-four, who had also
been martyred as to earth-life, by scourging, and by the rack, and by
being pulled in quarters, and by being burnt, who were distributed
amongst the mortal armies of soldiers. And these angel officers had
angel armies and companies, disciplined and quartered in the camps of
the mortals with the soldiers.

26\. Such, then, were the inspiring hosts, varying in number from six
millions to twelve millions, who remained with the soldiers of the
republic during the war, day and night, inspiring them to fortitude, and
manipulating them to give them health and strength and endurance.

27\. God spake to the angel commander of these hosts, saying: Though thy
hosts inspire these mortals to liberty as to earthly things, yet thou
shalt also take advantage of this opportunity to sow the seed of higher
spiritual light amongst them. Remember, then, the sermon of the All
High: There is but one Great Spirit, Jehovih. And this shall thy hosts
forever inspire the mortals with.

28\. For seven years the war lasted, and during all the while, the
earthly commander, Washington, was under the guardianship of the
commander of the angel hosts. And there were detailed to guard
Washington, day and night, one thousand angels. And though he was shot
at, and in many ways sought for to be destroyed, these angels saved him,
even catching in their hands the bullets that were fired at him.

29\. And in like manner were many other mortal leaders and privates in
the war protected and saved from harm by the angels.

30\. And yet all this while the angels of Looeamong fought on the other
side, endeavoring to pull away the guardian angels, and so make the
mortal leaders vulnerable.

31\. But these angels were lower in grade and less potent, and, withal,
not so enthusiastic, for they had not suffered martyrdom.

32\. Jehovih hath said: Rather let a man glory in martyrdom for
righteousness' sake; for herein he taketh high resolves against evil;
which resolves are a great power to the soul when it entereth heaven.

33\. And it came to pass that the republic was established.

34\. And God caused the commander of the angels who had accomplished
this work, to call his hosts together, that they might hear the voice of
Jehovih. And there thus assembled eighteen million three hundred and
forty thousand in number, in an extemporized heaven above the Haguan
mountains, where the chiefs of Paradise had already prepared an altar to
Jehovih for the occasion.

35\. Of the higher grades from other plateaux, were here assembled in
the sacred circle, seventy million angels, to promote the Voice. Of
which matters God had previously sent word to Aroqu, that a chain of
light might be made to the upper heavens.

36\. Now, when the angels of the inquisition were thus assembled before
God, and duly placed by the marshals, God caused the light to be
lowered, so that they might rejoice rather than suffer because of its
brilliancy.

37\. And when God sat on the throne, and the es'enaurs had chanted unto
Jehovih glory for having founded the republic of mortals, a ray of light
was seen descending from the upper realms, and it extended down to the
throne of God, where now, on all sides, the illumination was in
splendor. Presently, just above the throne, a single star of light was
formed, and out of this came the Voice of Jehovih, saying:

38\. Peace, My beloved. The way is open: liberty to the conscience of
mortals is founded on earth. Ye have lifted them above the bondage of
Gods.

39\. Because ye were cut down before ye had finished your labor on
earth, I suffered ye to come back to mortals to complete your own
aspirations.

40\. Because ye united with one another in companies and phalanxes for a
good work, instead of working single-handed, ye are now admitted into
the second resurrection of My kingdoms.

41\. By the light of My throne are ye this day absolved from the bondage
of earth and first resurrection.

42\. The Voice ceased; but God spake unto his marshals, saying: Provide
ye an avalanza sufficient for the ascension of these my beloved angels,
and take them to the fields and forests of Attusasabak, in the Ortheon
plateau, where I have already provided them ample residences.

43\. And, after they are delivered, grade them, and give unto them
suitable instructors and companions, that in due time they may become
Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih, and ascend to the emancipated
kingdoms in the etherean worlds.

44\. Suffer them now to pass before the throne, that they may receive
badges from the Most High! For these will be to them a connection with
the exalted kingdoms.

<span id="page_743">p. 743</span>

45\. The marshals then filed them past the throne, and there fell, from
the heavens above, upon them, badges of immortal light, unchangeable.

46\. And the builders in Yutis brought them an avalanza, and they went
therein, to the sound of the singing of three millions of voices in
Jehovih's praise. And when they were within, God again spake to them,
saying:

47\. Ye go now far off from the earth. But as ye freed this land unto
itself, and now go away, behold, I will call ye back again before
another hundred years, to free the people from the doctrines and creeds
of the ancients. No God nor Lord nor Savior shall be enforced in this
land! Till then, Jehovih be with you all, and give you joy and
happiness!

48\. Thereupon, the officers of the avalanza set it in motion, rising
upward. And the musicians, they that remained and they that ascended,
sang and trumpeted until the fire-ship ascended out of sight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah557)
