[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah579)  [Next](oah581.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVIII

1\. HEAR the words of your God, O ye priests and preachers and rab'bahs,
and all ye that set yourselves up before men, professing to hold the key
to salvation and the places of my resurrections in heaven.

2\. Hearken to the words of your elder brother, God of these heavens and
the earth; behold, I will set you in judgment over yourselves; and the
powers of Jehovih within you shall cry out for truth and justice.

3\. Take your chosen of the congregation of your church, and make
manifest whereof ye preach.

4\. And prove that you have a good and sufficient doctrine for the
salvation of your souls.

5\. Choose ye the best of your flock, and show before your God an
example of all such as serve not mammon, but Jehovih. Seal up their
mouths; for ye shall judge them, not by words, but by what cometh of the
soul.

6\. And ye shall divide with one another your earthly possessions, being
as brethren. And ye shall cast it upon the altar of your church, saying:
We give it to the poor!

7\. Or, if ye have houses, ye shall say to the poor: Come and dwell
herein!

8\. Persuade not yourselves, O men of darkness, that ye are not graded
by the angels above; or, say to yourselves: Jehovih seeth not, nor
heareth.

9\. Nor say: When we are dead, our souls shall turn suddenly good, and
ascend to the right hand of God.

10\. Nor flatter yourselves, saying: We did the best we could under the
circumstances.

11\. Verily, I say unto you: Ye have not fulfilled the first law, which
is to make clean your own corporeal bodies. Because ye have stuffed
yourselves with carnal food, my holy angels can not approach you;
neither can your understanding approach the place of my kingdoms.

12\. How much less, then, have ye purified your souls? Wherein ye will
not put away flesh, because ye love flesh, even so will ye not put away
self-righteousness. Because ye shun the practice of labor, showing to
the world, ye love words, and the renown of men and caste, making
preferences in your churches, having rich and poor therein, which is
itself your condemnation. For ye should divide with one another; putting
in practice your doctrines.

13\. What one of you hath a congregation who have given up all, and who
make themselves alike and like, rich and poor?

14\. Say ye, my kingdoms in heaven are after such manner.

15\. I say unto you: Ye shall be bound in the first resurrection, in
hada, to all these whom ye have professed to lead; neither shall ye
ascend until the lowest of your congregations of spirits have put away
uncleanness and selfishness; which is the first labor. And, after this,
they shall learn to practice fellowship in union, for the resurrection
of others.

16\. Flatter not yourselves, that, because ye wear fine cloth, and ye
preach, that ye are not responsible also. Nor hope, that when ye become
spirits, ye shall ascend suddenly into places of delight. Ye are marked
by your God!

17\. Your souls are written all over with your deeds and works and
words; and ye shall see yourselves as in a mirror, and of your own
accord shun my kingdoms of light.

18\. Because ye have learned words, and practiced only in words, behold,
I come in this day to command practice in works. Not for a pittance, but
for all ye have.

19\. I am not come to destroy your religions; ye have done that already.

20\. I come to give ye a religion wherein all men can be as brethren.

21\. Even the infidel shall accept the Creator and good works. For he,
being the fruit of your behavior, is even in the foreground in the march
of my armies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](oah581.md)
