[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah595)  [Next](oah597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIV

GOD JUDGETH THE GOVERNMENTS OF MAN.

1\. GOD said: When a man hath young children, he maketh just laws, in
order to teach them discretion, justice, harmony and consideration, in
regard to one another.

<span id="page_787">p. 787</span>

2\. But, when his children attain to be men and women, man no longer
holdeth a law over them, for they become his equals, as brothers and
sisters.

3\. Even so, in the ancient times, provided I thee, O man, with
governments and laws for different nations and peoples.

4\. Nevertheless, I said unto thee: Let thy government be as a father
over the people, and not as a separate matter against them.

5\. But thou hast disobeyed my commandments; thy government is as one
thing, and thy people as another thing. That which should be one entity,
thou hast made into two.

6\. Thy government hath become a separate self from the people; and the
people are as servants, supporting the law-makers, who trade in projects
and schemes for their own profit and glory.

 

<span id="img_78700"></span> ![](img/78700.jpg)  
Plate 97.--GRADES.

 

7\. Since the earliest days, all the governments of man have drifted
into this.

8\. When a government no longer filleth the grade, according to the
advancement of the people, behold, thy God withdraweth his heavenly
protection from that government. And, straightway, the people run into
anarchy.

9\. Lay not the blame of anarchy and revolution and assassinations on
the people; my judgment is against the government in all cases. These
conditions of vengeance are but the fruit resulting from the
government's divergence from the will of Jehovih, and the march of His
light.

10\. As, for example, the offspring of inharmonious parents, or of
parents wrapt up in selfishness, are lower in grade than their
predecessors, even so do the subjects of a king decline in grade in
proportion to the prevention of liberty and the neglect of general
instruction.

11\. Judgment is rendered against government wherein it provideth not
liberty to the people, and neglecteth providing means for the
development of the talents created with all.

12\. In these respects, O man, governments are measured and graded by
thy God. And, whenever a government setteth up itself to enforce and
strengthen itself by violence against justice unto the multitude,
behold, I turn away from that government; and I call away my Lords and
holy angels.

13\. And, thereupon, drujas come upon that people, and the people fall
upon their government, and destroy it.

14\. If a government be a king only, and he have no holy council, then
the responsibility of the shortness is wholly his.

15\. But, if the king have a holy council, then the responsibility for
shortness lieth partly with the king and partly with the council.

16\. Judgment is rendered against them, not only in this world, but in
the es world. And each and every member of such council shall be bound
in the first resurrection until he hath made amends unto all his people
for the shortness he manifested on the earth.

17\. Hear the wisdom of thy God, O man, and consider the way of
righteousness in the governments of mortals:

18\. The nearer the twain are to being one, that is, the government and
the people, the nearer they are like unto my heavenly kingdoms.

19\. The more diverse the government is from the people, the farther it
is from the kingdom of thy God.

20\. Let this be a guide unto thee, O man, in prophesying the change and
the overthrow of governments: According to the square of the distance a
government is from Jehovih, so is the quickness of its coming change or
destruction.

21\. Think not these matters are governed by chance or accident: Jehovih
<span id="page_788">p. 788</span> is Perfect Righteousness: the all
Everlasting.

22\. He is All One. For a people and their government to attain to be
all one with each other, this is great strength, with a long existence
and internal peace.

23\. This, also, shalt thou consider, O man: All governments are tending
toward oneness with one another. This is the march of Jehovih. None can
stay Him.

24\. Consider, then, what is wisdom between governments: To make
themselves reciprocal toward one another.

25\. A government that setteth up itself for itself, and against other
governments, is a selfish government. And thy God rateth it the same as
a selfish man, being diverse from Jehovih and his kingdoms.

26\. Judgment is rendered against such a government. Neither my Lords
nor my holy angels shall bless that government.

27\. Governments that practice affiliation, to bring about reciprocal
brotherhoods between governments, are on the right road toward the
Father's everlasting kingdoms.

28\. Flatter not thyself, O man, that these matters can escape the
observation of thy God. The affairs, legislations, laws, treaties, and
all things whatsoever that governments accomplish, are known and
recorded in the heavens of the earth. And the leaders, kings and
councils, shall, soon or late, face them; and they shall judge of their
own fullness or shortness in serving Jehovih in righteousness and
wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](oah597)
