[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah531)  [Next](oah533) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLIX

ORIGIN OF MOHAMMEDANISM.

1\. THE Lord said: After Looeamong had cast out all other false Gods in
his earth dominions, he set to work enriching his heavenly home,
employing no less than seven thousand million angel slaves for that
purpose.

2\. Now, the place and extent of his heavenly capital was from Hasetus
to Roma, and thence northward to the Aquarian Mountains.

3\. His palace was modeled after Ennochissa's, at Eta-shong, and of
equal magnificence.

4\. His greatest warriors were now exalted as Lords, generals, marshals,
and so on. And he provided rites and ceremonies, and tournaments, and
all manner of heavenly diversities.

5\. But he made the rules of entrance to his palace so rigid, that only
his highest officers and visiting Gods could gain access to him.

6\. Now, for upward of a thousand years, the angel warrior, Gabriel,
alias Thoth, had been to Looeamong his most faithful sub-God.

7\. And Looeamong had promised Gabriel that, when he overthrew Baal, and
cast him in hell, he would give to Gabriel a great heavenly kingdom,
with an earthly base.

8\. Accordingly, Gabriel applied for Jerusalem (his station), and for
the heavens thereunto, and for one thousand million slaves.

9\. But Looeamong postponed the matter from time to time, for more than
six hundred years.

10\. Thoth, alias Gabriel, then sent this message to Looeamong, to wit:

11\. By virtue of mine own worth before the Gods of heaven, I greet thee
in peace and love. First, in remembrance of thy many promises to me, in
which thou hast kept no part thereof faithfully.

12\. Second, that thou art not Kriste, which is All Knowledge, but a
usurper and pretender.

13\. Third, that I made thee what thou art; and by mine own hand helped
thee to cast out Baal and Ashtaroth, and all the Roman'yan and Argos'yan
Gods. Of which matters it is known in these three great heavens, thou
didst promise me for more than seven hundred years, to give me a kingdom
of a thousand million subjects.

14\. And, fourth, since thou art safely raised up above all Gods within
these regions, thou hast affected to not know me. Yea, and in thy great
heavenly recreations and tournaments and receptions, thou hast not
commanded my presence, or in any way shown more remembrance of me than
as if I were an es'yan.

15\. And, fifth, thou didst long promise me that, if thou shouldst
succeed in establishing a sub-kingdom on the earth, or in hada, near the
earth, thou wouldst hand the same over to me, to rank thee in all
things. But thou hast greedily kept both kingdoms to thyself, making
either place thy residence, according to the times and seasons most
propitious to thine own glory and ease.

16\. And, lastly, that thou sacrificest the liberty of thy subjects,
making them thy laborers to embellish thy kingdom, and making them
little better than slaves, in forever parading in the ceremonies given
in thy applause.

17\. These things have I often desired to speak to thee about; but thou
ever affectedst to be overrun with other matters, so as to put me off
from my opportunity. Whereupon I have prayed to the Holy Ghost, for
hundreds of years, to have my suit just and honorable and holy.

18\. But I shall search no further. Hundreds of millions of thy highest
grades, who went down to the earth with me to fight thy battles, and who
know the justness of my cause, will, <span id="page_716">p. 716</span>
at a word from me, withdraw from thy kingdom, and join me in an
enterprise of my own.

19\. I shall await patiently for thy reply.

20\. But Gabriel received no reply to his message. And so, in course of
time, he called together ten thousand angel warriors, and they assembled
in a place called, Kalla-Hored, the place of seven steps, in hada.
Gabriel spake before them, saying:

21\. Here will I establish my kingdom of heaven, and forever. I will
show this false Kriste, what I can do. Mark ye, the great power of a God
is to establish a good foothold on the earth. The natural increase will
soon populate a heavenly kingdom.

22\. I will raise me up a prophet and seer of mine own on the earth, and
establish a new doctrine amongst mortals. Behold, I have a sword that
will cut to pieces Looeamong's kingdom on earth. For, listen! In the old
Eguptian libraries are books and tablets and manuscripts, that will show
the perversity of the Constantine bible.

23\. Now, when I have established my prophet, I will cause mortal
legions of Arabin'yans to possess these libraries, especially
Alexandria's. And I will raise up mortal scholars, who shall establish
the truth of my prophet's doctrines, and the falsity of this false
Kriste's doctrines; and I will thus overturn his earthly kingdom, and
possess all these mortal regions myself, to be mine forever!

24\. After that manner, the angel, Gabriel, boasted. And he made the ten
thousand his Holy Council, and from amongst them he appointed marshals,
captains, generals, heralds and officers in general. And they built a
throne in heaven unto Gabriel, and called it, the THRONE OF KALLA-HORED;
and he went and sat thereon, and then crowned himself, GABRIEL, GOD OF
HEAVEN AND EARTH.

25\. And then he crowned ten Lords, to wit: Ateiniv, Le Chung, Tudol,
Raim, Hakaya, Wochorf, Yademis, Stu'born, Wolf and Gussak. And Gabriel
thereafter commenced the initiation of members to his kingdom. And there
thus acceded to his heavenly place upward of five hundred thousand
angels every day, and this continued until Kalla contained more than
eight hundred million angel subjects.

26\. Of these, certain selections were made, according to grade, who
were appointed as officers over the rest; and immediately they were put
to work, building heavenly mansions, and constructing streets and roads,
and all things required in an exalted heaven, and in the meantime
Gabriel's palace and throne were extended and beautified beyond
description.

27\. Gabriel knew the power of rites and ceremonies, and he provided
unto his heavenly kingdom accordingly, so that his people were kept in a
constant state of excitement, because of his wonderful inventions. So
that millions and millions of them truly believed he was the veritable
Creator of heaven and earth, thus in form of an angel.

28\. Gabriel perceived this, and for these he provided places of trust
and nearness to him, that his miraculous power might be the better
strengthened with the unbelieving.

29\. Now, the time came when Gabriel's kingdom was sufficiently
established, and he began to provide for his great scheme to establish
himself with mortals, that their spirits after death might be brought to
his kingdom. For such is the order of Jehovih's creation, that whosoever
man worshippeth whilst he is on earth, to that God will his spirit float
after death; and without resistance become a dutiful slave, not knowing
there be other Gods and other heavens.

30\. And Gabriel made Ateiniv Chief Lord of Lords to go down to the
earth, and find a mortal capable of the required inspiration. And he
gave to Ateiniv to be his co-laborers, Yademis, Stu'born, and Wolf, and
with them, at their call, three hundred million warrior angels.

31\. And with this host, Ateiniv departed for the earth, for Arabin'ya;
and as he went forth he dropped of his hosts, at certain distances,
groups of angels, which formed the line of light from Gabriel down to
the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L](oah533)
