[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah54)  [Next](oah56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# Synopsis of Sixteen Cycles

BEING FORTY-EIGHT THOUSAND YEARS; COVERING THE SUB-CYCLE OF A THOUSAND
YEARS OF DARKNESS; COVERING A PERIOD FROM THE CREATION OF MAN DOWN TO
THE SUBMERSION OF THE CONTINENT OF PAN, CALLED BY THE ANCIENTS, *THE
FLOOD, OR DELUGE*, WHICH WAS TWENTY-FOUR THOUSAND YEARS B.K., SELECTED
FROM THE RECORDS IN THE LIBRARIES OF HEAVEN.

### Chapter I

1\. FIRST, the earth plieth in a circuit around the sun, which circuit
is divided into four arcs called spring, summer, autumn and winter.

2\. Second, the sun, with his family, plieth in a large circuit, which
is divided into one thousand five hundred arcs, the distance of which
for each arc is about three thousand years, or one cycle.

3\. During a cycle, the earth and her heavens fall in the etherean
regions of hundreds of etherean worlds, where dwell Jehovih's
high-raised angels, whose Chiefs have to do with the management of
worlds.

4\. During the time of a cycle, the earth is therefore under the control
and management of such of Jehovih's angels for the resurrection of man
of the earth.

5\. At the time of the creation of man, the earth was traveling in the
arc of Wan, where dwell thousands of Orian chiefs, with thousands of
millions of high-raised angels.

6\. The Holy Council of Orian Chiefs, through the Wisdom and Voice of
Jehovih, appointed one of their number, Sethantes, to take charge of the
earth, and to people it with immortal beings, during its travel in Wan.

7\. The rank and title of Sethantes, thus raised up by Jehovih, Creator
of worlds, was, FIRST GOD OF THE EARTH AND HER HEAVENS.

8\. And Sethantes came with millions of angels, who had been raised up
from other worlds previously, and he accomplished his work, and was
known as God.

9\. Sethantes was, then, the first God of the earth and her heavens, and
his place was within the arc of Wan. And during his cycle of three
thousand years, he raised up from the earth fifteen hundred million
Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih.

10\. After Sethantes came Ah'shong, sub-Chief in the realms of Hieu Wee
in the Haian arc of Vehetaivi. And during the cycle of Anakaron, also
three thousand years, Ah'shong raised up from the earth a harvest of two
billion two hundred million Brides and Bridegrooms.

11\. The third cycle was under the dominion of Hoo Le, surveyor of
Kakayen'sta in the arc of Gimmel, and his harvest was three billion
seven hundred millions.

12\. The fourth cycle was under C'pe Aban, Chieftainess of Sulgoweron in
the arc of Yan, and her harvest was four billion eight hundred millions.

13\. The fifth cycle was under Pathodices, road-maker in Chitivya in the
arc of Yahomitak, and his harvest was six billion four hundred millions.

14\. The sixth cycle was under Goemagak, God of Iseg, in the arc of
Somgwothga, and his harvest was seven billion nine hundred millions.

15\. The seventh cycle was under Goepens, God of Kaim, in the arc of
Srivat, and his harvest was nine billion three hundred millions.

16\. The eighth cycle was under Hycis, Goddess of Ruts, in the arc of
Hohamagollak, and her harvest was nine billion four hundred millions.

17\. The ninth cycle was under See'itcicius, inspector of roads in
Kammatra, in the arc of Jusyin, and his harvest was ten billion one
hundred millions.

18\. The tenth cycle was under Miscelitivi, Chieftainess of the arches
of <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> Lawzgowbak, in the arc of Nu, and her
harvest was ten billion eight hundred millions.

19\. And now the earth was full of people; all the continents and
islands of the earth were inhabited by man; nor was there left any
wilderness wherein man did not dwell.

20\. But the generation of man had fallen from thirty-three years down
to twelve years. And man and woman were at maturity at seven years old;
and not many lived above thirty years; but they were prolific; many of
the mothers bringing forth two score sons and daughters, and from two to
four at a birth.

21\. And man dwelt in peace, and the earth was tilled, and brought forth
abundantly of everything that was good for man to eat, and to clothe
himself. And there were in those days great cities of hundreds of
thousands of inhabitants; thousands and thousands of such cities, and in
all the five great divisions of the earth. And man built ships and
sailed over the ocean in all directions, around about the whole world.
By the angels of the Lord was he taught and guided in all things. And
man had books, both written and printed; and the young were taught in
schools, a knowledge of the sun and moon and stars, and of all things
that are upon the earth and in the waters thereof. This was therefore
called the first period of civilization on the earth.

22\. Now, for the most part, all the people had become I'hins, small,
white and yellow. Nevertheless there were ground people, with long arms,
who were large; but they dwelt by themselves, and their food was of all
manner of flesh, and fish, and creeping things. The ground people were
brown and black, and they lived to be two hundred, and even four hundred
years old.

23\. Jehovih said: In the early days I raised up I'huans, and I gave
them certain commandments, amongst which was, not to cohabit with the
Druks lest they go down in darkness. But they obeyed not My words; and
lo and behold, they are lost from the face of the earth.

24\. Because the I'hins have become a spiritual people and have
prospered in peace and spirit, behold, they have degenerated in the
corporeal body. They yield abundant harvests for My etherean realms, but
they are like untimely births.

25\. Now will I bring the earth into a'jiyan fields and forests for a
long season; for I shall again reproduce the I'huans; and the time of a
generation shall be thirty-three years. For my harvests shall be of
fruit that is mature and full of ripeness.

26\. And Jehovih brought the earth into new regions in the etherean
worlds, and covered it over with a'ji, east and west and north and
south.

27\. And it came to pass that many of the I'hins lost the generative
desire and, so, brought not forth many heirs. But the brown people burnt
with desires, and they laid hold of the I'hin women when they went into
the fields, and forced them, and thus brought forth again the I'huan
race, the copper colored, strong and bright and quick.

28\. Accordingly the eleventh cycle, which was under Gobath, God of
Tirongothaga, in the arc of Su'le, brought forth a harvest of six
billion seven hundred millions.

29\. The twelfth cycle was under F'aiyis, Goddess of Looga, in the arc
of Siyan, and her harvest was two billion six hundred millions.

30\. The thirteenth cycle was under Zineathaes, keeper of the Cress, in
the arc of Oleganaya, and his harvest was one billion two hundred
millions.

31\. The fourteenth cycle was under Tothsentaga, road-maker in
Hapanogos, in the arc of Manechu, and his harvest was only six hundred
millions.

32\. The fifteenth cycle was under Nimeas, God of Thosgothamachus, in
the arc of Seigga, and his harvest was only forty millions.

33\. The sixteenth cycle was under Neph, God of Sogghonnes, in the arc
of Arbroohk, but he failed to bring forth any harvest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah56.md)
