[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah55)  [Next](oah57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. GOD, that is Neph, said: Hear my prayer, O Jehovih! The earth and
her heavens are gone down in darkness.

2\. The I'hin hath been destroyed off all the divisions of the earth
save Whaga.

3\. More than thirty thousand million angels are gathered on the surface
of the earth, and they are too low in grade to be delivered.

4\. What shall Thy God do, O Father?

5\. Mortals are descending in breed and blood; only as diseased vermin
do they inhabit the earth.

6\. Their cities are destroyed, and they dwell after the manner of
four-footed beasts.

7\. The inspiration of Thy God and his angels can no longer reach them.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

8\. When they die and enter these heavens they are as festering sores on
one another, thousands of millions of them.

9\. For three thousand years have I labored with them, but the abundance
of their darkness outmatcheth Thy God.

10\. What shall I do with them, O Father! How shall Thy God deliver so
great a carcass of death?

11\. But Jehovih answered not the prayer of God; left him to consult
with other Gods in the higher heavens.

12\. But in etherea, Jehovih spake to His Orian Chiefs, saying: As I try
mortals, so do I try angels; as I try them, so do I try My Gods. Forever
and forever do I keep before them the testimony of AN ALL HIGHER.

13\. Now it had come to pass on earth that the time of a generation of
mortals had risen from twelve years to eighty years. And there were many
who lived to be three hundred years old. And they had become very large;
twice the size of men of this day. But they were without judgment and of
little sense. Hardly knew they their own species. And they mingled
together, relatives as well as others; so that idiocy and disease were
the general fate of the tribes of men; and they were large and strong
and prolific.

14\. This then that followeth is the grade of declension in the heavens
of the earth; that is, after Kishalon had changed the period of
generation from twelve years into the upper grades, to wit:

15\. Abner, seventh dawn of dan, enduring three thousand two hundred
years in Hastaf, etherean a'ji seven, Hoe'tan, grade ninety-nine.

16\. Enseeni, Goddess of Marsef, etherea, dan of Gem, enduring three
thousand years, grade ninety-three.

17\. Boaz, God of Hom, Orian field, dan of Josh, enduring two thousand
seven hundred years, grade eighty-eight.

18\. Da'ivi, Goddess of Wowitski in a'ji thirty-six, dan of Ruth,
enduring two thousand nine hundred years, grade eighty-two.

19\. Lia'mees, Goddess of War in Broek, dan forty, Orian field, Semsi,
enduring three thousand years, grade seventy-seven.

20\. Divi'yas, God of Hut in Habak, ji'ya twenty-two, Neth, enduring
three thousand one hundred years, grade sixty-nine.

21\. Roa'yis'yis, Goddess of Tamak, Bent, one of Hud'du'owts, enduring
three thousand and seventy years, grade sixty-one.

22\. Yij, Chief of Orian field, Lud in Goo, dan seventy-four, enduring
two thousand six hundred years, grade fifty-eight.

23\. Gul'yaniv, Chieftainess, Orian field, Ob'Low in ji'ya forty,
enduring three thousand four hundred years, grade fifty-one.

24\. From this time onward there was found no grade in the roadway of
the solar phalanx (great serpent), sufficiently dense for the angels of
the heavens of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah57)
