[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah58)  [Next](oah60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. I, Aph, Son of Jehovih, high dwelling in the etherean worlds, and
oft trained in the change and tumult of corporeal worlds, answered
Jehovih, saying:

2\. Father of Worlds; Jehovih, Almighty! Thy Son and servant hath heard
Thy voice. Behold, my head is bowed, my knee bent to rush forth with a
thousand million force to the suffering earth and hada.

3\. Hear me, O angels of the earth's heaven; from Jehovih's everlasting
kingdoms, I speak, and by His Power reveal! Again His Voice coursed the
high heavens along where angels dwell, older than the earth. Jehovih
said:

4\. Hear Me, O ye Chieftains, of Or and of Oot, and in the plains of
Gibrathatova. Proclaim My word to thy hosts of swift messengers of
Wauk'awauk and Beliathon and Dor, and they shall speed it abroad in the
a'ji'an mounds of Mentabraw and Kax of Gowh.

5\. Hear My voice, O ye Goddesses of Ho'etaivi and of Vaivi'yoni'rom in
the etherean arcs of Fas and Leigge, and Omaza. Proclaim My decrees of
the red star and her heavens in the crash of her rebellious sides, for I
will harvest in the forests of Seth and Raim.

6\. Hear My voice, O ye H'monkensoughts, of millions of years standing,
and managers of corporeal worlds! I have proclaimed the uz and hiss of
the red star in her pride and glory. Send word abroad in the highway of
Plumf'goe to the great high Gods, Miantaf in the etherean vortices of
Bain, and to Rome and to Nesh'outoza and Du'ji.

7\. Hear Me, O ye Orian Kings and Queens of thousands of millions of
Gods and Goddesses: I have spoken in the c'vork'um of the great serpent
of the sun! A wave of My breath speedeth forth in the broad firmament.
The red <span id="page_73a">p. 73a</span> star flieth toward the point
of My whetted sword.

8\. Proclaim My voice in the Orian fields of Amal and Wawa; let the
clear-tongued Shepherds of Zouias, and Berk, and Gaub, and Domfariana,
fly with all speed in the road of Axyaya, where first the red star's
vortex gathered up its nebulæ, millions of years agone, and on the way
say: Jehovih hath decreed a pruning-knife to a traveling world.

9\. Shout it abroad in the crystal heavens of the summering Lords of Wok
and Ghi and M'goe and Ut'taw; call them to the red star speeding forth.
Lo, she skippeth as a lamb to be shorn; her coming shock lieth
slumbering low. Let them carry the sound of My voice to the ji'ay'an
swamps of exploded worlds, boiling in the roar of elements, where wise
angels and Gods explore to find the mystery of My handiwork.

10\. Tell them I have spoken, and the earth and her heavens near the
troughs in the etherean seas of My rich-yielding worlds. I will scoop
her up as a toy, and her vortex shall close about like a serpent hungry
for its prey. Proclaim it in Thessa and Kau and Tin'wak'wak, and send
them to Gitchefom of Januk and Dun.

11\. Hear Me, O ye Kriss'helmatsholdak, who have witnessed the creation
of many worlds and their going out. Open your gardens and your mansions;
the seine of My fishing-pole is stretched; countless millions of druj
and fetals will fall into My net. My voice hath gone forth in Chem'gow
and Loo and Abroth, and Huitavi, and Kuts of mas in the wide etherean
fields of Rod'owkski.

12\. Haleb hath heard Me; Borg, Hom, Zi and Luth, of the Orian
homestead, and Chor, whence emanate the central tones of music, from
Goddesses older than the corporeal worlds. To them the crash of worlds
is as a note created, and is rich in stirring the memory with things
long past.

13\. I have spoken, and My breath is a floating world; My speech is
written in the lines where travel countless millions of suns and stars;
and in the midst of the etherean firmament of the homes of Gods. Let
them shout to the ends of the universe; invite them in My name to the
hi'dan of Mauk'beiang'jow.

14\. Around about in the place of the great serpent send swift
messengers with the words of My decree; bring the Lords and Gods of Wan
and Anah and Anakaron and Sith.

15\. Call up Ghad and Adonya and Etisyai and Onesyi and the hosts of the
<span id="page_74a">p. 74a</span> upraised, for the past time of
Jehovih's sons and daughters in the high heavens draweth near.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah60.md)
