[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah564)  [Next](oah566.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. GOD, embassador of Jehovih, saith: Ye shall assemble for the
communion of angels, regularly, and maintain intercourse with them. For
in no other way can ye demonstrate the immortality of the soul.

2\. Doing this in the name of Jehovih, and for spiritual light in regard
to spiritual things.

3\. Whoso consulteth the spirits for earthly things, shall fall in
darkness.

4\. But when ye assemble, let no man nor spirit be as a spectacle to
others. But as all men labor in the field to gather the harvest, so
shall all members in the assembly, by prayer or by music, contribute a
glory unto the Father.

5\. Remembering that the humblest prayer, even with weak words, if given
with a full heart, is as strong unto Jehovih as the best oratory.

6\. From all men the spirit shall pour forth unto the Father in praise,
according to what hath been created unto it. Neither is more required of
any man.

7\. But this shall happen unto many: Learning to speak by entrancement
or by inspiration, they shall imagine themselves controlled by certain
angels, when, in fact, it is only their own spirit, eliminated from the
corporeal senses.

8\. Others, being influenced, shall imagine it is themselves and not an
angel, whereas it is an angel speaking through them. This was the case
of Ka'yu. Both are good, and shall be practiced.

9\. Let no man concern himself as to whether it be the spirit of himself
or an angel; for it is only the subject uttered which is of value. In
this day, all things shall stand on their own merit, and not on a
supposed authority.

10\. And let not him, who speaketh with his own spirit, judge others to
be the same; nor yet the reverse of this; for no two in all the world
are alike.

11\. To them, that have not experienced elimination of the spirit-self
from the corporeal self (trance), all speech is believed to be of the
corporeal senses only, or of a diseased condition. Such men are not to
be blamed for their interpretation; rather shall ye pity them, and not
answer them.

12\. For many such, even after death, will not admit they are dead,
because of the darkness upon them.

13\. It is wiser for the spiritual-minded to keep to themselves,
especially when communing with Jehovih and His angels. For a greater
wonder than these will follow: Some will enter the trance of the first
resurrection, and go in spirit out of the body, but only subjectively;
others will enter the trance of the second resurrection, and go in
spirit out of the body subjectively. And the first shall not believe but
the second was like himself, going only subjectively. No two men in all
the world have I created alike, saith Jehovih. Even many, after death,
are not capable of entering the second resurrection objectively. He,
that is in subjective state, speaketh and writeth from the earth,
looking upward; he, that cometh of the objective heavens, speaketh and
writeth as one come down from My kingdoms to the earth.

14\. Two conditions will manifest: Subjective spiritualists will
affiliate with the world's people, being deniers of the Ever Present
Person, and they will pursue earthly avocations for self sake; but
objective spiritualists, being such as live for the spirit's sake, will
be Faithists, believers in the Ever Present Person, Jehovih, Whom they
will worship not only in words, but by abjuring self, and uniting
themselves in brotherhoods, for sake of doing good <span
id="page_756">p. 756</span> unto others. These latter are the chosen
people of the Father of the kosmon era, and they will become supreme in
all the world.

15\. These three peoples, the world's people, the believers and the
Faithists, have been in all ages of the world. The latter only of them
all practiceth harmony and good works. Both of the others are
resistants, quarrelers and warriors and disintegrators and breakers-down
of all things.

16\. Yet, the Faithists, having faith in the All Person, shall
ultimately possess the whole earth, and make it a paradise of peace and
love.

17\. As the first is bound in the flesh, and as the second is bound by
the hadan spirits, so is the Faithist bound unto Jehovih, which is
emancipation. As the second can commune with the spirits of the first
resurrection, so can the Faithist commune with the Father through the
second resurrection.

18\. Nevertheless, this shall happen: The second shall say: My angels
are high, thine are low! Or they shall ask: How know ye your light is
higher than ours?

19\. And the Faithists shall answer them, saying: We know no high, no
low. We give up all things, in order to serve Jehovih by doing good
works unto our fellows.

20\. And Jehovih shall judge betwixt them, as to which is high or low,
not by their words, but by their works.

21\. And the signs of good works and self-abnegation shall be as a
witness before the world, whence cometh the inspiration of each.

22\. Let no man say, that only seers and prophets and such persons as
work signs and miracles are under the influence of spirits; for even as
much as these, so are other mortals under the dominion of spirits. Yea,
the infidel, the disbeliever, the philosopher, the lawyer, the judge,
the preacher, the fanatic, and all others, are more controlled by the
spirits of the dead than by their own personal spirit. And the more a
man's spirit is wrapped up in his own corporeality, the more is he
subject to vampires and spirits of darkness.

23\. Neither knoweth the philosopher whether his ideas come from Jehovih
or from the spirits of the dead.

24\. Whosoever hath witnessed and knoweth of a truth, that he hath seen
the spirits of the dead, that knowledge is impregnable. And whoso hath
entered the second resurrection, even though in mortality, that
knowledge is impregnable.

25\. But, whoso hath found the All Person, his knowledge is greater than
all. And none below him can judge him. Neither can any man attain to
this knowledge, till he hath passed through the other two conditions.

26\. No man knoweth the Creator, unless he hath proven the communion of
spirits. Neither can any man rise to the second resurrection, till he
hath arisen to faith in the All One, Jehovih.

27\. Neither shall the Brahmin, nor Mohammedan, nor Budhist, nor
Kriste'yan join in the second resurrection on earth or in heaven.

28\. For they have not the doctrine of unit; they are as a house divided
against itself. Their colonies and communities shall fail in all cases.

29\. There shall be but one doctrine, which is Jehovih, the All Person,
who is Ever Present; with good works done unto others, with all of one's
wisdom and strength.

30\. And this shall prevail with the young; whom, as orphans and
castaways, ye shall gather up in infancy, founding them in the light of
Jehovih, teaching them from the start to sing and pray unto Him, in
reverence and fear and joy, that He may be glorified in their purity and
good works.

31\. And they shall grow up of all nationalities, and races, knowing
not: This is mine, or that is mine, or that is thine, but understanding,
that they own nothing, and that all things are Jehovih's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah566.md)
