[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah507)  [Next](oah509.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV

1\. THEONACTUS, angel chief of the loo'is, that brought forth Sakaya,
seeing the resolution of Sakaya, departed at once to Paradise, before
God on the throne, to receive the commission of Jehovih, and to
establish a line of es'ean light to the mortal sphere.

2\. And thereupon, God caused his officers to select from the volunteers
the highest grades, and to arrange them in a line of light down to the
earth, to Sakaya, that the voice of God and his Holy Eleven might speak
through Sakaya, with the wisdom of Jehovih. The hosts to be under the
direction of Thoanactus.

3\. The million loo'is were also summoned to their places in the line;
and in five days' time, the light of the throne of God was made one with
the soul of Sakaya, and he began preaching, even from the steps of the
palace of the king, his father.

4\. In the meantime, the loo'is of the hosts of Thoanactus inspired
their mortal wards, men and women, who had been born into the world to
become disciples and followers of Sakaya, to come before him.

5\. And it came to pass, that presently, there assembled in Sakaya's
native city, to hear him preach, men and women from remote distances. So
that people said, one to another: Such coming of strangers, proveth that
the Great Spirit is with Sakaya.

6\. These, then, that follow, are the substance of the doctrines
preached by Sakaya, being a re-establishing of the Zarathustrian law,
that is to say:

7\. I am but a man; worship not me. Neither honor ye me for my words;
for they are not my words in fact.

8\. All men's wise words are the accumulation of things previous;
nothing is new. Nor do I proclaim any new doctrine or new rites and
ceremonies.

9\. On the contrary, I declare my follies publicly before you. Inasmuch
as I have been an example of folly, learn ye to be wise by not following
my past footsteps.

10\. In my youth, I was quickened to see the miseries and sorrows and
afflictions of mortals. And I cried out unto Ahura'Mazda, as the priests
had directed me, to find some sure way to do great good in the world.

11\. But in the legends of the ancients I beheld that certain signs and
miracles had attended Capilya and Zarathustra. So I grieved to attain to
signs and miracles.

12\. Ye know the rest. I fasted and prayed and tortured my flesh, to
make the earth abhorrent in my sight, even according to the rules of the
Brahmin priests.

13\. But nothing came to me more than to the commonest magician.

14\. So I declare unto you, I have renounced Brahminism and asceticism,
and taken up the Zarathustrian religion, which is, that good works are
the only salvation.

15\. To know, then, what are good works, and to apply the same unto the
inhabitants of the earth, should be the chief study of a preacher.

16\. And, since most crime and misery come because of poverty, and
because of the division of the affairs of men, it is wise to devise,
first, a remedy against poverty, and second, a means of attraction to
bring about a brotherhood between men.

17\. To accomplish which, the association of families of tens and
twenties and hundreds and thousands, with rab'bahs (priests), unto each,
as Capilya taught, is the highest and best plan.

18\. In which families, there shall be neither buying nor selling, nor
ownership, nor divisions, nor castes, nor privileges of one above
another, nor rich, nor poor.

19\. When Sakaya was asked: How about such as can work fast, and are
strong, and can accomplish much, shall they not have preference over
those that produce little?

20\. Sakaya said: A certain man had two sons, one was strong, and the
other weak, and yet that father distinguished not between his sons in
his will. Was he then just?

21\. They said: A most just father.

22\. Sakaya said: So declare I unto you the Ormazdian law: to give unto
one another all things required, and without distinction as to strength,
or as to expertness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](oah509.md)
