[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah592)  [Next](oah594.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXI

GOD JUDGETH THE MAN OF PROMISE.

1\. GOD said: Consider the judgments of God, O thou man of many
promises.

2\. Behold, I have heard thee say: O God, if I were rich; or, if this
undertaking hold good; or, if I am spared, then will I do something
handsome for the Father's kingdom!

3\. And thy vows have been registered in heaven, over and over again.

4\. And my angels have labored with thee to fulfill thy promise. And,
yet, thou dost not regard thy word. But thou holdest to thy earthly
possessions, saying: Wait yet a little while.

5\. Hear thou, then, the judgment of thy God, for it is that which thou
shalt put upon thyself after thine entrance into the es world.

6\. Which is, that thou shalt be bound in heaven till thou shalt
accomplish what thou mightst have done, but failed to do.

7\. And this is the penalty for neglecting, on earth, to fulfill the
light that was given unto thee: Thou shalt, in heaven, accomplish
without money, what thou couldst have done with money. And the
difference it requireth to do a thing without means, as compared to what
might be done by one with means, is the extra bondage and duration that
shall be upon thy head and soul.

8\. To all men, who set out with a promise to accomplish charity, or any
good for the resurrection or melioration of man, and fail to do it, the
same judgment shall be upon them in heaven. Nor shall they rise above
the first resurrection until they have fulfilled the same in all
particulars. Thus shall they judge themselves in heaven.

9\. It is not sufficient for thee, O man, to say: I saw not my way clear
as to the best method of doing a thing, and so I waited.

10\. The commandment of Jehovih is upon thee, to do what thou canst,
according to thy highest light and ability to accomplish. In this
respect, then, thou shalt find no excuse, because thou knew not the best
way.

11\. Neither mattereth it, the amount of thy riches being less than
another man's riches.

12\. Nor shalt thou find an excuse, in saying: I did more according to
my means than did my neighbor.

13\. One man shall not be judged by another; but all shall be judged
according to the light of Jehovih in them, and according to what He hath
given unto them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](oah594.md)
