[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah569)  [Next](oah571.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. A man may be wise as to books and philosophy and mathematics and
poetry and great learning, and yet be low in grade as to spirit.

2\. A man may know little of all such knowledge, and may be poor withal,
but by hardship and experience, developed in sympathy and good works
done unto others, and be high in grade as to spirit.

3\. So also may it be with spirits that manifest through you as great
orators, who stand even in the lowest grade in heaven.

4\. Let not thyself deceive thyself, O man, as to thy knowledge, or thy
speech or professions.

5\. Thou hast the scales in thine own hands, and shall, soon or late,
weigh thyself justly, and take thy place, even as thou hast prepared
thyself.

6\. Nor flatter thyself that thou canst cheat heaven, or change the ways
thereof.

7\. Nor hide thyself behind doctrines, or behind the promises of Gods or
Saviors.

8\. Old things are done away, and none of these things shall avail thee
on earth or in heaven.

9\. Be thou king or queen or judge or servant, the same judgment shall
stand upon all.

10\. When the garment is gone, and the diadem and riches and the flesh
withal, consider thou the grade of thy spirit and the bondage upon thee.

11\. Thou shalt take that for which thou hast fitted thyself, according
to what thou hast done.

### Chapter VIII

1\. HEAR my words, O man, and be considerate of the justice of thy
Creator.

2\. These are my exhibits which I place before thee, that thou shalt not
err:

3\. And thou be a rich man, and adorn a city by donating unto it a park,
with statuary and pleasure-walks, hoping to glorify thyself thereby, and
be praised by men; therein thyself burieth thyself in the first
resurrection. And the act lowereth thy grade instead of raising it.

4\. For in whatsoever thou givest, thou shalt consider, first, the
lowest of the low, whether they have bread to eat, and a place to sleep:
And the sick, whether they have attendance and good provision.

5\. And thou be a rich man and contribute a house for the orphans or for
the helpless and aged who cannot help themselves, it raiseth thee in
grade.

6\. But so far as thou doeth this for the applause of men, thou
detracteth from the rate of thy beneficence.

7\. Neither doth such a good work help thee more than the poor man
helpeth his own grade by assisting one poor orphan.

8\. For thy resurrection dependeth not on the quantity thou givest, but
as to whether thou givest according to what thou hast. Of which matter
thou shalt judge thyself.

9\. For he who giveth a penny may be raised up more by so doing, than he
that giveth ten times ten thousand.

10\. A certain rich man, being converted from the desires of earth, went
about casting his money freely in the streets, and in giving to
whosoever asked him therefor.

11\. And some gathered it up, and fed and clothed themselves; others
took of it, and went and got drunk, and became worse than before.

12\. The measure of righteousness of that man's behavior was not in
giving what he had to the poor, but in the good and evil that came of
it, being weighed, as to which outbalanced the other.

13\. And where he lowered the grade of them that received this money, or
where he lowered a greater number <span id="page_762">p. 762</span> than
he raised, there his act of casting the money away was a judgment
against him.

14\. He who giveth, saying: Here, thou beggar! doeth a good corporeal
act, but an evil spiritual act. He lifteth up with one hand, but
knocketh down wih the other. Such an act detracteth from the grade of
that man.

15\. A certain rich man, being converted to do good works, went and
built a score of soup-houses to feed the poor gratuitously.

16\. And all the poor people of that town went therein and were fed. But
the next year, behold, there were twice as many poor. And the rich man
built another score of soup-houses, and they were all fed.

17\. But the next year, there were still twice as many poor people to
feed; but the rich man had exhausted his means, and could feed none at
all.

18\. Judgment is therefore rendered against that man for his supposed
beneficence.

19\. For, whilst he did a little corporeal good, he did a great
spiritual wrong, because he lowered the grade of manhood and womanhood
in those that he fed. His benevolence promoted dependence.

20\. A rich man founded a place of labor for the poor, who had nothing
to eat and nowhere to sleep. And he said unto them:

21\. The Creator hath given you hands to work with; come ye, be men and
women.

22\. And they went and worked and earned their living.

23\. Judgment is rendered in favor of that man, for he raised the
spiritual grade of the poor. This is a beneficence that extendeth into
heaven.

24\. Let thy charity be to the sick and helpless, but be thou wise in
directing the able-bodied to help themselves.

25\. For all charity tendeth to lower the self-respect of the receiver,
and casteth him lower in the grades in heaven.

26\. Certain ones depend on alms, not having either sickness nor yet
strong bodies. Nevertheless, were they aroused, they could support
themselves.

27\. When thou givest them regularly, they depend on thee. These become
beggars in the lowest grades in heaven.

28\. That which thou givest them accounteth against thine own grade.
Better is it for thee and for them, that thou arouse them from their
degradation.

29\. To do this tenderly and mercifully, is a great virtue; to do it
cruelly, is a great crime.

30\. Consider not so much what thou shalt do to raise thine own grade,
but what thou canst do to raise the grade of those within thy reach.

31\. Remember, all men and women are thy brothers and sisters, and thou
shalt labor to make them make themselves a glory unto the Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah571.md)
