[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah559)  [Next](oah561.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_748">p. 748</span>

### Chapter XVIII

1\. ES said: Such, then, was the fate of the chief false Gods in the
lower heavens.

2\. But, during the last three or four hundred years, many of the
officers of these false Gods had seceded from them, and had set up small
heavenly kingdoms of their own. And their mortal followers were called,
sects.

3\. These little heavens were, for the most part, situated on the earth,
and usually these small Gods inhabited the churches where mortals came
to worship.

4\. And the preachers within these churches fell under the inspiration
of these itinerant Gods and their gangs of wandering spirits.

5\. In Guatama, these inspirations were carried to such an extent, by
these drujan Gods, that the mortals of one sect were made hostile, one
sect against another.

6\. An enmity, therefore, existed betwixt protestants and catholics, and
betwixt protestants themselves, and betwixt all of these and the Jews.
And, not only on earth, betwixt mortals, did these things take place,
but these petty Gods had small kingdoms of their won; as a presbyterian
heaven; a methodist heaven; a baptist heaven, and so on. And, when a
mortal member died, his spirit fell into his heaven, where he had lived,
becoming a servant to these drujas. And, when he cried out: I want to go
to Jesus, I want to go to Kriste, he was shown the drujan God, and told:
That is he! The which he would believe to be true. For what is bound on
earth, is bound in heaven.

7\. A drujan God, Piad, established a sect, and named it, Mormon, and he
located his kingdom on earth with his mortal followers, and he became
master over the spirits of his mortal followers in the same way, calling
himself, the TRUE KRISTE.

8\. Piad taught, that all good Mormons would ultimately attain to rule
over some planet and her heavens. But, he never permitted the angels of
his kingdom to go out of his reach. He also taught mortals, that the
more numerous progeny a man begot, the greater would be his heavenly
kingdom, in time to come. For this was Piad's scheme, to make his own
heavenly kingdom large and powerful.

9\. Another drujan God, Lowgannus, established a kingdom on earth, and
named it, Shaker Heaven, pretending, he was the TRUE KRISTE. And his
place became a heavenly bondage unto himself.

10\. Another drujan God, Sayawan, established a heavenly kingdom on
earth, and called it, THE ALL HIGHEST HEAVEN.

11\. This Lord called himself, THE LORD. He raised up a mortal,
Swedenborg, whom he took in spirit, subjectively, into many of the
lowest heavens and hells, saying to him:

12\. Behold, they that serve not THE LORD! How hard it is with them! And
he further said: This place of darkness is the Brahmin heaven; that
place of darkness is the Budhist heaven! But this place of light is my
heaven, I, THE LORD.

13\. Thus did this drujan God establish a Swedenborg heaven, and mortals
looked upon him as the true Kriste, and, after death, their souls went
thither.

14\. So, it came to pass, as had been prophesied of old: Lo, Kriste,
here! Lo, Kriste, there!

15\. And, as it was with Looeamong's heavenly kingdoms, thus split into
hundreds of remnants, even so was it with the heavenly kingdoms of the
other false Gods, Brahma, the false, and Buddha, the false, so that
there were on the earth thousands of petty Gods' heavenly kingdoms of
darkness and misery.

16\. Now, all of these drujan Gods, whether of Chine'ya, or Vind'yu, or
Arabin'ya, or Uropa, or Guatama, rejected Jehovih, but took the name of
some one of the four false Gods, and protested that he himself, was the
real and true God and Savior.

17\. And mortal sects, that followed them, did the same thing. The
presbyterian professed the true Kriste, but denounced all others as
false; the methodist professed the true Kriste, but denounced all others
as false; the Mormon professed the true Kriste, but denounced all
others; the Roman catholics also professed the true Kriste, but
denounced all others as false. Even so was it with all of them, and none
of them practiced righteousness and good works, but were warriors and
money-getters, for self sake.

18\. God had said: Behold, I give a new testimony unto the nations of
the earth: In the time I overcame, and cast out the four heads of the
beast, the acrimony existing between different sects began, suddenly, to
die out, and they spake friendly to one another.

19\. And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](oah561.md)
