[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah536)  [Next](oah538.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIV

GOD CHASTISETH THE FOUR FALSE GODS SEPARATELY.

1\. IN Jehovih's name, greeting unto thee, Looeamong.

2\. Thou hadst a warrior angel, Thoth, alias Gabriel, who labored for
thee more than a thousand years, in order to make thee under thy false
names worshipful on earth.

3\. And thou didst promise Thoth, that when he overcame Dagon,
Ashtaroth, Baal and other false Gods, thou wouldst give to him a
heavenly sub-kingdom, with a thousand million subjects.

4\. And Thoth did thus accomplish thy desire, but thou didst not give
him anything.

5\. But thou didst further exact of him the destroying of idol worship
amongst mortals, and the destroying of the oracle-temples for consulting
spirits, re-promising him, that when he had fulfilled these things, thou
wouldst give unto him the promised heavenly kingdom.

<span id="page_722">p. 722</span>

6\. And Thoth did accomplish these things also; but thou didst refuse
again to fulfill thy promise.

7\. Whereby Thoth rebelled against thee, and set up his present heavenly
dominions, inspiring his followers under the name of Mohammed.

8\. And now, behold, thou hast since that day tried to destroy him in
heaven and on earth.

9\. But Thoth was anchored in earthly possessions, in Jerusalem and
Te-theas and Egupt.

10\. And thou didst inspire mortals in western Uropa to made crusades
against Thoth, in order to possess Jerusalem and Te-theas, whereby
millions of mortals were slain, and vast regions of country laid
desolate.

11\. Behold, thou hadst pretended thou wert the all highest God, and yet
thou wert unable to take a small earthly kingdom.

12\. Thou didst also inflict dire punishment and torturing of the flesh
on Jehovih's worshipers and on infidels, against thy doctrines. With
red-hot pincers pulled the flesh from the bones; or in boiling oil
slowly dipped them; or from precipices hurled them; or in boxes lined
with pricking spikes of iron bound them, thus to blot all knowledge and
learning and opposition. Millions and millions hast thou thus cast in
death in thy earthly regions.

13\. In Es'pan (Spain) and Itius (Italy), thou hast thus put to death
more than seven million mortals.

14\. Nevertheless, these angels will come home to thee in after-time,
with vengeance in their souls.

15\. Behold, thy false promises to Thoth are already visited upon thy
kingdoms.

16\. But, as for Thoth, who became thy willing tool to do destruction
for thy glory, what merit hath he?

17\. How shall I judge thee, O Thoth?

18\. Because thou hast a heavenly kingdom, and withal art master on
earth, of Jerusalem and Te-theas and Egupt and Punjaub, thou flatterest
thyself thou art a great God.

19\. But thy heavenly kingdom hath become a place for lusters and
foul-smelling spirits in the lowest of grades.

20\. And thy heaven is surely and steadily declining in grade.

21\. Now, as to thee, Kabalactes, though thou hast destroyed a thousand
mortal libraries, and put to death sixty millions of people, in order to
establish thyself as Budha, still thou hast steadily declined in grade,
and thy kingdoms with thee.

22\. Thou has fashioned many sacred cities, and framed many tales as to
who thou wert in mortal life.

23\. Thou hast falsely called thyself, Budha; and doubly false hast thou
taken the name, Sakaya Muni.

24\. Thou hast tortured to death millions of mortals who rejected thee.

25\. And when my heavenly ships rescued their distracted and chaotic
spirits, thou didst wantonly connive with thy drujas to despoil my
ships, and cast these helpless spirits into darkness.

26\. Thou hast done these things for pastimes and diversities for thy
falling heavens.

27\. And even so hath it been with thee, Ennochissa.

28\. Never had a Lord a fairer opportunity in all the earth's heavens to
do a good and great work, than what fell into thy hands.

29\. But, behold how thou hast harvested thy heavens!

30\. A thousand years ago, thy grades were from forty to sixty-five; and
this day, they average but ten.

31\. It needeth no prophet to foretell that thy declension will lead to
destruction in the end.

32\. Now, lastly: O ye false Gods, ye deceivers and hypocrites, ye have
divided the earth and the heavens thereof between yourselves, and
re-confederated together for a balance of power.

33\. Ye have also persuaded mortal kingdoms to divide the earth into
sections and regions, and to clamor for a balance of power between
different kingdoms.

34\. Ye have thus caused mortals to provide standing armies to protect
themselves, kingdom against kingdom, after the manner ye protect your
own kingdoms in the heavens.

35\. Kriste'yans against Kriste'yans; Brahmins against Brahmins;
Budhists against Budhists; Mohammedans against Mohammedans; yet all of
these four have ye arrayed against one another. In very likeness of your
heavens, have ye built on the earth.

36\. Ye have inspired mortals to keep, as standing armies, forty million
soldiers.

37\. Ye have inspired mortals to build military schools and colleges,
where the young may be trained in the art of war and destruction.

38\. Ye have inspired mortals to build monuments to their generals and
captains, because of their courage to destroy.

<span id="page_723">p. 723</span>

39\. Ye have inspired the wickedest of mortals to believe that, if they
would read your sacred books, and call on your names, ye would surely
save them, and, after death, take them to the highest of heavens.

40\. And, yet, when they die, your hosts are not there to receive them.

41\. And when they call out for you, your emissaries kick them, and beat
them,

42\. And they return with vengeance, to afflict mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](oah538.md)
