[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah548)  [Next](oah550.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

THE ALARM IN KALLA-HORED, THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM OF GOD-GABRIEL, ALIAS
THOTH, THE MOHAMMEDAN HEAVEN.

1\. WHEN the Lords of the Holy Council of Kalla-Hored, the heaven of the
false Mohammed, had expressed their hopes and fears as to the fire-ship
descending to Paradise, Thoth, alias Gabriel, said:

2\. Who here feareth, let him speak; who here feareth not, let him speak
also. I will know my Lords and Holy Council.

3\. Behold, I am a warrior God. I profess not peace, like the Triunes,
and practice war. I profess war, and I practice it.

4\. I made Looeamong. When he chose to have himself established as
Kriste, I established him. When he denied me justice, I exposed him in
heaven and on the earth as the false Kriste. When he refused me the
heavenly kingdom which he promised, I took it, and established myself.

5\. I made ye Lords of my Holy Council; I drove away from the earth a
thousand false Lords, and broke up the oracle-houses of mortals.

6\. What, then, have I to fear from a foreign God, coming to the heavens
of the earth? Behold, these heavens belong to such as are born of the
earth. Let the foreign Gods return to worlds where they were native
born.

<span id="page_734">p. 734</span>

7\. If this God hath come to battle me, in behalf of Jehovih's God, let
him come. Till he or I shall be cast into hell, let the battle wage.

8\. Did I not the daring Goddess, Ashtaroth, send to hell? and the
mighty Baal after her? And all the Argos'yan Gods; and the Gods of Roma
silence and cast into torments?

9\. Now, behold, I will send an arrow-boat, a million strong, to
Paradise, and banter this adventurous God to give me battle. Better try
our respective powers, as to who shall go down, than to live in
uncertain surmises as to such a God's business in another God's heavens.

10\. Then let my marshal provide an arrow-boat, armed with shafts of
fire and water, and choose a million warriors for this adventure. Over
them, my warrior Lord, Justin, shall hold command.

11\. And he shall go to Paradise, greeting, in the name of God-Gabriel,
to know of the coming God by what right he hath ventured near my holy
kingdoms.

12\. So, it came to pass, Thoth dispatched a boat to Paradise, as he had
commanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah550.md)
