[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah535)  [Next](oah537.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIII

GOD CONTINUETH TO JUDGE THE FOUR FALSE GODS.

1\. IN the name of the Almighty, greeting unto you.

2\. A thousand years ago, the grades of your heavenly subjects were from
thirty to fifty; now, they are fallen to fifteen.

3\. As ye have declined the grades of the angels in your heavens, even
so have ye declined the grades of mortals within your dominions.

4\. Instead of well-tilled fields and good orchards, ye have given them
war, widows, orphans, paupers, debauchees, thieves and murderers.

5\. Instead of giving them good harvests, ye have given them famines and
pestilences.

<span id="page_721">p. 721</span>

6\. For your ashars inspire the priests, and they in turn entice their
followers away from the fields, to come and dwell in the cities, where
they can be conveniently absolved from neglect in not confessing you.

7\. Thus have ye set aside good works and instruction and the desire for
the knowledge, both within your heavenly kingdoms and on the earth also;
and, instead thereof, ye have given them rites and ceremonies, leading
angels and mortals as if they were cattle for your markets.

8\. Instead of teaching angels and mortals to think for themselves, ye
have prohibited them from thinking, save as your leaders think for them.

9\. Thus have ye thwarted, with all your might, the cultivations of the
talents Jehovih created with all.

10\. Say not, that I, Jehovih's Son, desire subjects or worshipers;
behold, I prohibit both angels and mortals from worshipping me, or
announcing me or my kingdoms, as the all highest.

11\. I teach them, One only is the All Highest, even Jehovih.

12\. I teach them, that I am but Jehovih's servant, working for the
resurrection of mortals and angels.

13\. I teach both angels and mortals, they shall not worship any one
born of woman.

14\. And behold, my foot-prints can not be mistaken; I raised up
Zarathustra, and the man Brahma, and Abraham and Moses and Po and Chine
and Capilya.

15\. Yet, not one of these, with all the wonders they accomplished, was
worshipped by their followers

16\. Yet, who was greater than Moses? that stretched forth his hand, and
said: Come! Come!

17\. And four millions of people, in bondage, marched out of Egupt!

18\. Yet none worshipped Moses.

19\. Behold, the seventy colonies founded by Zarathustra, and yet they
worshipped not him.

20\. Behold Chine, who named the empire, who turned three hundred
millions of warriors to a people of peace.

21\. Behold Capilya, who overturned the laws of thirteen kingdoms in
Vind'yu, and gave peace and plenty to a hundred millions of people.

22\. Yet, not Chine nor Capilya were worshipped.

23\. But ye harp on the idle tales of obscure magicians, and teach
mortals to worship them.

24\. Nevertheless, ye have caused to be preached, in your heavens, that
I am a God like unto yourselves, working for mine own glory.

25\. Now, behold, I prepare my angel hosts in wisdom and virtue, that
they may go away from me, and inherit the etherean heavens above.

26\. For this was my labor for which Jehovih, through His exalted Gods,
made me God of the earth and her heavens.

27\. And I have sent thus away, as Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih,
thousands of millions of angels, whom I had raised to grade ninety-nine.

28\. Yet, in all the time of your dominions ye have not raised one angel
to the emancipated grades.

29\. Such as are wise within your dominions, tire of your pomp and
splendor, and, in course of time, come to my heavens, and renounce all
Lords and Gods, and betroth themselves to Jehovih only.

30\. And I give them places in my schools, colleges, hospitals and
factories, and thus educate them, that they may, indeed, in time, become
fit companions to Gods and Goddesses.

31\. Thus are your kingdoms forever depleted of your highest grades. So
that your heavenly kingdoms and your earthly dominions have chiefly the
ignorant and depraved as your idolaters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV](oah537.md)
