[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah540)  [Next](oah542) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LVIII

GOD PLEADETH WITH THE FOUR FALSE GODS.

1\. GOD said: In the name of Jehovih, greeting unto you.

2\. Hear the plea of God, Jehovih's Son.

3\. Like one that is whipt and beaten in a great contest, I cry out,
because of the Almighty, whom I serve.

4\. What is the fault of Jehovih, that ye have turned away from Him?

5\. Behold, I will plead for Him. Was not His name good enough? What
name is greater than the word, Creator?

6\. If ye rejoice that ye live, then are ye not beholden to Him?

7\. Why have ye substituted other names? Who was to be the gainer
thereby?

8\. Certainly not Jehovih.

9\. What excuse can ye assign, that ye have made other names than
Jehovih's worshipful on earth and in heaven?

10\. Mortals will ask these questions in time to come.

11\. Did not the Almighty, before your times, find a way to reveal
Himself and his commandments?

12\. Why have ye persecuted, abused and put to death mortals for
worshipping Jehovih?

13\. Behold, all ye four profess to be the Prince of Peace; but ye carry
concealed daggers, and ye strike to death those who glorify the Creator.

14\. I run after my children, as a father would, to snatch them away
from a serpent; but ye slaughter them before my eyes.

<span id="page_725">p. 725</span>

15\. I weep for them.

16\. In shame, I look upon the earth and the heavens thereof, and I say
unto myself: O thou God, to whom these were given in charge, how
incompetent thou art against the flood of evil!

17\. And I pray unto Jehovih, that your hearts may be turned to pity. I
see, before you all, certain ruin and terrible hells; and I cry out to
Jehovih, to give me the means to save you.

18\. I pray, that I may be even unmolested in rescuing and saving the
helpless and distressed, but ye frustrate all my inventions.

19\. I am weary with my labor, and with the great kingdoms given into my
keeping.

20\. Alas, I am shut off on all sides from doing good, and yet, that is
all I desire to do.

21\. Now, I beseech you, O ye false Gods, make ye concessions unto
Jehovih.

22\. Save yourself from certain destruction, and Jehovih's Son from
humiliation, before the high-raised Gods of other worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIX](oah542)
