[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah589)  [Next](oah591) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_781">p. 781</span>

### Chapter XXVIII

GOD SHOWETH HOW TO DO CHARITY.

1\. GOD said: O man, consider the folly of individual effort! One will
say: I help my family and my neighbors; let others do so, and all will
be well.

2\. This is his philosophy and doctrine! Now, I say unto thee, this is
just what hath been tried for thousands of years, and it hath resulted
in impotency all the while.

3\. It hath been said: Sell all thou hast and give it to the poor; but I
say unto thee, thou shalt not do this.

4\. Though that opened the way to salvation in the ancient days, it is
not sufficient in this day. Neither shalt thou hope, that, by giving to
the poor, thou shalt escape condemnation.

5\. But thou shalt go to the foundation of things, and go
systematically.

6\. Thy efforts shall not be single-handed, but thou shalt unite with
others; and, together, ye shall provide a remedy against poverty.

7\. Remembering, it is wiser to accomplish with the young than with the
aged. For the mature will be dead in a few years; and, in that day,
those that are children will be mature.

8\. Better is it, that ye provide a way unto ten fatherless children,
than for forty people that are grown.

9\. But, even in this, ye may err toward the children. For, to provide
them an asylum in infancy, saying: Behold, what a good work we have
done! showeth that ye measure not as your God measureth.

10\. For it is not sufficient that ye feed and clothe little ones; but
ye shall teach them a trade, and occupations, and give them learning, so
that, when they are grown, they can sustain themselves.

11\. But, even yet, your work is not the highest; but ye shall so
provide them, they they will not only be self-supporting, but that they
shall be willing and capable of rescuing others, as they were rescued.

12\. After this, ye shall see to it, that all things are so provided,
that, after your death, your institution be not liable to fall into
disuse or perversion.

13\. This is founding the Father's kingdom on earth; and whoso laboreth
thus, shall be ministered unto by my heavenly kingdoms for the glory of
Jehovih.

14\. Therefore, let your charity be not for a year, nor for a hundred
years; but, be ye the corner-stones, founding places on earth where
shall rest perpetually a system that will provide a new race, where
poverty and crime and helplessness cannot enter.

15\. Ye thus become, even in mortality, members of my second
resurrection in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](oah591)
