[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah519)  [Next](oah521) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVII

1\. THE following are the books of Ka'yu, to wit:

2\. OF THE CREATOR, the Great Spirit, Eolin, and His Creation.

3\. OF THE PLAN OF CORPOREAL WORLDS, the sun and earth and moon and
stars, and their sizes and motions, and their power to hold themselves
in their places, by the velocity of rotation.

4\. OF LIGHT AND HEAT and thunder and lightning.

5\. OF THE UNSEEN WORLDS; the upper and lower heavens; the habitations
of the Gods.

6\. OF THE INTERMEDIATE WORLD, or lower heaven, which resteth on the
earth.

7\. OF TE, who hath charge of this world and her heavens.

8\. OF FALSE GODS, and their kingdoms in the lower heavens; and their
power to catch the souls of men after death.

9\. OF HELL, where the spirits of bad men are tortured for a long
season.

10\. OF THE HIGHEST HEAVENS, the Orian worlds, where the spirits of good
mortals dwell in everlasting bliss.

11\. OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF GODS and drujas over mortals; how nations
are built up, or destroyed by the Gods.

12\. And these ten were such as in after years were recorded as the
BOOKS OF GREAT LEARNING, and were made by the Sun Emperor THE STANDARD
of the empire.

13\. The following books of Ka'yu were such as were called, THE LESSER
SCHOLARSHIPS, to wit:

14\. AXIOMS, being the simples of problems.

15\. THE PERFECT MAN (TAE), or HIGHEST REPRESENTATIVE.

16\. THE MEAN MAN.

17\. PURIFICATION; to purify the flesh; and to purify the spirit (or
soul).

18\. DIVINATION; consultation of spirits; legerdemain; sar'gis; su'is;
power of the spirits to give man dreams and visions.

19\. MAXIMS, propriety, sincerity, rites <span id="page_700">p.
700</span> and ceremonies, reverence to age, respect to the dead.

20\. LOVE; to love the Great Spirit; to love the parents; to love
discipline and industry; marriage; marriage for earthly sake being
wicked; marriage for spiritual redemption of the world by generations of
holier men and women.

21\. BOOK OF HISTORIES, of Gods and Saviors, of kings and emperors, of
wise men, of law-givers, of the rise and fall of nations.

22\. BOOK OF HOLIES, in six parts: Omnipotence, Worship, Jehovih's
(Eolin's) Judgments, Progression, Reverence to the priests, and
Obedience to the sacred commandment.

23\. BOOK OF GEMS, also in six parts: Proverbs, Poetry, Morning and
Evening Devotion, Association, in the family, the community, the state
and the empire, Confession of Sins, and Praise and Rejoicing in Eolin,
the Great Spirit.

24\. Such were the twenty books of Ka'yu, which were the pith and cream
of the eighteen thousand books of the ancients, together with all the
light of the latter days added thereto. And in not many years, these
also became the standard books of the Chine'ya empire.

25\. And the Council of Ts'Sin'Ne came to a close, and the disciples of
Ka'yu departed to their respective provinces, taking copies of the books
with them.

26\. God had said to his inspiring angels: Suffer not Ka'yu to know he
receiveth light from heaven, for he shall be as an example to men, to
inspire them to perfect the talents created withal.

27\. And it was so; and during all these years of labor, Ka'yu knew not
that he was inspired.

28\. And God looked upon the empire of Chine'ya, and he said: Behold, my
son shall write other books, but less profound.

29\. And God inspired Ka'yu to write:

30\. A BOOK OF FAMILY SAYINGS;

31\. A BOOK OF ANELECTS;

32\. A BOOK ON GOVERNMENT;

33\. A BOOK ON LIFE;

34\. A BOOK ON PUNISHMENT;

35\. AND A BOOK OF INVENTIONS.

And these were all the books Ka'yu wrote.

36\. Nevertheless, his fame became so great that many men followed him
about, even when he traveled into distant provinces, and they watched
for the words he spake, and they wrote them down, and these were also
made into books.

37\. Because of the presence of God and his angels, Ka'yu saw clearly
and heard clearly; nevertheless, his inspiration was God by proxy, and
not like the inspiration of Chine, to whom God came in person, dwelling
with him. Wherein, on many occasions, Ka'yu did things of his own
accord, and committed some blunders.

End of the history of Ka'yu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](oah521)
