[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah64)  [Next](oah66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. NEPH, God of earth, said: Behold, O Aph, Son of Jehovih, by the
power and magnificence of thy work am I bewildered in thy presence. Who
can come so near the Almighty? Who but Jehovih hath attained beyond the
power of thy soul? Who hath wisdom like unto thee, save the Great
Creator? Thou hast stretched a line beyond the moon, and by thy spoken
word crushed in the side of the great earth, as if it were nothing. Thou
hast said: Arise! and a world moved at thy command! Yea, thou hast the
love and esteem of millions of Gods and Goddesses.

2\. And thou camest against the winds of the earth, saying: Turn ye
hither or turn ye thither, and lo, the winds moved before thy words as
an obedient child to its father's voice. Thou callest down the fire of
heaven; it cometh at thy bidding; and thou sayst: O Jehovih, put thy
hand under the heavens of the earth, and straightway a light and floor
wide as the earth fly into the place of thy desire.

3\. Now, behold thou hast said: O Jehovih, I surrender my commission; I
have finished that which Thou commandest me to do. Wherefore, O Aph, my
soul hath great sorrow. But because thou hast labored a hundred days and
cleaned up the whole earth and her heavens, as one might sweep the floor
of a house, I am bowed down in gratitude.

4\. Then Aph, Son of Jehovih, said: O Jehovih, what have I done that Thy
Son's love hath come to me? So far as I have become one with Thee, O
Thou Everlasting Creator, so Thou showest me plainer and plainer that I
am nothing. And yet Thy Son heapest praise upon me, seeing I am but as a
figure moved by Thy hand. Shall a man lose sight of the Almighty!

5\. Nevertheless, O Jehovih, who so weak in love as I, Thy servant?
Because Thou hast quickened me in wisdom and power, so hast Thou made my
love as a place that can never be supplied to the fill. How shall I find
strength to leave this, Thy Son, on the far-off earth? Will I not glory
in his love and great esteem; and yet know I not that I will repine
because I have him not with me?

6\. Hear me, O Jehovih, for I will measure Thy Son with swiftness.
Scarce forty thousand years raised up to etherea, and yet Thou madest
him God of heaven and earth. For three thousand years struggled he in
the battle against evil and darkness; and the broad heavens in the
etherean world looked on in sympathy and love and hope, because of his
tenacity and wisdom and power.

7\. It was as one man fighting against a house on fire, and the place
filled with helpless babes. And yet Thy God ceased not, nor once rested
and said: It is useless; but forever renewed the battle in new ways and
stratagems. As a light showeth better in the dark, so did Thy Son Neph,
O Jehovih, move the souls of even Gods and Goddesses in Thy exalted
heavens.

8\. Then came Thy voice, O Father, saying: Go thou, O Aph, My Son, and
deliver the earth. And, behold, the congregating of Gods and Goddesses!
So eager to fly to the assistance of Thy honored Son!

9\. And God (Neph) said: One favor, O Aph, Son of Jehovih, I ask of
thee; which is that thou shalt tarry three days and honor the throne of
God. For I will have it founded and ready; and my Lords shall have the
honor of speaking to thee face to face.

10\. Aph, Son of Jehovih, said: By Thy permission, O Jehovih, I will
tarry three days and three nights with Thy Son, God of heaven and earth,
and I will honor his throne and speak face to face with his Lords, that
I may win their love.

11\. In three days' time the kingdom of God was founded, and situated in
atmospherea, near and over the land of Jaffeth (Chine'ya), but the
plateaux extended with two wings, so as to embrace Shem and Ham (India
and Egypt); and thither went the Gods, with their Lords and attendants.

12\. Now, there were with God (Neph) two million spirits (earth-born) in
the second resurrection, who had volunteered to serve another two
hundred years for the founding of the new kingdom of heaven, and they
were well learned in official capacity, knowing how to found plateaux,
with factories, mansions, hospitals, nurseries, and all such places as
are required in heaven for the newborn, so that God only had to say: Do
ye thus, or so; and it was done, and without error.

13\. And now, from the hosts of Aph, Son of Jehovih, there came before
God half a million etherean volunteers who <span id="page_85">p.
85</span> desired to remain two hundred years with God and his hosts.

14\. God said to them: Behold, the earth hath passed Tryista, and it is
no longer lawful for any but earth-born to hold the places of sub-Gods
and sub-Lords and marshals; and since ye are from different stars
raised, and from different etherean circuits, what shall I do that ye
may be honored, and also profitable to yourselves in development?

15\. Gaitivaya, chief spokesman for them, said: We desire to be laborers
only. For what is two hundred years to us? We pray thee, appoint us not
to the I'hins, for they are already advanced, but appoint us to the
natives in the divisions of the earth, especially to those who speak but
little, and who burrow in the ground. Neither do we desire a place in
thy heaven, but we will abide with mortals, and in the first
resurrection of those who are born in darkness.

16\. God said: Thou shalt remain, and thy people with thee. For since
thou hast volunteered to leave thy high estate and come and dwell for
one dan <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) on the lowest of all
places, laboring for the blind and dumb, thou shalt be recompensed with
the love of millions in time to come.

17\. Then God departed, and Aph, Son of Jehovih, went with him, and they
came into the midst of the kingdom of God, whereat they halted, and God
said: Here will I build my throne; and inasmuch as Sethantes, in the
olden time, called his place Hored, so will I call my place Hored also,
and on the earth it shall be called the Mountain of God, for it shall be
my home.

18\. So God stretched forth his hand to Jehovih, saying: Throne of Thy
throne, O Father! And there came down from the heavens above a great
light, and it settled around about in the midst of the place of God and
Aph, Jehovih's Son; and presently the light gathered up of the
atmospherean substance and made it shining and condensed, whereupon the
attendants who do such matters brought and laid the throne of God, and
thereafter fenced it around with pillars of fire, after the manner of
Hored of the ancient days.

19\. And God ascended and sat on the throne, and Aph also sat on the
right hand of God, and the four Lords of the earth on the left hand; but
the fifth Lord, Eolait, stood down at the foot. And he said: Behold, the
division of the earth that was mine is sunk beneath the sea; how, then,
shall I sit on the throne of God?

20\. God said: Since thy labor hath been taken from thee, thou art as a
parable on the newly dead; who have lost the earth, but have no place in
heaven. Since the es'yan serveth a time through the proxy of others, so
shalt thou in that which I will bestow upon thee. Know, then, thou shalt
sit on my right hand, for thou shalt be my assistant and Vice-God during
the time of my sojourn; and, after that, whatsoever thou wilt.

21\. Eolait said: Thou hast honored me, O God! Jehovih's will be done!
So God rose up, raising his hand, and said: O Thou All Light, crown Thou
Thy Son Vice-God of Hored, for Thine Own Glory, forever!

22\. And as the light of etherea descended into God's right hand, he
shaped it into a crown and placed it on Eolait's head, with the usual
ceremony of such rank in heaven. And Eolait came and sat on the right
hand of God. And in that same time, Aph, Son of Jehovih, rose up,
whereupon God and the Lords, and all people whatsoever, sat down, for
the place was as if Jehovih had appeared in person. Aph said:

23\. As a father is made to comprehend his own early life by looking on
his infant son, so hast Thou, O Jehovih, forever raised up before my
eyes the images of times and conditions long past. In these, Thy Lords,
Thou hast called me back to the time and place when first Thou and Thy
Son crowned me a Lord and a Vice-God over one of the divisions of my
native star.

24\. And my soul rose up to Thee in fear and prayer; for I understood
how unmindful men and angels are of the labor of Gods and Lords, and
prone to rate themselves as Chiefs of all created things. But Thy Voice,
O Jehovih, came to me, saying: Complain not, My Son, against the
self-conceit of men and angels, nor of their criticisms of My Gods and
Lords; for to such boasters do I provide trials, which they perceive not
till they are encompassed therewith. Suffer them, therefore, within thy
dominions to grow in their own glory, for I have sufficient labor for
them, either on earth or in heaven.

25\. And I perceived Thy wisdom, and I applied it through my angels; and
when my people rose to the first resurrection, and the second
resurrection, behold, I knew where to place them that they might prove
themselves all in all. And Thy light came upon me in my place, saying:
As thou hast <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> profited in the first
lesson, so shalt thou comprehend the second, and even up to the etherean
heavens.

26\. Nevertheless, O Father, Thou sufferedst all things to harass me and
perplex my soul; and I was filled with fear and reverence because of the
great responsibility Thou gavest unto my keeping. So great were my
tribulations and trials that I called out to Thee in Thy holy place to
remember all other Gods and Lords in Thy whole universe.

27\. And Thou saidst: Hear the words of Thy Creator, thou, My God, My
Son: For I created man to enter heaven as helpless as he entered earth
life, and dependent on those above him, that he might comprehend the
unity between high and low, strong and weak, light and darkness; and I
placed him in My mills, wherein he should learn that, even as others
grind for him, so should he grind for those beneath him.

28\. For of what profit under the sun is it for My Lords to come down
from their liberty and glory in My etherean firmament and become Lords
over the grovellers in the flesh, or over the es'yans in darkness? Shall
selfishness reign in heaven, and every one for himself? Have I not
proved it on the earth that the love of doing good works unto others is
all that insures a rich harvest of love in return.

29\. Because they stoop from their high estate in order to promote My
children which I created alive, are they not becoming the more one with
Me? Even so is all exaltation in heaven; for as I stoop down to the dumb
earth and water, and quicken them, making man, so have I stooped lower
than can anything of all My universe. And they that do after My example,
raising them up to make them have joy in life, are on the road to attain
to all power and wisdom and love.

30\. Aph, Son of Jehovih, said: I perceived Thy wisdom, O Father; and
Thy power and wisdom came upon me tenfold. Then I sought forever after
to go to the lowest and darkest places; but, lo, when I had grown in Thy
judgment, Thou spakest again to me, saying:

31\. O Aph, My Son, because thou hast found the key to unlock the doors
to the highest heavens, behold, thou art too mighty for small labor.
Come, therefore, with Thy Creator, for I have a whole etherean world at
thy command, and thy wisdom and power are required at My hand.

32\. And I obeyed Thy call, O Jehovih. And then again, after a season,
Thou calledst me again, and again, and madest my labors to extend into
many etherean worlds. But I loved to look back and glorify Thee for my
first Lord-dom, and to treasure up the millions of loves I found in
those days. And again, O Father, hast Thou blessed me to meet many
millions of them in this pruning of the red star, the earth.

33\. Now Thou hast called me to speak on the throne of Thy God of earth.
Alas, thy God has said: O Aph, Son of Jehovih, come thou and honor my
throne! Whereas, O Jehovih, I am the most honored of men and Gods
because I have again opened my mouth before Thee and in Thy name. All
glory be to Thee, O Jehovih, now and forever!

34\. Then Aph, Son of Jehovih, sat down, and God signalled to the
marshals, who proclaimed freedom for two whole days. Thereupon the Gods
and Goddesses of Aph's staff filed past the throne, and after them came
the hosts of God, and then the hosts of the Lords, for they all desired
to pass near and look upon Aph, and receive the signal of his blessing.

35\. And presently thereafter all the people joined in with the
es'enaurs and sang a song of glory unto Jehovih, the All Highest. And
when it was finished, the multitude turned to recreation and social
intercourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[85:\*](oah65.htm#fr_13) Two hundred years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah66)
