[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah654)  [Next](oah656) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

GOD SHOWETH THAT THE RENUNCIATION OF THE UZIANS IS NECESSARY.

1\. HEARKEN, O man, to the discourse of thy God upon the second
resurrection in heaven, and apply thou these principles to founding
Jehovih's kingdom on earth.

2\. Many come to my holy place, saying: Hear me, O God, I am weary of
the first resurrection and of the earth. Open the gates of paradise unto
thy servant.

3\. And I say unto them: Whoso will put aside all that is below, shall
dwell in this heaven; but whoso cannot in heart, and mind, and soul
renounce all that is below is not prepared to enter.

4\. Hath not Jehovih said on earth: Husband and wife shall be the model
and key of My kingdom?

5\. As woman forsaketh father, mother, brother and sister and becometh
one with her husband, so do they of the first resurrection forsake all
the earth and the lowest heaven in order to become one with the kingdom
of thy God.

6\. For, save the mind and heart be one with my holy place, the love of
improvement will also depart out of that man's soul.

7\. Isolation belongeth below the second resurrection, but unity is
within it.

8\. He who hath disciplined himself to be honest in his own sight may be
in error; he who striveth to do good on his own account may be in error
as to an ultimate good; and in all cases man alone is weak.

9\. Yet no man can practice the highest whilst living with those who are
inclined downward.

10\. In the second resurrection the angels are relieved of individual
responsibility, all matters being under the wisdom of the Holy Council,
whose head is thy God.

11\. First on earth, monarchies, then republics, then fraternities, the
latter of which is now in embryo, and shall follow after both the
others.

12\. Behold, how hard it is for an ignorant man to conceive of a state
without a master, or for the people of a republic to understand a state
without votes and majorities, and a chief ruler. Yet such shall be the
fraternities.

13\. Have they not resolved their colleges into teachers and pupils? By
their superior knowledge do these heads receive their places, yet not as
rulers, but teachers.

14\. Have they not resolved jurisprudence so that testimony governs the
rulings? According to evidence adduced and the knowledge of the judge,
so shall he decide, and not according to his own volition.

15\. Out of the wisdom of the college and the court shalt thou discover
the rules of fraternity, and by relieve-watch <span id="page_843">p.
843</span> preserve the brotherhood against caste and dictatorship.

16\. See to it then, in departing out of Uz, that thou take with thee
only things that have proved good--the rest leave behind.

17\. As Jehovih gave woman to man, and the twain became one in their
aspiration, hope and labor, and especially with reference to their
offspring, so shall the members of the fraternity be such as having
renounced all the world, can become one with one another, and especially
for raising up the young to become the Father's edifice on earth.

18\. As the husband is the representative head of the family, yet he
shall not tyrannize over them, nor by his rulings make himself a
separate entity from the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah656)
