[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah651)  [Next](oah653) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

GOD SHOWETH WHAT IS MEANT BY FOLLOWING THE HIGHEST LIGHT.

1\. BE considerate of thy fellow man, and weigh his standing place in
the sight of thy God.

2\. For one man saith: My highest light is to get money; another, to get
great learning; another, to enjoy earthly pleasure; another, to
contemplate sexual relations; another, to serve Buddha; another, to
serve Brahma; another, to serve Christ; another, to be efficient in
warfare, and so on, every one from his own standpoint.

3\. Many are also under the prejudice of old things, or the influence of
a neighbor, or a spirit or their surroundings, or the impulse of their
own flesh, and say: I too follow my highest light.

4\. Whereas they are in darkness altogether; neither know they what is
meant by the term--highest light--often venturing an opinion or a vague
surmise instead, and believing they are expressing their highest light.

5\. For which reasons thou shalt explain that only facts well known, or
comparatively proven, are light. An opinion is not light.

<span id="page_841">p. 841</span>

6\. That whoso professeth light must know the matter of his own
knowledge.

7\. That facts, numbers, figures or axioms can demonstrate light; and
that without these, then the supposed light is only darkness.

8\. Pursue this philosophy and thou shalt easily discover who amongst
you hath the highest light; and also what kind of judgment shall govern
the chief's rulings.

9\. Some will desire to consult the angels, as to which--in a given
matter--is the highest light; but I say unto thee, thou shalt weigh the
words of angels even as if they were mortals, exacting similar facts and
substantiation.

10\. Was it not the consulting of the oracles that destroyed Vind'yu
(India), Socatta, Fonece (Phoenecia), Persia, Ghem and Greece? Such
consultation of angels is answered from the first resurrection; and it
ever will be so, save man exact from the angels facts and substantial
proof.

11\. These, then, are rules of light: That which is self-evident: That
which is axiomatic: That which is substantiated by facts: That which
hath a parallel in known things: Things that lead to peace, order, and
the uplifting of thy neighbor and thyself.

12\. Also to discipline thyself to be constantly on the alert to be
pure, good, truthful and gentle in thy speech; to practice
right-doing--these are following the highest light.

13\. This though is darkness--to express fault finding, criticism,
censure, or even an opinion unsupportable by facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah653)
