[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah642)  [Next](oah644.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXV

1\. THIS rule I made in all My works, saith Jehovih: When I separate the
people, the good go away out from amongst the evil.

2\. Even as I drew the Israelites out of Egupt.

3\. And, whoso go out, prosper in My hand; I make them an everlasting
people.

4\. But those that remain, go down to destruction; and they become
unknown upon the earth.

5\. Their great men are forgotten, and their wisest men lose caste in
the histories of a thousand years.

6\. Behold, these things I had made known unto the generations of the
earth.

7\. Now, when I separated the Faithists and the Uzians, in the kosmon
era, I sent angels, warning them. I said unto them:

8\. Flatter not yourselves that man is all wisdom; I say unto you, I am
with the righteous; might shall not triumph through wrong-doing. Behold,
a judgment shall come upon this people.

9\. When I begin to call them, My chosen shall come and found My
kingdom; and they shall come faster and faster every year.

10\. And the Uzians shall fall into iniquity, more and more every year.

11\. And, now, behold what hath been!

12\. The prince of devils came upon the Uzians, saying:

13\. Think not that I come to send peace on earth; I come not to send
peace, but a sword.

14\. I come to set man at variance against his father, and a daughter
against her mother.

15\. Now, therefore, when My angels went in behalf of My kingdom,
behold, the prince of devils did invade the places of the ungodly.

16\. And, whoso received My angels, and practiced righteousness, were
fallen upon by the emissaries of the prince of devils, and unmercifully
treated with curses and tortures.

17\. But I called the righteous hence, and they built unto Me My
kingdom.

18\. And I said unto the Uzians: Let this be a testimony unto you of the
power of the Almighty;

19\. Ye go about building ships of war, and harbors for defence, with
torpedoes, and with all manner of wicked inventions;

20\. But I say unto you, this nation, this government and this people
shall not be attacked in the places ye build.

21\. It is within.

22\. For I will draw away the righteous, and none but rogues shall
accept your great offices.

23\. And this matter shall grow upon you in the way of evil, declining
in virtue more and more every year.

24\. Look, therefore, at your grade; judge ye the words of the Almighty.

25\. My hands fashioned the signs of the times.

26\. As the hirer this day hireth one man to watch another, even so
shall it come unto you in the great offices of your government.

27\. By force and by might, ye shall hope to overcome the prince of
devils, but ye shall fail.

28\. And, in proportion as ye go down in corruption, even so shall the
Faithists go away into My kingdoms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](oah644.md)
