[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah600)  [Next](oah602) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIX

GOD PROVIDETH FOR INCREASE.

1\. GOD said: When thy educational colony of infants shall have grown up
to manhood and womanhood, they shall understand that, as they were once
homeless and fatherless, and ye gathered them up, and provided unto
them, even so shall they go, and do likewise, gathering up from the
Uzians other orphans and castaways, and raising them in other colonies,
after the same manner.

2\. And it shall come to pass, that many will desire to marry, and it
shall be granted unto them to choose amongst their own people, and marry
whom they will.

3\. But it shall be a law that no man nor woman shall marry more than
one time.

4\. Whether the partner die, or whether they divorce themselves, yet, to
none other shall either ever wed more.

5\. And it shall be a law, that, at maturity, if any one desireth to
leave <span id="page_793">p. 793</span> the colony, he shall do so
without hindrance or prejudice.

6\. Though it shall be inculcated into them, during their youth, that,
at maturity, they are supposed to swarm out, after the fashion of bees,
becoming too numerous for one hive, and go and form a new colony; that
in all things they shall be taught not to do anything for self sake, but
for the good of man and for the honor and glory of Jehovih.

7\. And these things shall come to pass with these people:

8\. They shall abjure war;

9\. They shall be non-resistants;

10\. They shall have su'is, and shall see without their mortal eyes, and
hear without their mortal ears.

11\. My angels shall appear before them, and walk with them, talking to
them, and teaching them of my kingdoms.

12\. And angels of the I'hin race will come to them; and of the I'huans,
and of all other peoples whereof mention is made in this OAHSPE.

13\. And mortals shall recover, from the libraries in heaven, things
that have been lost on the earth, as to languages and histories of tens
of thousands of years ago.

14\. And mortals shall prophesy truly of things in heaven and on the
earth.

15\. And many shall attain adeptism, and, in spirit, go out of their
mortal bodies, and appear hundreds of miles away, and there make
themselves known; and they will return again to their mortal bodies,
unharmed.

16\. All these, and even greater things, shall my angels teach them.

17\. Flatter not thyself, O man, that these things can come in Uz, or
that they can come suddenly. They can neither come to Uzians, nor can
they come suddenly.

18\. It is not the work of thy God in this cycle to raise up any man to
become worshipful because of such wonders; it is my work to show man how
he shall attain to these things himself.

19\. For this reason, I come not, in this day, to call sinners to
repentance, nor to gather up the lost sheep of Israel.

20\. I come now to the wise and pure, who have fulfilled the former
commandments.

21\. I come to give them a new lesson, which is, to show them how to
build the Father's kingdom on earth.

22\. I come to raise up a new people in the world, greater than hath
ever been.

23\. Those that I sent have cleared away the old edifice. I come not as
a destroyer; I come as a builder.

24\. Into thy hands, O man, I give the key to the heavenly kingdoms.
Remember, the pass-word which admitteth thee to the all highest kingdoms
is, JEHOVIH, THE I AM.

END OF THE BOOK OF JUDGMENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah602)
