[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah649)  [Next](oah651.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_839">p. 839</span>

### Chapter VI

OF JEHOVIH AND HIS KINGDOM ON EARTH.

1\. O man, apply thyself to understand the spirit of my discourse, for
herein shalt thou find the key to the Father's kingdom.

2\. These are the rules of the second resurrection: To become an
interpreter and worker without a written formula:

3\. That whatsoever giveth joy to thy fellow and rendereth peace and
good will unto all--shall be called light:

4\. That whatsoever giveth sorrow to thy fellow, or discouragement to
others--shall be called darkness:

5\. As to find fault with another, or to aggrevate unto
displeasure--shall be called darkness:

6\. But to make another's burden light, to encourage him unto strength
and happiness--shall be called light:

7\. To be forever complaining about this or that--shall be called
darkness:

8\. To be forever imparting cheerfulness--shall be called light.

9\. Now therefore whoso becometh a member of my kingdom shall practice
light; but whoso practiceth darkness, will depart away from my kingdom
of his own accord.

10\. Neither shalt thou practice darkness upon thy fellow for any
shortness he hath done.

11\. Nor shalt thou reprove him for error, nor blame him, nor make
thyself an inquisitor over him, nor assume to be a judge over him.

12\. Nor ask him to apologize, nor otherwise seek to make him humble
himself before thee.

13\. Nor shalt thou boast over him because thou art wiser or stronger or
more expert.

14\. For all such inquisition cometh of darkness, and shall return upon
him who uttereth it, in time to come.

15\. Rather shalt thou discover the good that is in thy neighbor, and
laud him therefor, for this is the method of raising him higher.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah651.md)
