[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah628)  [Next](oah630.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. JEHOVIH had prospered Shalam in every way, more than had been
possible to any other people in all the world.

2\. Whilst the nurses and teachers were providing for the infants, the
rest of the people were providing habitations, factories and educational
workshops, and also tilling the ground and ornamenting it with fields,
gardens and orchards, and with walks and terraces.

3\. In regard to the houses, the temple of Jehovih, the temple of Apollo
and the gymnasium were the most important, and, yet, none of these were
like unto the buildings of the ancients.

4\. Jehovih had said: Behold, the ancients built their temples so
durable that succeeding generations forgot the art of building. Better
is it for man's talent to remain, than for stones and pillars of iron.

5\. For which reason, in kosmon, thou shalt not build imperishably in
corporeal things; but rather leave the way open for succeeding
generations to build also.

6\. The temple of Jehovih, which was devoted to public worship on every
seventh day of the week, was provided with fountains in the north-east
and south-west, and with the four lights of the square, and with the
four dark corners of evil and temptation, and with a throne of Light in
the east, with time-bells, a gau and sacred wheel. The ceiling
represented the stars and planets, interblended with plateaux of the
heavenly kingdoms. The east was adorned with the rising sun, the south
with the sun at noon, and the west with the setting sun. The north was
adorned with the pole-star and aurora borealis. The belt of the zodiac,
colored in cream-yellow, crossed over the ceiling and faded down the
east and west walls. On the south wall was the coil and travel of the
great serpent (solar phalanx), from the time of the Arc of Bon (of
Moses, Capilya and Chine) down to the Arc of Kosmon, in the etherean
heavens. Flags of golden colors were provided for the four lights, and
were mounted on silver-colored staffs inclining toward the altar of the
Covenant; and this was in the place Tae stood, betwixt the crescent
horns, when they had, on the first day, made the covenant. And in the
place of the crescent, where the fifty-one stood, was laid a stone
crescent, provided with seats and gate-ways for successive affiliations
to Jehovih's kingdom. The outside of the temple was of wood, and was
surrounded by posts made of native trees, surmounted with a roof of
cement.

7\. When the temple was completed, Tae said: Who but Gods could have
made anything so beautiful with such cheap material! And if it perish in
two generations, two things man shall gain; the third generation can
build another; and, moreover, we shall not have left a temple on earth
that will call us back from the higher heavens for more than two
generations of time, to look after mortals who might applaud us.

8\. In regard to worship in the temple, Jehovih had said:

9\. As, in the olden times, I provided a preacher to stand at the altar
in <span id="page_818">p. 818</span> the east, and speak unto the
multitude, behold, in kosmon, the multitude shall render an account
before My altar of their fulfillment of My commandments, and My C'chief
shall respond in My name.

10\. And such, indeed, it was; instead of a preacher denouncing people
for their sins, it was a place where the people returned thanks and
praises to Jehovih, with rejoicing, in anthems and songs of praise, with
pleadings in Jehovih's name for the Uzians to learn the lessons of the
new kingdom.

11\. And it came to pass that Uzians did come, and listen, and look on,
and examine, saying and inquiring:

12\. Why was not this tried before? A people without a leader!

13\. And whilst they thus pondered, they looked upon the meadows and
lawns, the orchards and hot-houses and the rich-growing fields, saying:
Is not this the garden of Paradise?

14\. The temple of Apollo was devoted to music, dancing, calisthenics,
initiative processions, rites and ceremonies of amusement. The interior
was finished illustrative of proportions and figures of symmetry and
beauty. The decorations illustrated attitudes, posings and groupings. On
the east summit was a figurative illustration of the God Apollo with his
heavenly hosts, descended to the lower heavens, in past ages, looking
down on to earth at a group of druks (ill-formed mortals) with long
arms, who were squatting on their haunches. Apollo was illustrating, on
a well-formed model, to his angels, how the druks of earth were to be
changed into shapeliness and beauty.

15\. In its external structure, the temple of Apollo illustrated a
combination of one thousand designs of architecture, arches, curves,
columns, pillars and so on. And yet all of this was made of the forest
trees of Shalam and without cost.

16\. Next to these was the gymnasium, which contained also two swimming
baths and one hundred single bath-rooms.

17\. Here were all kinds of places for developing muscular action, with
swings, ropes to walk, places for leaping, places for tumbling and
climbing. This was under the charge of the group of physicians. The
temple of Apollo was under the charge of the group of musicians. The
temple of Jehovih was under the charge of the C'chief and his group of
chiefs.

18\. Besides these, were the houses of Architecture, the house of
Mechanics, the house of Horticulture, which adjoined the hothouses on
the north and west. Here were grown all kinds of fruit and herbs for
food, and many beautiful flowers, rich-growing all the year around.

19\. Then the Agricultural house; then the factories, for hats,
clothing, shoes, cutlery, and, in fact, all conceivable places required
by man.

20\. And not the least interesting of all was the house of Nurseries.

21\. Here were the heart and kernel of the whole colony, the orphans and
castaways gathered up from amongst the Uzians.

22\. Now, from the first of the inhabitation of Shalam, the Voice had
constantly urged Tae and Es to make continual additions of infants to
the colony.

23\. The Voice had said: Give thy people plenty to do. Keep the nurses
busy; give them little to mourn for coming out of Egypt (Uz); keep them
at work; keep them in the rites and ceremonies.

24\. Then Tae said to Es: Take thou one of the women with thee, and go
back to Uz; gather in more infants.

25\. And that ye may be known and respected by the Uzians as to your
occupation, go in plain black dress, without oddity, and I will give to
each of you a wooden triangle, which shall be suspended on your bosoms
by a cord over the neck; for this is the symbol of earth, sky and
spirit, the three entities which constitute the universe, being
emblematical of Jehovih.

26\. So, Es took Hamarias, a young woman of Thessagowan, and went back
to Uz, and in the cities gathered up infant waifs and brought them to
Shalam.

27\. And thus, every year, they brought from twenty to fifty additional
infants, and adopted them in the nurseries.

28\. So that, in not many years, there were more than a thousand orphans
in the colony.

29\. It so happened, in the second year of Shalam, that a disease came
amongst the cows, and the physicians forbade the babes being fed on
their milk.

30\. So, for some days, they were in straits as to how to support the
infants till other milk could be supplied.

31\. And one Abbayith, an elderly woman, said unto them: Why worry
yourselves? Behold, the corn is in ear. Go, gather it, and press out the
milk and cook it, and give to the babes; for this also is good milk.

32\. So, they gathered the corn and <span id="page_819">p. 819</span>
scraped it and pressed out the milk which, on being boiled a little, was
found to be excellent food for infants.

33\. Thus was discovered artificial milk, even as it is bottled and sold
to this day. And the chemists also made water extracts from slippery elm
bark, and from flax seed, combined with rice milk, and this also made an
excellent liquid food for infants.

34\. Jehovih had said: Whether flesh or milk or cheese that man useth
for food, behold, in the herbs and plants and trees I created, I gave
the same things. Let man discover them, and understand the fruit of My
inventions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah630.md)
