[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah67)  [Next](oah69.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. THE Council of Hored being still in session, God, that is, Eolait,
ascended the throne. And the light of <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
Jehovih fell upon God, so that he was well nigh obscured from sight, and
the voice of Jehovih spake, saying:

2\. Hear ye My voice; as by My Presence and of Mine Own Self I made each
self, and gave thereto power of words, so am I in Light manifest by soul
words to My etherean hosts. As to the Lords of earth, ye have provided
ashars, and above them asaphs, and betwixt all My kingdoms allotted
messengers, so shall ye also provide for barbarians, familiar spirits,
who shall be subject to the order of the ashars and their Lords.

3\. I create alive all men, whether I'hins or barbarians, and your labor
shall be not alone with My chosen, whom it is easy to save, but with
those also who know Me not, and know not My es worlds. For, beside those
destroyed by the flood, behold the earth is still covered over with men,
women and children.

4\. In the time of Aph ye received volunteers from Osi, in etherea; give
them this matter in hand.

5\. This was done, and they were divided up into groups, and the
corporeans having been already numbered by the angels of heaven, the
ethereans were distributed accordingly. And these again selected and
apportioned familiar spirits to abide with the barbarians. And these
familiar spirits were the fathers and mothers and friends who had
recently died, but still sojourned in the first resurrection. So the
officers provided places on earth for these spirits, and persuaded them
to reappear before mortals in order to prove continued life; but the
officers never showed themselves.

6\. Jehovih hath said: Provide ye the way, but cause the familiars to do
the labor. Neither shall ye make a familiar of the spirit of a young man
or a young woman, lest they become fetals.

7\. So it came to pass that a new department of heaven and earth was
opened and set on foot during the absence of Neph, and in one year the
matter was in prosperity.

8\. At the end of one year God returned from the Hautuon Colony,
bringing with him five millions of volunteers, being of the third
resurrection. And, it being known in Hored when he would return, a great
concourse of angels gathered together to receive him in honor, and to
welcome the volunteers.

9\. So that, when God's etherean star descended, the Vice-God, Eolait,
proclaimed a recreation of ten days, which was to follow immediately
after God should ascend the throne and regain his presence. And so,
whilst the es'enaurs were singing, the star alighted, and the marshals
and hosts of honor proceeded to the places, and received God, who at
once ascended to the throne and saluted Eolait, Son of Jehovih, saying:

10\. By Thy Will and Power, O Jehovih, Thy Son rejoiceth in the time of
this proceeding. Eolait said: Welcome, God of heaven and earth. And he
saluted with the sign of Jehovih's name, and was answered in like
manner.

11\. Without more ceremony, he took off the triangle of the Gods and
placed it on God's neck, saying: In Jehovih's name, receive thou the
gift of the ancient Gods.

12\. Hardly had this been accomplished when the ship-star alighted in
the floor of the Congress, before the Council, and near the altar of
Jehovih; and the five millions of volunteers alighted, amidst the
applause of the many millions assembled.

13\. God, being reinstated, said: Let the marshals proclaim ten days of
recreation. For we shall account to our especial loves how we found
matters in Hautuon, and of the power of Jehovih manifested.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah69.md)
