[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah603)  [Next](oah605) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

1\. THE eye of man I made to obtain knowledge by light; but the ear of
man I made to obtain knowledge from darkness, and within darkness, saith
Jehovih.

2\. The power of touch I gave to man, whereby he might learn of things
their adaptability and compatibility and incompatibility with himself.

3\. These are the corporeal doorways I gave unto thee, O man, whereby
thou mightst receive knowledge from Me and My creations, consciously to
thyself.

4\. Through these, thou art constantly impregnated; through these, thy
soul accumulateth knowledge of My works.

5\. Whatsoever is charged upon these doorways of my soul, is
inspiration.

6\. When thou seest bread, thou art inspired to eat; when thou seest a
horse, thou art inspired to ride; when thou touchest a nettle, thou art
inspired with pain.

7\. Yet, in all cases, thou must have practice before thou canst
comprehend the inspiration that cometh to thee from these external
things.

8\. Man saith: To-day, I remember my friend whom I saw not for many a
year.

9\. Jehovih saith: I made thee as a storehouse, and as a book that was
written before.

10\. And I gave to thee power to re-read thy stores and thy book, within
thy soul.

11\. This was the accumulated inspiration which I had previously given
thee.

12\. When thou art fevered, or entranced, or in diverse action from thy
usual bent, thy soul turneth into these stores, and thy memory cometh
forth wonderfully.

13\. This is the manifestation of inspiration which I had previously
given thee.

14\. I made thee that thou shouldst receive inspiration, not only from
the world external to thyself, but inspiration from the members of thy
body.

15\. My impression upon thee is inspiration; but thou must realize My
inspiration, in order to know Me.

16\. An idiot holdeth fire in his hand, and it giveth him pain, but yet,
he knoweth not the cause, nor whence the origin of the pain.

17\. So, also, I come to thee, and give thee inspiration, but thou
discernest not Me.

18\. Another man discerneth My Presence, and My inspiration. He heareth
Me speak; he seeth My Person.

19\. Yet, I am with both alike.

20\. One man openeth his mouth to speak, and, behold My words come
forth.

21\. And yet another saith: No man know Jehovih; none have heard Him.

22\. One man is sensitive, as a plate for a picture, and he catcheth My
Light instantly, and knoweth it is from Me.

23\. Another one saith: A sudden thought struck me! But he discerneth
not whence it came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah605)
