[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah648)  [Next](oah650.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

GOD SHOWETH HOW MORTALS MAY ATTAIN INSPIRATION FROM JEHOVIH AND FROM THE
ANGELS OF THE SECOND RESURRECTION.

1\. WHOSO ruleth over his own earthly desires, passions, actions, words
and thoughts, being constantly watchful for the highest light and
greatest good, is on the right road.

2\. And if he persist in this till it hath become a constitutional
growth within him, then shall he hear the Voice.

3\. Who then can judge him, save they have also attained to the same
high estate? Is it wise for the unlearned to dispute with the learned;
or the unholy with the holy?

4\. Shall the drunken man, reeking with foul smell, sign the pledge to
drink no more, and straightway say: We temperance men!--and presume to
dwell with the pure?

5\. I say unto thee, till that man is purified and grown to be
constitutionally temperate he is not temperate.

6\. Consider then the seers and prophets (who hear the angels) whether
they have grown constitutionally to be one with Purity, Wisdom and
Goodness.

7\. For this is required of such as presume to hear me and my holy ones.
And having attained to this, who can judge them, save they have attained
unto the same?

8\. Shall a man inquire of the magician as to the inspiration of the
prophets of thy God? Or the angels of the first resurrection be
consulted as to their opinions of my revelations, and their words taken
for truth without substantiation?

9\. Let all things be proved, or supported by corresponding testimony
known to be true. As the holy man perceiveth how things should be in the
heavens above, so they are. The unholy man seeth heavenly things but
dimly; he bindeth himself in ancient revelations which have become
corrupted.

10\. Jehovih is as near this day as in time of the ancients; put thyself
in order, becoming one with Him, and no book so easily read as His
created universe.

11\. Inspiration cometh less by books, than by what Jehovih wrote--His
worlds. Read thou Him and His works. Frame thy speech and thy thoughts
for Him; He will answer thee in thine own behavior, and in the happiness
of thy soul.

12\. Great wisdom cannot be attained in a day; nor purity, and strength,
to overcome temptation, till the growth be from the foundation.

13\. The fool will say: The sacred books are no more than man of his own
knowledge might write; yet, he hath not imitated wisely the power of the
words of thy God.

14\. Let him do this well, and, behold, he will also declare my words
are from me. Yea, he will recognize them wherever found.

15\. It is the will and wish of thy God, that all men become
constitutionally capable of receiving and comprehending the highest
light, and that they shall no longer depend upon any priest, church,
oracle or holy book, or upon consulting the spirits.

16\. That their behavior may make the earth a place of peace, with long
life unto all people, for the glory of Jehovih.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah650.md)
