[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah617)  [Next](oah619) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVII

THE FALLEN SWORD'S DAY.

1\. AS Jehovih, through His God, delivered into freedom Guatama's
slaves, and, thus, to general slavery dealt the final blow, so Jehovih
blessed that day, and sanctified it.

2\. And He gave to man, as the master's sign in the lodge, A HAND
POINTING TOWARD A PEN, signifying, I HAVE PROVED THIS MIGHTIER THAN THE
SWORD.

3\. And Jehovih gave to the members in the lodge to answer in the sign,
CLASPED HANDS, AND LOOKING UPWARD, signifying, IN THY PRAISE, JEHOVIH!

4\. Jehovih said: Remember the day of proclamation of freedom, for it is
My day, which I bequeath unto you as a day of freedom in all righteous
jollification, which ye shall keep every year, and commemorate, to the
end of the world.

### Chapter XVIII

HOLY KOSMON DAY.

1\. BESIDE the above, Jehovih gave one more holy day, Kosmon Day, which
He also commanded to be kept in commemoration of another matter, which
Jehovih commanded to be secret with the Faithists for a certain period
<span id="page_804">p. 804</span> of time, the which time hath not
expired to this day. Therefore, the day of kosmon is still a secret with
the Faithists.

2\. And Jehovih said: That mortals and angels may live and labor in
concert, behold, I have given certain days, whereby large congregations
on earth may be met by My organic heavens, in re-union, mortals and
angels, for the happiness of both, and for the glory of My works.

3\. Now, behold also, as by My Presence I inspire thee, when thou
laborest with Me, and thou art doing righteously, and with purity and
love, so also is it with thee, in regard to My angels.

4\. When thou makest and keepest thy corporeal body pure and clean, My
angels, who are pure and clean, come to thee to aid thee, and to
enlighten thee.

5\. And when thou puttest away all unclean thoughts and all unselfish
desires, and seekest to obtain wisdom, and to learn how best thou canst
help thy fellow-man, behold, My angels of light and wisdom come to thee,
and, by virtue of their presence, which thou seest not, they inspire thy
soul in the light of thy Creator.

6\. Man hath said: I will not be a seer, or a prophet, nor a su'is, nor
sar'gis; verily, I will not have angels with me to teach me, or to give
me any light or knowledge under the sun.

7\. Whatever I can attain, it shall be mine own. Wiser is it for me to
obtain to know, and to do things of myself, than have angels come and
give to me, or manifest through me.

8\. Verily, I will not be used, by man nor angel, for it would be
prostituting my flesh and my spirit to others.

9\. Behold, my body was given to me for mine own use and profit, to
establish and develop mine own soul unto eternal happiness in
individuality.

10\. Alike unto all people is My Presence, saith Jehovih. I am unto the
just and the unjust; I am everywhere, both, in darkness and in light.

11\. Because thou art in darkness, thou beholdest not Me.

12\. Because thou art imperfect in flesh and spirit, thou deniest Me.

13\. Because thou art confounded with inharmony, thou believest not in
Me.

14\. He, who hath not an ear for music, discovereth not a tune; even as
he that is discordant denieth My Person.

15\. To the pure there is no selfishness, neither for earthly things,
nor for their own flesh and spirit.

16\. A pure man is as a clear glass; he can see out of himself, and, so,
perceive My angels and Me.

17\. Through the pure man, pure angels can see mortality as well as
spirituality. Their presence inspireth him to understand all things.

18\. As much with the man that is not a seer, or a su'is, are the
angels, as with those that are seer, or su'is, or sar'gis.

19\. Because thou seest not, nor hearest angels, only proveth thy
darkness, but proveth not the absence of angels.

20\. To the dark, come the dark; with the dark, abide the dark, both,
angels and mortals.

21\. More is the man of darkness ruled by angels, than is the man of
light.

22\. Behold, I created thee not to fill any place in all the world for
thine own self's sake.

23\. Neither gave I thy flesh nor thy spirit to be thine only.

24\. These, also, shalt thou relinquish, saying: To Thee, O Jehovih, I
give all; my flesh, my spirit, mind, and all my service; to be Thine
forever.

25\. Thou shalt say: Appropriate Thou me, soul and body, in whatsoever
way Thou canst, that I may do the most good unto others, mortals and
angels.

26\. Until thou attainest this, thou shalt not hear My Voice, nor see My
Hand.

27\. As I gave away Myself, and thus created all things, so shalt thou
follow in My footsteps, in order to become one with Me.

28\. Herein lieth the secret of wisdom, truth, love and power, time
without end.

END OF BOOK OF INSPIRATION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah619)
