[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah626)  [Next](oah628) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX

1\. TAE said: Behold, the Uzians have schools, and they teach their
young by and in books. But when their youth are thus educated, as to
their brains, their hands are useless for providing food and clothes and
habitations.

2\. Education, in regard to corporeal things, must embrace the
manipulation and handling of corporeal things for useful purposes. And,
foremost of all problems is: How to provide the necessities of life with
one's own hands, that he may not be rendered a dependent on others.

3\. This shall be one of the first problems ye shall make our infants
understand.

4\. Young children not only ask questions, but they desire
illustrations, with the privilege of trying to do something themselves.

5\. Their questions must be answered by their nurses and their teachers.

6\. It is not sufficient unto Jehovih's requirements of you, that ye put
off His children with elusive answers, or with incomprehensible
explanations.

7\. Education must be accompanied with practice. As, for example, ye
show the child certain seeds, explaining what will grow therefrom; ye
shall plant and illustrate. And when the vine hath come up out of the
ground, ye shall not only illustrate its corporeality, but shall display
the life therein as a manifestation of Jehovih's Presence.

8\. To simply teach the child the botany, without reference to the
spirituality that underlieth all living things, would have little effect
in turning the child's thoughts to its own life and growth in spirit.

9\. At an early age, these infants shall be thus put to work in
gratification of their own desires to do something; and their work shall
be educational, corporeally and spiritually.

10\. And when they are large enough to handle tools, they shall be
permitted to work at trades, or in art; and full and sufficient
explanations shall be given to all their questions.

11\. And this shall come to pass in Shalam; without tiresome study and
without tiresome labor, these infants, at fourteen years, shall be wiser
and better learned than Uzians at twenty.

12\. For they shall not be limited to one trade each, or one occupation
each; but, to a great extent, all of them shall know all trades and
occupations.

13\. For botany, they shall have a garden; and for astronomy, an
observatory; for chemistry, a laboratory; for clothing, a factory; for
horticulture and agriculture, they shall have orchards, fields and
gardens.

14\. Such, then, shall be the method of teaching our infants.

15\. Now, as to Jehovih and His creations, in magnitude and perfection,
they shall be ever kept before the child's mind, to exalt its gratitude
and adoration, and to make it rejoice in its own life.

16\. For there is not, in all the philosophies in all the world,
wherewith to restrain the private life and habits from secret vice, save
through belief in Jehovih's eye being ever upon us.

17\. Nevertheless, a child that is raised up without learning angel
communion is but half raised.

18\. By the actual presence of angels, and by children seeing them and
conversing with them, the proximity of heaven to earth becometh firmly
established in the child's mind, and it beholdeth the fitness of one
world to the other.

19\. For which education the infants shall, at an early age, be made
familiar with the unseen world, by training in the crescent.

20\. And their teachers shall try them to discover su'is and sar'gis in
them; and, finding these talents, shall cultivate them in righteousness
and wisdom for the glory of the Father.

21\. And it shall come to pass that many of these infants shall not only
see without their corporeal eyes, and hear without their corporeal ears,
but they will attain to adeptism.

22\. And the angels of heaven shall descend amongst us, appearing so as
to be seen, and talking with us so as to be heard.

<span id="page_816">p. 816</span>

23\. And, because of such exceeding great light amongst us, no one shall
practice deception; for the minds and souls of all shall become as an
open book.

24\. These are the promises Jehovih hath given us; by the signs of the
times they are proven probable. Through faith in Him we shall make these
things true.

25\. In faith He will bless you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](oah628)
