[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah622)  [Next](oah624) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

THE HOLY COVENANT.

1\. THEN Tae and his hosts went into the midst of the Place of the Holy
Covenant; and the hosts formed in a crescent, and Tae stood betwixt the
horns thereof.

2\. And, whilst thus standing, Tae, being moved by the Light of Jehovih
upon him, uttered the covenant, and his hosts, in concert, uttered the
words after him.

3\. And these words were called, THE HOLY COVENANT, even as they are to
this day, to wit:

4\. Thou, O Jehovih! As Thou hast declared Thyself in the Book of
Jehovih!

5\. To Thee I covenant myself, to be Thine forever! And to Thee only, O
Jehovih!

6\. And I abjure all Gods but Thee.

7\. And I abjure all Lords but Thee.

8\. And I abjure all Saviors but Thee.

9\. In this, Thy Place of the Holy Covenant, do I covenant myself unto
Thee, to be only Thine, and forever!

10\. My corporeal body, I dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy
service during all my life.

11\. Because Thou madest it out of Thine own material, behold, it is
Thine.

12\. The workmanship is Thine; the material is Thine also.

13\. I have no claim upon it; unto Thee, and for Thy service, do I
resign it forever.

14\. Into my charge Thou gavest it unto me, as the habitation of my
spirit.

15\. Because it is Thy gift, I will care for it, and keep it clean and
pure, before Thee, that it may be acceptable to Thee, and to the
presence of Thy holy angels.

16\. My spirit I also dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy
service, henceforth forever.

17\. My mind and soul, I dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy
service, henceforth forever.

18\. My whole self, whereof I am made, soul and body, dedicate and
covenant I unto Thee, to be in Thy service forever.

19\. Out of Thine own self madest Thou me, soul and body, and they are
Thine only, to be used by Thee forever.

20\. Appropriate Thou me, O Jehovih, my corporeal body, and my spirit,
my mind, my behavior and thoughts, to be of profit to Thee, for founding
Thy kingdom on earth.

21\. And I covenant unto Thee, Jehovih, I will search constantly into
mine own every act and deed and word and thought, to make myself true in
the practice of Thy highest Light upon me.

22\. That henceforth, forever, I will search to find the highest Light,
and I will practice the same toward all men, women and children.

23\. Unto them will I not only do as I would be done by, but more; I
will do for them, with all my wisdom and strength, all my life.

24\. I covenant unto Thee, Jehovih, that, since all things are Thine, I
will not own nor possess, exclusively unto myself, anything under the
sun, which may be entrusted to me, which any other person or persons may
covet or desire, or stand in need of.

25\. Neither more will I talk of myself, either in laudation of what I
am, nor of what I have done; but Thou shalt judge me, and hold me
accountable for shortness in word and behavior, wherein, by any means, I
may manifest self-esteem or covetousness for fame, or the applause of
men, even for any good I may have done unto others.

<span id="page_811">p. 811</span>

26\. Neither more will I censure, nor criticise, nor blame, any man, or
woman, nor any child over fourteen years of age, as an individual, in
all the world, for any shortness in word or deed they manifest.

27\. For they are Thine, Jehovih, and not mine, to be led or driven by
me.

28\. To all these Faithists, my brothers and sisters in Thy kingdom,
will I deal and think and behave, in affiliation, as gentle and truly as
were they my own blood and kin, brothers and sisters, or father and
mother.

29\. And over these babes, which Thou hast entrusted to me, will I be as
loving and true as were they mine own blood and kin, sons and daughters.

30\. According to Thy Light, which Thou mayst bestow upon me, will I
raise them up to know Thee, and to be a glory in Thy kingdom.

31\. First of my teaching unto them shall be, to make them know Thee,
and to remember that Thy eye is upon them, and Thy hand above them, to
bless them according to their wisdom, truth, love and purity.

32\. And I will teach them the way of the communion of Thy angels; to
develop them in su'is and sar'gis.

33\. Teaching them to live for the spirit within, rather than for
corpor.

34\. Teaching them by books and instruments.

35\. Teaching them useful trades and occupations.

36\. Teaching them music and worship.

37\. Teaching them dancing and gymnastics.

38\. And, in all things, developing in them all the talents Thou hast
created in them, that they may grow up to be an honor and a glory on the
earth, and to rejoice because Thou hast created them alive.

39\. And I will emancipate them from infancy at fourteen years of age;
and bestow upon them the rights of man and woman, in their thoughts,
words, deeds, choice and actions.

40\. Throwing upon them, at that age, their responsibility unto Thee,
for their thoughts, words, ideas, behavior, as fully as I claim the same
unto mine own self.

41\. And now, O Jehovih, that this, Thy kingdom on earth, may be known
and distinguished from the habitations of the Uzians, we make this our
solemn oath unto Thee:

42\. We will not, now, nor forever, make war, nor engage in war, nor
take any part in war, for any God, nor Lord, nor Savior, nor country,
nor king or other ruler on earth; nor will we aid nor abet war in any
way whatever.

43\. Neither will we now, nor forever, eat fish nor flesh of any
creature Thou didst create alive.

44\. And we swear unto Thee, Jehovih, in regard to these our babes,
which Thou hast given unto our keeping, to found Thy kingdom on earth,
we will raise them up to abjure war, like unto this our oath unto Thee,
and to practice not the carnivorous habit belonging to the Uzians.

45\. Neither will we use, nor permit to be used, in Shalam, any
intoxicating drink, nor weed, nor root, nor gum, nor any other drug, for
the contamination of human flesh by intoxication or for stimulation
unnaturally.

46\. Make us strong and wise, O Jehovih, in this our covenant and oath
unto Thee, for Thine are the honor and the glory of all things, time
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah624)
