[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah640)  [Next](oah642.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIII

1\. IN course of time, the first heirs of Shalam came to maturity and to
marriageable ages. And since they had been guarded as to diet, and as to
controlling their passions, they were unlike Uzians in their general
characteristics.

2\. Because they had never known to say: This is mine, and that is
thine, they were without selfishness or selfish desires; looking upon
all things as Jehovih's, and on themselves as laborers to render good
unto others.

3\. They said: We were created in order to help rescue the world from
darkness, and to rejoice in our own lives, because of such good as we
can do unto others.

4\. Behold, we were orphans and castaways; Jehovih wedded us to all the
world.

5\. Having, therefore, wisdom and purity within themselves, and, withal,
having sufficient association to choose from, they did choose and wed
for love's sake.

6\. Nor did any worldly ambition control their choice, or influence them
in hope of any gain as to their wedded partners.

7\. And it came to pass that the offspring begotten of these were indeed
a new race in the world, as to wisdom, love, purity and spirituality,
and new also as to beauty and shapeliness, the like of which had never
been before in all the world.

8\. And they were by birth so developed in su'is, that, when they were
grown a little, education came to them without books. To see and to
hear, either corporeally or spiritually, was all they required in order
to accomplish wisely all things required unto mortals.

9\. And, with them, the heavens were as an open book; the libraries of
the heavens as the sound of voices full of wisdom.

10\. And the angels of ancient and modern times came, and stood by them,
and walked with them, revealing the past and the future.

11\. And, now, the fame of Shalam and her people were spread abroad,
<span id="page_830">p. 830</span> and, lo and behold, colonies were
springing up in the east, west, north and south.

12\. Hundreds of forest places and unoccupied lands were purchased and
put under cultivation.

13\. The wisest and best people began to depart out of the cities of Uz.
Many of the Uzians, lawyers, preachers and priests and physicians, gave
up their callings. And they went forth, saying: Alas, what good have I
produced in the world? O Jehovih, teach Thou me the way to work in one
of Thy kingdoms.

14\. And some of the rich gathered up their means, calling: Come, O all
ye poor and helpless! Behold, I have purchased land; come hither, and
build a colony unto Jehovih.

15\. And judges and governors gave up their callings also, and went and
joined the Faithists, founding and practicing Jehovih's kingdom on
earth.

16\. And kings and queens and emperors deserted their thrones, and went
and dwelt with the poor.

17\. So, colonies of Faithists in Jehovih spread in every direction,
becoming the chief foundation of the state and of the world.

18\. And, yet, none of these colonies were bound by written laws, nor
had any of them leaders or masters, nor any government, save the Light
of Jehovih.

19\. Nor was one colony bound by the customs and commands of another
colony; but all of them lived by the highest Light that came to them.

20\. Nor owned any man, woman or child anything more than the clothes he
or she wore; but all things were Jehovih's, in care of the keeping of
the colony.

21\. Nor was there buying or selling between the colonies; but they
exchanged with one another according to production, and without any
regard to value.

22\. And whosoever came and joined a colony, bringing gold or silver or
valuable goods of any kind, donated them to Jehovih, and not to the
colony, to be distributed according to the light thereof for the
Father's kingdoms.

23\. Neither labored any one for the colony, but for Jehovih; nor did
any colony hire any man nor woman nor child to work for them.

24\. Such, then, was Shalam and her example before the world, of the
Father's kingdom on earth.

END OF THE HISTORY OF SHALAM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](oah642.md)
