[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah613)  [Next](oah615) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

1\. MAN saith: If I can not add one jot or tittle to my corporeal body,
and it is all built up by Jehovih, then, indeed, it is His.

2\. Neither am I accountable whether it be well made, or well preserved.

3\. And if I can not make one new thought nor idea, then, indeed are all
my thoughts and ideas Jehovih's, given to me by inspiration, either
directly by Jehovih, or by His creations.

4\. Neither, then, am I accountable for my thoughts, nor ideas, nor
behavior, whether they be good or bad. Verily, then, I am not
responsible for anything, neither what I am, nor what I do, nor for what
becometh of me. I am but an automation; I, myself, am nothing.

5\. Jehovih saith: Because I gave thee liberty, thou art responsible for
all thou art, and for all thou makest thyself, and for all that shall
come to thee, and for thy peace and happiness, both in this world and
the next.

6\. Liberty I gave thee as to what thou shouldst eat, and shouldst wear
to cover thyself, and where thou shouldst abide.

7\. I gave thee liberty to build thy house in thine own way; but,
behold, such liberty I gave not to the bird, as to her nest, nor to the
beaver, nor to the ant, nor to any other living creature.

8\. Liberty I gave thee as to whether thou should eat herbs or flesh.
But such liberty I gave not to any other living creature.

9\. To the sheep and the horse I said: Eat ye of herbs; to the tiger and
lion: Eat ye of flesh.

10\. To thee I gave liberty to make thyself carnivorous, or herbivorous,
or omnivorous.

11\. Whatsoever thou didst put in thy mouth, and it united with thy
blood, and entered thy body, behold, it was by My labor and by My power
it was accomplished.

12\. Verily was I thy workman.

13\. All that thou didst in the matter was to choose. Thou wert, in that
respect, the master, and I thy servant. And, behold, I made not the
servant responsible for the master's behavior.

14\. Because thou madst thyself carnivorous, the fault is thine own. I
placed before thee the herbivorous animals and the carnivorous animals;
and I gave thee eyes to look upon them as to their behavior, whether
ferocious and destructive, or peaceful, patient and docile.

15\. And I spake unto thy soul, saying: Look, judge for thyself as to
what thou shalt eat; behold the order of My creations and the result
upon all My living creatures.

16\. Hence, thou art accountable unto <span id="page_802">p. 802</span>
thyself, and responsible unto all the world for having made thy
corporeal body as thou hast.

17\. Even so, in regard to thy spirit, thy soul, thy mind, thy ideas and
thy thoughts, I gave thee liberty in the same way.

18\. I gave thee liberty to receive thy inspiration from drunkards and
harlots and fighters; or from men of wisdom, or the innocence of
childhood, or the virtue of a virgin.

19\. Or from a city of corruption, or from the country, with pure air
and trees, and flowers and mountains and valleys.

20\. And I spake unto thy soul, saying: Choose thou what thou wilt to be
the inspiration of thy mind and spirit and soul; behold, I, thy Creator,
am thy servant to impregnate thee with thoughts and ideas and
disposition. All thou hast to do, is to choose.

21\. Yea, I said: I will even take thee to whichever place and condition
thou mayst choose.

22\. And, now, because I gave unto thee this extreme liberty, and thou
hast chosen, behold, thou art accountable unto thyself for thine every
thought and idea; and for thy spirit and soul, and in thy behavior thou
art responsible to all the world.

23\. With liberty I bestowed responsibility also.

24\. I am the Power, the Light and the Life.

25\. In one thing, chiefly, thou art not an automaton, and that is thine
own entity, thine own self, thine own whatsoever thou art.

26\. Thyself I gave to thyself, and even at the zero of thy entity, I
said unto thee: Go thou, make thyself. All other animals I created
perfectly with Mine own hands, but to thee I gave liberty to make
thyself, even as thou hast. Yea, even in this, I said: Choose thou, and
I will do for thee thy labor Myself.

27\. So that, choice and liberty were the sum total which I gave to
thee.

28\. Now, therefore, O man, as I gave choice and liberty unto thee, so
shalt thou give the same unto thy neighbor and associate.

29\. Without these, there is no responsibility; with these, all
responsibility.

30\. Choose thou thine own food, and thine own raiment and thine house;
and choose thou the place, and provide thou the way for whatever
inspiration thou mayst, still thou shalt be responsible in all; and the
result shall be to thee according to thine own choice, whether thou fawn
upon satan, or emulate thy Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah615)
