[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah632)  [Next](oah634.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XV

1\. AT six years of age, the children were entered in the school of
oratory, and also given the signs and graces of unspoken words by means
of gestures. And, now, they began to take part in theatricals and
operatic performances.

2\. For such purposes these two houses were provided with angel chambers
adjoining the stages, and during the performances the angels came in
sar'gis, also taking parts in the operas, ascending and descending
before the audiences, singing and speaking audibly, so all could hear
them.

3\. Many of the plays and operas were composed and prepared by the
angels, who also gave directions how to put the pieces on the stage. And
in some of the pieces there were, of the children and angels combined,
more than three hundred performers on the stage at one time.

4\. Instead of the crude and loud-sounding horns and hideous
instruments, as used by the Uzians for their operas, the opera here was
provided with an organ of full power, and with instruments of delicacy
and sweetness, so that the most refined ear should not be shocked or
pained by any crude or disgusting noise, so common in the Uzian
orchestras.

5\. Now, as to the plays, whether in the opera or in the theatre, they
varied on different nights, as to being adapted to young children, or to
older ones, or to adults. But, for the most part, the plays and operas
pertained to illustrations embracing a life on earth and an entrance
into the lower heavens, showing also the part in real life which angels
of purity take in guarding and advising mortals, by inspiration, to
righteousness, and also showing how drujas inspire mortals to sensual
things and to wickedness.

6\. So, that the plays required the presence of angels, to illustrate
their <span id="page_822">p. 822</span> parts in the affairs of mortal;
and every play was made a lesson and sermon on life, so simple a child
could understand them and apply the instructions to its own soul.

7\. Herein, then, was the difference betwixt the plays and operas in
Shalam, as compared with plays and operas with the Uzians: With the
latter, they apply to the lives and adventures of mortals, and to
histories of mortal affairs and occurrences wrapt up in inexplicable
causes; but the plays and operas with the Faithists, in Shalam,
illustrated the same things by showing the causes that govern and
control mortals by spirit-presence.

8\. So that (for example), were it necessary to exhibit a drunkard on
the stage, it was also shown how the drunkard was surrounded by dark
spirits (drujas), who inspired him to his course; and also was exhibited
the struggle of his guardian angels to save him, showing thus how the
choice lay with himself as to who he would serve, satan or Jehovih.

9\. In the simple plays, where the children took their parts at first,
they were taught without books, by repeating after their teachers.

10\. And here was a new school, not known amongst the Uzians; which was,
to learn by hearing words spoken, to repeat them. First, they practiced
with half a dozen words, then with a dozen words, then with two dozen,
then four dozen, and so on. And it came to pass, in a little while, many
of the children could repeat whole chapters, by simply hearing the words
spoken once.

11\. Tae said: Here, first of all, began to manifest that clearness of
mind resulting from an herbivorous diet which was and is wholly unknown
amongst the Uzians.

12\. Tae said: And Jehovih further blessed our children in su'is, so
that many of them who had not yet been taught to read, could lay a hand
on a printed page, and repeat it word for word.

13\. Tae said: And their little playmates, hearing them, could repeat
the same things. And some of them would hold a sealed letter in their
hands, and read it word by word; so that dissemblance and secrecy were
become as a farce before Jehovih's children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](oah634.md)
