[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah644)  [Next](oah646.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_834">p. 834</span>

# Book of Discipline

### Chapter I

GOD REVEALETH WHO HE IS.

1\. THIS is the word from the organic heaven:

2\. Hear the words of thy God, O man -- I am thy brother, risen from
mortality to a holy place in heaven; profit thou in my wisdom, and be
admonished by my love.

3\. For as I am thy elder brother, so shall it be with thee, to rise
also in time to come, and look back to mortals and call them to the
exalted heavens of the Almighty.

4\. To Jehovih all adoration and glory, forever, Amen!

5\. By and through Him is all life and motion, and power, things seen
and unseen.

6\. Nor is there an angel in heaven so high, or sufficiently wise to
comprehend Jehovih in His entirety, nor to see Him as thou seest thy
fellow man.

7\. For He is within all; beyond and over all:

8\. Being Ever Present in all places:

9\. Doing by Virtue of His presence:

10\. Quickening all the living:

11\. Adorable above all things:

12\. Even as the sun is to the light of day, so is Jehovih to the
understanding of all the living:

13\. Whereon to contemplate is the road of everlasting life, rising in
wisdom, love and power forever.

14\. Hear thy God, O man, and distinguish then that the twain, God and
Jehovih, are not the same one; nor more is thy God than what thou shalt
be in time to come.

15\. First, mortality, then death, which is the first resurrection; such
are the spirits of the dead-- angels dwelling with mortals upon the
earth, where they abide, some for a few years, some for a hundred and
some for a thousand or more years.

16\. Second, angel organization in heaven, and their abandonment of
mortals, which is the second resurrection.

17\. As a kingdom on earth hath a king, and the king is nevertheless a
mortal, so in like manner is the heavenly place of thy God a kingdom of
angels, and the chief over them is God, an angel also.

18\. Howbeit the kingdom of thy God embraceth all the heavens of the
earth. So is it also with all the corporeal worlds and their
atmospherean heavens--a God and organic heavens belonging to each and
all of them.

19\. Nor is this all; for there is a third resurrection, in which the
angels rise still higher in wisdom, love and power, and are sent by thy
God into etherea, mid-way between the planets--the highest of all
heavens--over which there are Chiefs, who are also Gods and Goddesses of
still more comprehensive attributes.

20\. Therefore I am as any other spirit of the dead, a one time man upon
the earth, even as thou art in this day; but one within the organic
heavens of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah646.md)
