[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah637)  [Next](oah639) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XX

1\. AND there volunteered, and went out of Shalam, two hundred adults
and more than three hundred children, of whom more than a hundred were
infants.

2\. And they went into another part of the country, and came to a place
called Busiris, which was unoccupied. And they purchased the country
there, and settled, and called the colony Illaem, signifying, healing
waters, for there were mineral springs on the place, said to contain
great virtue in healing the sick.

3\. Now, in a similar manner to Shalam, so did Illaem, building and
improving the place. But the people of Illaem had less hardship, for
they drew supplies and assistance from Shalam.

4\. Nevertheless, they had also many hardships and trials, for several
years.

5\. And Jehovih prospered Illaem also; so that it came to pass, that it
was established in great perfection.

6\. As to Shalam, after the first swarm departed, the inhabitants sent
back to Uz, of their women, whose allotment it was, and collected yet
more infants, castaways and orphans, and brought them to Shalam, and
raised them in the same way.

7\. From this time onward, every year, a goodly number reached the age
of fourteen, and they were also liberated from infancy, and admitted as
brothers and sisters. And, nearly every year, a swarm departed out of
Shalam.

8\. In addition to the infants admitted into Shalam, there were also
admitted many adults. But these were examined after the same manner as
were those at the first founding of Shalam.

9\. And none were accepted save those, who were Faithists in the All
Person, Jehovih, and who were willing to work.

10\. But there came many of the poor of Uz, seeking membership for
charity's sake.

11\. But none of them were admitted. Jehovih had said: The laborers, in
establishing My kingdom, shall not do <span id="page_828">p. 828</span>
for charity's sake. Their labor shall be to provide a way to prevent
poverty, not to alleviate it. Behold, I will have a new race of people
in the world, and they shall not waste their substance on those that
deny Me.

12\. But the poor were fed and sent on their way.

13\. Now, it happened that many lazy people from Uz, having heard of the
beauty and peace in Shalam, sought also to become members, being willing
to make any covenant and to swear any oath, for sake of living in
idleness.

14\. But the Light of Jehovih had also made this matter clear; so that
they were suffered to remain a while in Shalam at work, and to attend
the schools of discipline, that they might be judged; and, if found
worthy, they were admitted, but if unworthy, they were rejected.

15\. But it came to pass, that many who came with no thought of
self-resurrection, but came for a home, to be cared for by others, were
entirely changed in their habits in a few months, being converted in
truth from worthlessness to industry and self-improvement.

16\. And many of these became zealous in purification and in good works,
even above the average.

17\. But nearly all who applied for admittance were poor, or
misfortunate, or discouraged with life, and with the ways of the world
in particular.

18\. Neither came many who were rich; hence the saying, the difficulty
for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.

19\. For, having corporeal comforts, they took little concern as to the
spirit, and especially as to affiliation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](oah639)
