[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah624)  [Next](oah626.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

FOUNDING THE GROUPS.

1\. THE Light of Jehovih being upon Tae, he said: Let the examples of Uz
be not lost upon you. But where ye have learned, and what ye have
acquired, these shall ye appropriate wisely in Shalam.

2\. For which purpose, it is wise that we appoint our groups as now
required, to be added unto afterward, when more is required.

3\. How say ye, then, shall we appoint groups this day?

4\. Thereupon, different persons spake, and the sum of their wisdom was
that there should be:

5\. A group of architects;

6\. A group of clothiers;

7\. A group of dieticians;

8\. A group of engineers;

9\. A group of manufacturers;

10\. A group of horticulturists;

11\. A group of agriculturists;

12\. A group of botanists;

13\. A group of nurses;

14\. A group of physicians;

15\. A group of artists (sculpture, painting and gardening);

16\. A group of musicians.

17\. And these were all the groups required at that time. Accordingly,
Tae proclaimed them, and called for volunteers for each and every group.

18\. And these were filled, though, because there were but fifty-two
members, some of them took membership in two or three groups, so that
all were filled.

19\. The Light still being upon Tae, he said: Since ye have made the
groups, let each group now select a chief.

20\. Now, many of them spake up, saying: I neither wish fame for being
chief, nor do I wish the responsibility of the position.

21\. Tae said: Suffer me, then, to declare the Light that is upon me;
which is, that ye are here to fulfill whatsoever Jehovih may put upon
you, with all your wisdom and strength.

22\. Whether ye be made chiefs or not made chiefs, it is Jehovih's work
ye are here to fulfill, without any regard as to your personal selves.

23\. To covet chieftainship would be selfish; to refuse chieftainship
would be selfish.

24\. We can not found the Father's kingdom with any other members than
such as say, with all their hearts, and mind and soul: Whatsoever Thou
puttest upon me, O Jehovih, that will I do with all my wisdom and
strength.

25\. To have faith in this way, is to have faith with practice; such a
one is a Faithist in fact.

26\. Now, those who had spoken before relented, saying:   O Jehovih,
what have I done? Behold, I tript myself up even in the start. Make this
a rebuke to me, O Father, and heap Thou upon me whatsoever Thou wilt.

27\. Tae said: What any one can do, it is well done; wherein he faileth,
because of incapacity, behold, it is not his fault, but his misfortune.

28\. So, it came to pass, chiefs were selected for every group, men and
women.

29\. And Tae was made C'chief. And so, Tae delivered to each of the
chiefs a synopsis of his duties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah626.md)
