[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah638)  [Next](oah640) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXI

OF THE VOICE OF JEHOVIH.

1\. THIS is the sermon of the Voice, as delivered in Shalam to such as
were admitted on trial, to wit:

2\. My Voice is with all men, saith Jehovih.

3\. Whoso is admonished against wrong-doing hath heard Me. By that shall
he know My Presence.

4 . The man of Uz crieth out in mockery: Who hath heard Jehovih? Do the
Faithists say, they have heard the Creator's voice? How can empty space
speak?

5\. But I am sufficient unto all My creations. The ant heareth Me, and
the bee, the bird and the spider and all manner of living things which I
created.

6\. How think ye they hear Me, learning to do My will? Go I to them with
lips and tongue, or with a trumpet?

7\. I am Spirit; I am the Soul of things. By way of the soul is My Voice
unto every living creature that I created.

8\. But man locketh up his soul, and will not hear Me.

9\. He heedeth that which cometh upon his corporeal senses. And this
darkness groweth upon him, generation after generation.

10\. Then he crieth out: Where is Jehovih? Who hath heard Him? Perhaps
the ancients; but none in this day.

11\. Jehovih saith: I am as one on the top of a mountain, calling to all
people to come up to Me. But they hearken to darkness at the foot of the
mountain, calling them down in corpor.

12\. Now, behold, whatsoever thou hearest, or seest or readest or any
indulgence that riseth thee upward, the same is My Voice unto thee.

13\. But, whatsoever thou hearest, or seest or readest that casteth thee
downward, is the voice of darkness.

14\. Whoso studieth to know the right, shall hear Me; whoso striveth to
be all truth, to himself and to others, already heareth My Voice.

15\. Whoso indulgeth in anger, or vengeance, or in wrong-doing, casteth
a veil up betwixt Me and himself; he shutteth out My Voice.

16\. It is a talent to hear Me; I bestowed it upon all the living; it is
seated in the soul.

17\. By cultivation, it groweth; yea, it becometh mighty above all other
talents.

18\. By its culture, man attaineth to all possibilities, for so I
created him.

19\. When My Voice is weak, because of the darkness of man, he calleth
Me conscience, or setteth Me aside as a faint impression.

20\. But, with culture, behold, My Voice cometh to man with words and
with power.

21\. And he knoweth Me, and is mighty in good works and wisdom.

22\. And he becometh a proof before the world, that My Voice is with
him.

23\. Jehovih saith: Whoso hath not heard Me, is in darkness indeed. He
hath not yet turned his thoughts inward to purify himself and seek
wisdom.

24\. Whoso hath heard Me, knoweth it, and all the world can not convince
him to the contrary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](oah640)
