[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah69)  [Next](oah71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

1\. ALL things prospered in heaven for many years, nor were there great
wars on earth, nor famines, nor epidemics. And the Lords of the earth
had sufficient loo'is for all the Faithists, so as to control I'hin
marriages to bring forth sons and daughters who would rejoice in heaven.

2\. And as fast as they died on the earth, these angels were carried to
heavenly places suited to them, where they were handed into the care of
asaphs and entered as es'yans. But the Lords appointed no loo'is over
the barbarians; and only commanded the ashars to watch for their spirits
in the hour of death, and, if possible, to bring them to the organic
places of God in Hored. And mostly they were so brought. This continued
for many years; but in course of time the familiar spirits aroused up
the barbarians, and they began to have dreams and see visions, for their
familiars talked to them during sleep. And when this became common,
Jehovih said:

3\. Behold, the time is come to appoint loo'is to abide with the
barbarians. For herein will I reveal a great secret, which is that My
chosen on earth cannot subdue it; for they are a harmless and
defenseless people. Therefore, have I created the barbarian wisely; for
he shall drive away and destroy all evil beasts and serpents; and the
forests shall fall down before him.

4\. For this purpose the loo'is shall select marriages with the view of
raising up great kings and queens. But since, in the olden time, the
kings depended on the prophets of God for counsel, and thus were advised
against killing anything I had created alive, they quarreled; so in this
time of the new heaven ye shall permit the kings and queens to consult
the spirits of the dead with the talents I have given them.

5\. This was done also; and the barbarians were attended by familiar
spirits, many of whom took upon themselves any name pleasant to the ear,
some of them calling themselves God or Lord, or after the name of some
great king of the olden time. And these familiars, being stupid,
supposed themselves to be such persons.

6\. The result of their stupid impressions was to inspire the barbarians
to believe they were attended by Gods or Lords, or by the spirits of
kings or queens; and so they held up their heads and began to think. For
as it had been said by the Gods of ancient times: Some are led by
flattery, some by self-conceit, some by duty, some by love of
righteousness; but there are others who can be led to self-improvement
by persuading them they are chosen especially by some God or Lord, or
the spirit of a renowned king or queen, to work wonders.

7\. God said: There was a certain sick man who could not be cured by the
physicians; so there came a foolish woman, seeing visions, and said to
the sick man: To-morrow thou shalt be healed. God hath been trying thee;
but thou hast proven thyself in soul, and thy God will withdraw the
spell of <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> thy infirmity; behold, thy God
standeth by thee.

8\. Now on the following day the sick man put forth his own spirit and
rose up and was well; wherefore, it hath been adjudged even deceit may
accomplish what truth could not. Suffer then the familiars to lead the
barbarians on for a season, but be ye watchful at the proper time to
appoint new spirits to be with them.

9\. God said: Instruct the Lords that the time is now come to reveal to
mortals, especially to the I'hins, the seven tetracts; for, as the
ashars are withdrawn a pace, so shall mortals advance a pace.

10\. Which is to say: These are the inheritances of all men born on the
earth: ANASH, which is persistent stubbornness, by word or thought;
ZIMMAH, wicked device; RA, delight in being bad; BELYYAAL,
worthlessness; AVEN, vanity and self-conceit; DIBBAH, slander and
reporting of evils; and SA'TAN, to be a leader, and especially to the
delight of the other six entities.

11\. These are the members of the Beast <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14) of all men and women under the sun; nor
is any one without them in some manner or degree. Go ye, therefore, to
the Lords and say to them: Jehovih hath set the beginning of the
resurrection through Aph, His Son, Chief of the arc of Noe, to lay the
tetracts on the shoulders of mortals.

12\. The marshals of the Council provided messengers who were at once
sent down to the different divisions of the earth; for the tetracts were
some of the words selected in heaven to be given as everlasting names,
whereby, in after ages, the tribes of Faithists might be discovered; and
they were given alike to the Faithists of Guatama, Jaffeth, Shem and
Ham, who were the sons of the arc of Aph preserved on the earth in that
day. For these words were provided in the Hebraic, Vedic and Algonquin
languages, to be synonymous, till the coming of the kosmon era.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[91:\*](oah70.htm#fr_14) Person-self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah71)
