[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah77)  [Next](oah79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97a">p. 97a</span>

## Book of Sue, Son of Jehovih

BEING THE SECOND CYCLE AFTER THE FLOOD.

### Chapter I

1\. JEHOVIH spake in the gardens of Atahavia, precinct of Sue, Orian
Chief, in the etherean firmament, saying: Sue, My son, what of the red
star, the far-off earth? Behold, her harvests are blighted; she is
become barren in imparting immortal souls to My unending realms.

2\. Sue heard the voice, and he said: In Thy name, O Jehovih, will I
summon my Gods of Hoit and Izaracha.

3\. Swift messengers departed; and Sue, quick-perceiving God of two
worlds in the etherean Seamar, foresaw the importance of the coming red
star. He said: This, with my Gods of Hoit and Izaracha, who will come in
swift speed, shall be the second deliverance.

4\. Then came Le Wing, God of Hoit; and presently, Sivian, Goddess of
Izaracha, and they stood before Jehovih's throne. Sue said:

5\. Jehovih hath spoken. Behold, the red star bringeth forth nor sons
nor daughters more to Jehovih's realms. She is weak, unstrung, and out
of tune, and cometh this way. And I said:

6\. In Thy power and wisdom, O Jehovih, will I visit the red star! Six
years I will stand on her soil, and course her heaven; and such potency
give to her confused Gods and Lords as will make a thousand millions
sing for joy. To accompany me, I have called you. Behold, I have charts
and maps of her heaven and her corporeal parts; and a history of her, as
yet, young adventures in the field of worlds.

<span id="page_98a">p. 98a</span>

7\. Then spake Le Wing and Sivian, saying: To do Jehovih's will and
thine, behold, we are come to thee. Give us to fulfill whatsoever thou
wilt.

8\. To the swift messengers Sue said: Ye have heard; go proclaim
throughout my etherean worlds my will; and summon up from Ithyivius a
hundred million skilled volunteers. When the red star shall cross the
wing of Izaracha, we will go forth in power, and land on her troubled
parts in a sea of golden light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah79.md)
