[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah87)  [Next](oah89) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110a">p. 110a</span>

# Book of Apollo, Son of Jehovih

BEING THE HEAVENLY ADMINISTRATION OF APOLLO, AN ETHEREAN GOD.

### Chapter I

1\. APOLLO, Son of Jehovih, resident of Pti'mus, in etherea, and God of
Suf'ad and Don'ga and Tah, in the South Province of Buru, Orian Chief,
controller of vortices, said:

2\. I, Apollo, once a mortal, proclaim: First, wisdom, peace and
patience unto all men, and comprehensive judgment whereof I speak;
second, to perceive the reason of things, as to what seemeth to have
been, and of what cometh after.

3\. For the Great Spirit is all Harmony and Perfection, abounding in
time and in worlds to accomplish all possible imaginings; wherefore, be
ye magnified in conception, not judging by the little understanding of
mortals.

4\. So that he that asserteth harmony being more to the order of Jehovih
than that which is ill-formed or out of time, hath little reason to
prove his assertion before a wise man. As one may assert that ripe fruit
is nearer perfection than that which is green, which assertion is
self-evident without proof, so, in the understanding of Gods in the
management of worlds, are things past and present, not things past and
present in fact, but more like the immature and the mature.

5\. Since, then, man perceiveth that words, at best, are but slow and
coarse representations of the soul's conception of things, how much
farther distant lieth a God's wisdom beyond the reach of mortal
understanding! Remember, O man, that couldst thou in <span
id="page_111a">p. 111a</span> a moment of time recollect all thou hadst
ever learned thou wouldst be wise indeed. Wert thou in tune with
thyself, such would be thy wisdom. To advance in such direction, whereby
man becometh attuned, first with himself, then with his immediate
surroundings, then with the magnitude of worlds, and then with Jehovih,
so that he moveth, acteth, and comprehendeth harmoniously, is to become
one with the Father.

6\. Which condition awaiteth all men, and is called in high heaven,
Nirvana, because, to him that hath attained it, things past and things
to come are as an open book. He can look back to his own beginning in
the world, and even beyond, and whithersoever he directeth his eye, he
can see and hear even as if the matter now were.

7\. Marvel not, O man, that the Gods reveal the words and signs of
things long since perished corporeally; the proofs he could give, thou
couldst not understand, for the basis of spiritual entity lieth not
within the measure of the corporeal senses. Nevertheless, Jehovih hath
given thee comparisons; as a portrait of a man showeth his looks even
after his corporeal body hath perished; and yet, the picture is but a
representative. To the spirit, a corporeal body is but a representative,
being a manifested production of a spirit.

8\. As out of corporeal things a new thing is produced and born into the
world, so out of Jehovih is born the spirit of man; neither leadeth the
corporeal the spirit, nor the spirit the corporeal; but Jehovih doeth
all. Think not, then, that when the corporeal body is dead and moldereth
back to original elements, that in like manner the spirit of man will
resolve itself back into Jehovih, for spirit is not bound by similar
rules. As the corporeal body groweth by aggregating to itself, so not so
groweth the spirit of man, but by the opposite, which is giving away.

9\. Remember, O man, the more thou puttest forth thy soul to give light
and wisdom to others, the more thou receivest; wherein thou shalt
comprehend in the reason of things everlasting life to the spirit of
man. So also, to him that desireth to comprehend Jehovih, let him
describe the All Highest constantly. To him that desireth to comprehend
the etherean worlds, the homes of spirits long risen in Nirvana, let him
describe them. Fear not, O man, that thou shalt err; all the imagery
thou canst devise is surpassed millions of times in the magnitude of the
Father's kingdoms. <span id="page_112a">p. 112a</span> Till thou canst
shoot an arrow without striking the air, fear not for thy weak thoughts
shooting amiss in Jehovih's worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah89)
