[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah82)  [Next](oah84.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. SO great were the words and music of the ceremonies that the people
were entranced beyond measure; the old and divided kingdoms, which were
without unity and discipline, were now replaced by extreme sanctity and
decorum.

2\. Sue said: Hear me, O God, I will counsel thee further: Know, then,
that the false Gods and false Lords have gone off to build up kingdoms
of their own, nor know they what hath happened in Hored. Suffer them to
proceed until they have purified the corporeans from familiars and
fetals; but when they have finished, call thou another festival of all
these people, and also send word to the false Gods and false Lords who
deny Jehovih, the All Person, and they will come, bringing their slaves,
having themselves adorned in extravagant raiment and jewelry. For they
will expect, by their pageantry, to triumph over all other Gods and men,
hoping to carry back with them millions of subjects.

3\. God said: I perceive, O Sue, Son of Jehovih. So, God did as
commanded, and sure enough, in course of time, the false Gods and false
Lords stript the barbarians of the earth of their familiars and fetals,
making slaves of such spirits in heaven. And it came to pass that God
gave another festival, and it was greater than the first, and there were
present upward of three thousand million angels, who had become enlisted
in righteous works.

4\. This was the beginning of the third year of Sue; and his wisdom and
power were now manifested all around the world, on earth and in heaven.

5\. And this is what happened in reference to the false Gods and false
Lords, who came to the festival, equipped in chariots and ships, and
with banners and flags, and crowns and diadems, and such wonderful
extravagancies, the like of which had not been in heaven since the
flood. And each and every false God and false Lord endeavored to outdo
the others in show and parade.

6\. As might be expected, the first day of the festival neither won
their applause nor censure. The second day they ceased to attract
attention; for the thrift and purity and wisdom manifested in the
countless millions of the second resurrection caused even children to
receive more praise than the Gods and Lords with all their glitter and
show.

7\. On the third day one-half of the false Gods and false Lords cast
aside their adornments and appeared in plain white, pleading to be
initiated into the mysteries of the second resurrection. And on the day
following, the rest of them came also, seeking like admission.

8\. Whereupon the Light of Jehovih spake through God on the throne,
saying:

9\. Bethink ye, O ye Gods and Lords! What are ye doing? But as yesterday
ye asked for kingdoms, desiring to be leaders and great workers, over
and above your fellows.

10\. And ye obtained your desires, becoming Gods and Lords over
millions. And these became your dutiful subjects, and ye adorned your
throne and your persons in great splendor.

11\. Behold I gave a festival, and ye came as living witnesses of what
self-made Gods and Lords could accomplish. And your dutiful subjects
came with you to attest their loyalty and good faith in your wisdom and
power.

12\. Now have ye cast aside your crowns and high estate, praying to
become workers amongst the host of men and women! Are ye not mad? And
are ye not making yourselves the destroyers of your own subjects? For,
behold, because of your abjuration of self-pomp and self-glory, all your
subjects are cast aside in ignorance and misery.

13\. With one voice the self-Gods and self-Lords answered, saying: Alas,
O God! What shall we do? Our crowns we can give away; our raiment and
jewels, and our thrones and kingdoms. But, O God, we cannot give away
our <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> subjects; they will not go. We
have bound them to us; and we are bound to them because we accepted
them. What shall we do, O God? The burden is more than we can bear!

14\. God said: Be not disconsolate, O Gods and Lords! Ye have done a
great work. Ye have rescued millions and millions of familiars and
fetals. And even before ye applied for the resurrection, behold, most of
your subjects had already deserted you!

15\. Hear the judgment of your Creator, which is that when all your
subjects and fetals are risen in wisdom and virtue and good works, so as
to take the second resurrection, even on that same day shall ye be
promoted. For only until then can ye have freedom of soul.

16\. The voice ceased, and the self-Gods and self-Lords answered: Thou
art just, O Jehovih. We will go to work amongst our poor and ignorant
subjects, and make them comprehend Thy wisdom, power and justice.

17\. For ten days the festival lasted, and then it ended. Thus were
first established rites and ceremonies in the lower heaven as a power to
work wisdom and virtue. And from that time ever after, music and
marching and dancing were included in all ceremonies by the Gods and
Lords of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah84.md)
