[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah95)  [Next](oah97.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX

1\. WHEN Apollo, Jehovih's Son, had finished his labor, the dawn of dan,
God foresaw that his own resurrection, and his people with him, had
come. So he sent his proper officers to the libraries of atmospherea, to
learn who of all the etherean hosts should be selected to remain as God,
and who as Lords, for the next four hundred years.

2\. In twenty days the examiners returned and came before the throne of
God, and the Council of Gau. Za'dukawaski, chief speaker, said: By the
grace of Jehovih, Creator, we stand before thee, God of heaven and
earth. We find, by the ancient precepts, adjudged wise in the foundation
of atmospherea, one Gur, highest and most proficient of all the hosts of
heaven, to be anointed God for the next four hundred years.

3\. God said: I remember Gur, from Magel, in Sooftus, in etherea, God of
Ra'yatuf and a'ji, seventy-two. Let the marshals go to him and acquaint
him with Jehovih's decrees, in the name of God. And they shall provide
suitable conveyance for Gur to come to Gau, according to his rate.

4\. So the marshals, ten thousand in number, besides ten thousand
musicians, went and brought Gur before the throne of God, coming in an
otevan, prepared for the purpose, and adorned with one thousand pillars
of light.

5\. God said: I salute thee, O Gur, in the name of Jehovih, Creator.
Behold Apollo!

6\. Apollo stretched forth his hand, and Gur came and shook hands with
him, standing by the throne. Gur said: That I have lived to see this
day, O Jehovih, I am blessed indeed! Thy will, O God, and Jehovih's, be
done!

7\. God said: Behold, the dawn of dan is within thirty days to end, and
all who choose, and are prepared for the third resurrection, shall be
taken up to etherea. Besides thyself, O Gur, there are two hundred
thousand ethereans who have volunteered to remain another four hundred
years in these atmospherean heavens, and on the earth. From them thou
shalt select one thousand Lords, and bestow them with kingdoms, over
mortals. Two thousand millions of angels will raise up with me to
etherea.

8\. To thee, O Gur, I bequeath two thousand millions of atmosphereans
who have been initiated in the second resurrection. And of the first
resurrection, two hundred and fifty millions; and of fetals, three
hundred millions; and besides these, the inhabitants of the earth (men,
women and children) seven hundred millions.

9\. God ceased speaking, and Gur said: Thy will be done, O Jehovih!
Thereupon the es'enaurs sang, and the trumpeters played the MARCH OF
APOLLO, JEHOVIH'S SON. Presently, the marshals and messengers filed
before the throne; and a light of golden fire came down from etherea,
cast out by the Gods of Helmatia, Orian arc of Tanaya, and it fell about
the throne of God, so that many could not look thereon, because of the
brilliancy.

10\. God raised up, and Apollo by his side. God said: I stretch forth my
hand unto Thee, O Jehovih! Behold Thy Son, Gur, God of Ra'yatuf, in
etherea, an earth-born, forty thousand years inhabitant of Thy
emancipated realms. By Thy power, and in Thy name, O Jehovih, I proclaim
him God of heaven and earth, to bestow Thee and Thy kingdoms on angels
and men! Be with him, O Father, Creator, that he may add unto Thy glory,
forever! Amen!

11\. God took off the triangle, and hung it on Gur's (God's) neck,
saying: I now bestow thee with the heirloom of the Gods of the red star,
the triangle of the ancients. And that thou mayest be still further
honored, behold, one higher than I, even Apollo, shall weave a crown for
thy head.

12\. Apollo walked to the left hand, and raised his hand upward, and
there came from unseen space a flame of yellow light, and lodged on his
hand, and he turned it but half around, and lo, a crown with sparkling
gems stood upon his fingers' ends. Apollo said:

13\. Incomprehensible All Light! Weave me a crown for Thy Son, God of
heaven and earth! And even whilst <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> he
spake, it was done, and he placed it on God's (Gur's) head. And God went
and sat in the midst of the throne, saying: Throne of Thy throne, O
Jehovih! All things are Thine! For my resting-place, to do Thy will,
this shall be.

14\. During the ceremonies, the music was timed accordingly; and when
the new God was crowned, the multitude of a thousand millions applauded
with great joy.

15\. When all was quiet, God rose up from the throne, saying to Apollo
and to him who had been God: In Jehovih's name, come and honor my
throne! Accordingly, they both sat down on the right hand of God.

16\. God said: In thirty days the dawn of dan will end. Let the
marshals, through the messengers, proclaim the resurrection of two
thousand millions to the etherean heavens on that day. Proclaim it in
all the heavens of the earth; inviting all to come who can; for it shall
be a day of the feast of glory. But say not to any one that there hath
been a change of Gods, nor that great Apollo will rise also, lest sorrow
come upon the people. The marshals then selected messengers, a great
number, and sent them throughout the heavens of the earth, proclaiming
the commandments of God.

17\. God spake further, saying: For thirty days shall the Council
deliberate on my ten thousand Lords, selecting and allotting them; and I
will crown them in the name of the Father.

18\. Apollo then said: Now will I clothe myself in strange colors, that
none shall know me, and during the thirty days I yet tarry, I will go
around about the earth, that I may again look upon the star of my birth.

19\. And he who had given up the throne said: Thy joy shall be my joy
also. I, too, will again visit the star of my birth.

20\. Accordingly, God said: Joy be unto ye twain, in Jehovih's name!
Behold, I will throw a thick blanket over the throne, and ye shall
change your attire, and when I withdraw it, ye shall walk forth unknown.

21\. And this was done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](oah97.md)
