[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta11)  [Next](sta13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

# The Zodiac and Its Signs

IT is difficult for this age to estimate correctly the profound effect
produced upon the religions, philosophies, and sciences of antiquity by
the study of the planets, luminaries, and constellations. Not without
adequate reason were the Magi of Persia called the Star Gazers. The
Egyptians were honored with a special appellation because of their
proficiency in computing the power and motion of the heavenly bodies and
their effect upon the destinies of nations and individuals. Ruins of
primitive astronomical observatories have been discovered in all parts
of the world, although in many cases modern archæologists are unaware of
the true purpose for which these structures were erected. While the
telescope was unknown to ancient astronomers, they made many remarkable
calculations with instruments cut from blocks of granite or pounded from
sheets of brass and cop per. In India such instruments are still in use,
and they posses a high degree of accuracy. In Jaipur, Rajputana, India,
an observatory consisting largely of immense stone sundials is still in
operation. The famous Chinese observatory on the wall of Peking consists
of immense bronze instruments, including a telescope in the form of a
hollow tube without lenses.

The pagans looked upon the stars as living things, capable of
influencing the destinies of individuals, nations, and races. That the
early Jewish patriarchs believed that the celestial bodies participated
in the affairs of men is evident to any student of Biblical literature,
as, for example, in the Book of Judges: "They fought from heaven, even
the stars in their courses fought against Sisera." The Chaldeans,
Phœnicians, Egyptians, Persians, Hindus, and Chinese all had zodiacs
that were much alike in general character, and different authorities
have credited each of these nations with being the cradle of astrology
and astronomy. The Central and North American Indians also had an
understanding of the zodiac, but the patterns and numbers of the signs
differed in many details from those of the Eastern Hemisphere.

The word *zodiac* is derived from the Greek ζωδιακός (*zodiakos*), which
means "a circle of animals," or, as some believe, "little animals." It
is the name given by the old pagan astronomers to a band of fixed stars
about sixteen degrees wide, apparently encircling the earth. Robert
Hewitt Brown, 32°, states that the Greek word zodiakos comes from
*zo-on*, meaning "an animal." He adds: "This latter word is compounded
directly from the primitive Egyptian radicals, *zo*, life, and *on*, a
being."

The Greeks, and later other peoples influenced by their culture, divided
the band of the zodiac into twelve sections, each being sixteen degrees
in width and thirty degrees in length. These divisions were called the
Houses of the Zodiac. The sun during its annual pilgrimage passed
through each of these in turn, Imaginary creatures were traced in the
Star groups bounded by these rectangles; and because most of them were
animal--or part animal--in form, they later became known as the
Constellations, or Signs, of the Zodiac.

There is a popular theory concerning the origin of the zodiacal
creatures to the effect that they were products of the imagination of
shepherds, who, watching their flocks at night, occupied their minds by
tracing the forms of animals and birds in the heavens. This theory is
untenable, unless the "shepherds" be regarded as the shepherd priests of
antiquity. It is unlikely that the zodiacal signs were derived from the
star groups which they now represent. It is far more probable that the
creatures assigned to the twelve houses are symbolic of the qualities
and intensity of the sun's power while it occupies different parts of
the zodiacal belt.

On this subject Richard Payne Knight writes: "The emblematical meaning,
which certain animals were employed to signify, was only some particular
property generalized; and, therefore, might easily be invented or
discovered by the natural operation of the mind: but the collections of
stars, named after certain animals, have no resemblance whatever to
those animals; which are therefore merely signs of convention adopted to
distinguish certain portions of the heavens, which were probably
consecrated to those particular personified attributes, which they
respectively represented." (*The Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and
Mythology*.)

Some authorities are of the opinion that the zodiac was originally
divided into ten (instead of twelve) houses, or "solar mansions." In
early times there were two separate standards--one solar and the other
lunar--used for the measurement of the months, years, and seasons. The
solar year was composed of ten months of thirty-six days each, and five
days sacred to the gods. The lunar year consisted of thirteen months of
twenty-eight days each, with one day left over. The solar zodiac at that
time consisted often houses of thirty-six degrees each.

The first six signs of the zodiac of twelve signs were regarded as
benevolent, because the sun occupied them while traversing the Northern
Hemisphere. The 6,000 years during which, according to the Persians,
Ahura-Mazda ruled His universe in harmony and peace, were symbolic of
these six signs. The second six were considered malevolent, because
while the sun was traveling the Southern Hemisphere it was winter with
the Greeks, Egyptians, and Persians. Therefore these six months symbolic
of the 6,000 years of misery and suffering caused by the evil genius of
the Persians, Ahriman, who sought to overthrow the power of Ahura-Mazda.

Those who hold the opinion that before its revision by the Greeks the
zodiac consisted of only ten signs adduce evidence to show that Libra
(the Scales) was inserted into the zodiac by dividing the constellation
of Virgo Scorpio (at that time one sign) into two parts, thus
establishing "the balance" at the point of equilibrium between the
ascending northern and the descending southern signs. (See *The
Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries*, by Hargrave Jennings.) On this
subject Isaac Myer states: "We think that the Zodiacal constellations
were first ten and represented an immense androgenic man or deity;
subsequently this was changed, resulting in Scorpio and Virgo and making
eleven; after this from Scorpio, Libra, the Balance, was taken, making
the present twelve." (*The Qabbalah*.)

Each year the sun passes entirely around the zodiac and returns to the
point from which it started--the vernal equinox--and each year it falls
just a little short of making the complete circle of the heavens in the
allotted period of time. As a result, it crosses the equator just a
little behind the spot in the zodiacal sign where it crossed the
previous year. Each sign of the zodiac consists of thirty degrees, and
as the sun loses about one degree every seventy two years, it regresses
through one entire constellation (or sign) in approximately 2,160 years,
and through the entire zodiac in about \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="img_05300"></span>

[![CHART SHOWING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE HUMAN BODY AND THE
EXTERIOR UNIVERSE.](tn/05300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05300.jpg)  
CHART SHOWING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE HUMAN BODY AND THE EXTERIOR
UNIVERSE.  

From Kircher's *Œdipus Ægyptiacus*.

The ornamental border contains groups of names of animal, mineral, and
vegetable substances, Their relationship to corresponding parts of the
human body is shown by the dotted lines. The words in capital letters on
the dotted lines indicate to what corporeal member, organ, or disease,
the herb or other substance is related. The favorable positions in
relation to the time of year are shown by the signs of the zodiac, each
house of which is divided by crosses into its three decans. This
influence is further emphasized by the series of planetary signs placed
on either side of the figure.

<span id="img_05301"></span>

[![THE EQUINOXES AND SOLSTICES.](tn/05301.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05301.jpg)  
THE EQUINOXES AND SOLSTICES.  

The plane of the zodiac intersects the celestial equator at an angle of
approximately 23° 28'. The two points of intersection (A and B) are
called the equinoxes.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

25,920 years. (Authorities disagree concerning these figures.) This
retrograde motion is called the *precession of the equinoxes*. This
means that in the course of about 25,920 years, which constitute one
Great Solar or Platonic Year, each one of the twelve constellations
occupies a position at the vernal equinox for nearly 2,160 years, then
gives place to the *previous* sign.

Among the ancients the sun was always symbolized by the figure and
nature of the constellation through which it passed at the vernal
equinox. For nearly the past 2,000 years the sun has crossed the equator
at the vernal equinox in the constellation of Pisces (the Two Fishes).
For the 2,160 years before that it crossed through the constellation of
Aries (the Ram). Prior to that the vernal equinox was in the sign of
Taurus (the Bull). It is probable that the form of the bull and the
bull's proclivities were assigned to this constellation because the bull
was used by the ancients to plow the fields, and the season set aside
for plowing and furrowing corresponded to the time at which the sun
reached the segment of the heavens named Taurus.

Albert Pike describes the reverence which the Persians felt for this
sign and the method of astrological symbolism in vogue among them, thus:
"In Zoroaster's cave of initiation, the Sun and Planets were
represented, overhead, in gems and gold, as was also the Zodiac. The Sun
appeared, emerging from the back of Taurus. " In the constellation of
the Bull are also to be found the "Seven Sisters"--the sacred
Pleiades--famous to Freemasonry as the Seven Stars at the upper end of
the Sacred Ladder.

In ancient Egypt it was during this period--when the vernal equinox was
in the sign of Taurus--that the Bull, Apis, was sacred to the Sun God,
who was worshiped through the animal equivalent of the celestial sign
which he had impregnated with his presence at the time of its crossing
into the Northern Hemisphere. This is the meaning of an ancient saying
that the celestial Bull "broke the egg of the year with his horns."

Sampson Arnold Mackey, in his *Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients
Demonstrated*, makes note of two very interesting points concerning the
bull in Egyptian symbolism. Mr. Mackey is of the opinion that the motion
of the earth that we know as the alternation of the poles has resulted
in a great change of relative position of the equator and the zodiacal
band. He believes that originally the band of the zodiac was at right
angles to the equator, with the sign of Cancer opposite the north pole
and the sign of Capricorn opposite the south pole. It is possible that
the Orphic symbol of the serpent twisted around the egg attempts to show
the motion of the sun in relation to the earth under such conditions.
Mr. Mackey advances the *Labyrinth of Crete*, the name *Abraxas*, and
the magic formula, *abracadabra*, among other things, to substantiate
his theory. Concerning *abracadabra* he states:

"But the slow progressive disappearance of the Bull is most happily
commemorated in the vanishing series of letters so emphatically
expressive of the great astronomical fact. For ABRACADABRA is The Bull,
the only Bull. The ancient sentence split into its component parts
stands thus: Ab'r-achad-ab'ra, *i. e.*, Ab'r, the Bull; achad, the only,
&c.--Achad is one of the names of the Sun, given him in consequence of
his Shining ALONE,--he is the ONLY Star to be seen when he is seen--the
remaining ab'ra, makes the whole to be, The Bull, the only Bull; while
the repetition of the name omitting a letter, till all is gone, is the
most simple, yet the most satisfactory method that could have been
devised to preserve the memory of the fact; and the name of Sorapis, or
Serapis, given to the Bull at the above ceremony puts it beyond all
doubt. \* \* \* This word (Abracadabra) disappears in eleven decreasing
stages; as in the figure. And what is very remarkable, a body with three
heads is folded up by a Serpent with eleven Coils, and placed by
Sorapis: and the eleven Volves of the Serpent form a triangle similar to
that formed by the ELEVEN diminishing lines of the abracadabra."

Nearly every religion of the world shows traces of astrological
influence. The Old Testament of the Jews, its writings overshadowed by
Egyptian culture, is a mass of astrological and astronomical allegories.
Nearly all the mythology of Greece and Rome may be traced in star
groups. Some writers are of the opinion that the original twenty-two
letters of the Hebrew alphabet were derived from groups of stars, and
that the starry handwriting on the wall of the heavens referred to words
spelt out, with fixed stars for consonants, and the planets, or
luminaries, for vowels. These, coming into ever-different combinations,
spelt words which, when properly read, foretold future events.

As the zodiacal band marks the pathway of the sun through the
constellations, it results in the phenomena of the seasons. The ancient
systems of measuring the year were based upon the equinoxes and the
solstices. The year always began with the vernal equinox, celebrated
March 21 with rejoicing to mark the moment when the sun crossed the
equator northward up the zodiacal arc. The summer solstice was
celebrated when the sun reached its most northerly position, and the day
appointed was June 21. After that time the sun began to descend toward
the equator, which it recrossed southbound at the autumnal equinox,
September 21. The sun reached its most southerly position at the winter
solstice, December 21.

Four of the signs of the zodiac have been permanently dedicated to the
equinoxes and the solstices; and, while the signs no longer correspond
with the ancient constellations to which they were assigned, and from
which they secured their names, they are accepted by modern astronomers
as a basis of calculation. The vernal equinox is therefore said to occur
in the constellation of Aries (the Ram). It is fitting that of all
beasts a Ram should be placed at the head of the heavenly flock forming
the zodiacal band. Centuries before the Christian Era, the pagans
revered this constellation. Godfrey Higgins states: "This constellation
was called the 'Lamb of God.' He was also called the 'Savior,' and was
said to save mankind from their sins. He was always honored with the
appellation of 'Dominus' or 'Lord.' He was called the 'Lamb of God which
taketh away the sins of the world.' The devotees addressing him in their
litany, constantly repeated the words, 'O Lamb of God, that taketh away
the sin of the world, have mercy upon us. Grant us Thy peace."'
Therefore, the *Lamb of God* is a title given to the sun, who is said to
be reborn every year in the Northern Hemisphere in the sign of the Ram,
although, due to the existing discrepancy between the signs of the
zodiac and the actual star groups, it actually rises in the sign of
Pisces.

The summer solstice is regarded as occurring in Cancer (the Crab), which
the Egyptians called the *scarab*--a beetle of the family Lamellicornes,
the head of the insect kingdom, and sacred to the Egyptians as the
symbol of Eternal Life. It is evident that the constellation of the Crab
is represented by this peculiar creature because the sun, after passing
through this house, proceeds to walk backwards, or descend the zodiacal
arc. Cancer is the symbol of generation, for it is the house of the
Moon, the great Mother of all things and the patroness of the life
forces of Nature. Diana, the moon goddess of the Greeks, is called the
Mother of the World. Concerning the worship of the feminine or maternal
principle, Richard Payne Knight writes:

"By attracting or heaving the waters of the ocean, she naturally
appeared to be the sovereign of humidity; and by seeming to operate so
powerfully upon the constitutions of women, she equally appeared to be
the patroness and regulatress of nutrition and passive generation:
whence she is said to have received her nymphs, or subordinate
personifications, from the ocean; and is often represented by the symbol
of the sea crab, an animal that has the property of spontaneously
detaching from its own body any limb that has been hurt or mutilated,
and reproducing another in its place." (*The Symbolical Language of
Ancient Art and Mythology*.) This water sign, being symbolic of the
maternal principle of Nature, and recognized by the pagans as the origin
of all life, was a natural and consistent domicile of the moon.

The autumnal equinox apparently occurs in the constellation of Libra
(the Balances). The scales tipped and the solar globe began its
pilgrimage toward the house of winter. The constellation of the Scales
was placed in the zodiac to symbolize the power of choice, by means of
which man may weigh one problem against another. Millions of years ago,
when the human race was in the making, man was like the angels, who knew
neither good nor evil. He *fell* into the state of the knowledge of good
and evil when the gods gave him the seed for the mental nature. From
man's mental reactions to his environments he distills the product of
experience, which then aids him to regain his lost position plus an
individualized intelligence. Paracelsus said: "The body comes from the
elements, the soul from the stars, and the spirit from God. All that the
intellect can conceive of comes from the stars \[the spirits of the
stars, rather than the material constellations\]."

The constellation of Capricorn, in which the winter solstice
theoretically takes place, was called *The House of Death*, for in
winter all life in the Northern Hemisphere is at its lowest ebb.
Capricorn is a composite creature, with the head and upper body of a
goat and the tail of a fish. In this constellation the sun is least
powerful

<span id="img_05400"></span>

[![THE MICROCOSM.](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
THE MICROCOSM.  

From Schotus' *Margarita Philosophica*.

The pagans believed that the zodiac formed the body of the Grand Man of
the Universe. This body, which they called the Macrocosm (the Great
World), was divided into twelve major parts, one of which was under the
control of the celestial powers reposing in each of the zodiacal
constellations. Believing that the entire universal system was
epitomized in man's body, which they called the Microcosm (the Little
World), they evolved that now familiar figure of "the cut-up man in the
almanac" by allotting a sign of the zodiac to each of twelve major parts
of the human body.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

in the Northern Hemisphere, and after passing through this constellation
it immediately begins to increase. Hence the Greeks said that Jupiter (a
name of the Sun God) was suckled by a goat. A new and different
sidelight on zodiacal symbolism is supplied by John Cole, in *A Treatise
on the Circular Zodiac of Tentyra, in Egypt*: "The symbol therefore of
the Goat rising from the body of a fish \[Capricorn\], represents with
the greatest propriety the mountainous buildings of Babylon rising out
of its low and marshy situation; the two horns of the Goat being
emblematical of the two towns, Nineveh and Babylon, the former built on
the Tigris, the latter on the Euphrates; but both subjected to one
sovereignty."

The period of 2,160 years required for the regression of the sun through
one of the zodiacal constellations is often termed an age. According to
this system, the age secured its name from the sign through which the
sun passes year after year as it crosses the equator at the vernal
equinox. From this arrangement are derived the terms *The Taurian Age*,
*The Aryan Age*, *The Piscean Age*, and *The Aquarian Age*. During these
periods, or ages, religious worship takes the form of the appropriate
celestial sign--that which the sun is said to assume as a personality in
the same manner that a spirit assumes a body. These twelve signs are the
jewels of his breastplate and his light shines forth from them, one
after the other.

From a consideration of this system, it is readily understood why
certain religious symbols were adopted during different ages of the
earth's history; for during the 2,160 years the sun was in the
constellation of Taurus, it is said that the Solar Deity assumed the
body of Apis, and the Bull became sacred to Osiris. (For details
concerning the astrological ages as related to Biblical symbolism, see
*The Message of the Stars* by Max and Augusta Foss Heindel.) During the
Aryan Age the Lamb was held sacred and the priests were called
*shepherds*. Sheep and goats were sacrificed upon the altars, and a
scapegoat was appointed to bear the sins of Israel.

During the Age of Pisces, the Fish was the symbol of divinity and the
Sun God fed the multitude with two small fishes. The frontispiece of
Inman's *Ancient Faiths* shows the goddess Isis with a fish on her head;
and the Indian Savior God, Christna, in one of his incarnations was cast
from the mouth of a fish.

Not only is Jesus often referred to as the *Fisher of Men*, but as John
P. Lundy writes: "The word Fish is an abbreviation of this whole title,
Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior, and Cross; or as St. Augustine
expresses it, 'If you join together the initial letters of the five
Greek words, Ἰησοῦς Χριστος Θεου Υιὸσ Σωτήρ, which mean Jesus Christ,
Son of God, Savior, they will make ΙΧΘΥΣ, Fish, in which word Christ is
mystically understood, because He was able to live in the abyss of this
mortality as in the depth of waters, that is, without sin.'"
(*Monumental Christianity*.) Many Christians observe Friday, which is
sacred to the Virgin (Venus), upon which day they shall eat fish and not
meat. The sign of the fish was one of the earliest symbols of
Christianity; and when drawn upon the sand, it informed one Christian
that another of the same faith was near.

Aquarius is called the *Sign of the Water Bearer*, or the man with a jug
of water on his shoulder mentioned in the New Testament. This is
sometimes shown as an angelic figure, supposedly androgynous, either
pouring water from an urn or carrying the vessel upon its shoulder.
Among Oriental peoples, a water vessel alone is often used. Edward
Upham, in his *History and Doctrine of Budhism*, describes Aquarius as
being "in the shape of a pot and of a color between blue and yellow;
this Sign is the single house of Saturn."

When Herschel discovered the planet Uranus (sometimes called by the name
of its discoverer), the second half of the sign of Aquarius was allotted
to this added member of the planetary family. The water pouring from the
urn of Aquarius under the name of "the waters of eternal life" appears
many times in symbolism. So it is with all the signs. Thus the sun in
its path controls whatever form of worship man offers to the Supreme
Deity.

There are two distinct systems of astrological philosophy. One of them,
the Ptolemaic, is geocentric: the earth is considered the center of the
solar system, around which the sun, moon, and planets revolve.
Astronomically, the geocentric system is incorrect; but for thousands of
years it has proved its accuracy when applied to the material nature of
earthly things. A careful consideration of the writings of the great
occultists and a study of their diagrams reveal the fact that many of
them were acquainted with another method of arranging the heavenly
bodies.

The other system of astrological philosophy is called the heliocentric.
This posits the sun in the center of the solar system, where it
naturally belongs, with the planets and their moons revolving about it.
The great difficulty, however, with the heliocentric system is that,
being comparatively new, there has not been sufficient time to
experiment successfully and catalogue the effects of its various aspects
and relationships. Geocentric astrology, as its name implies, is
confined to the earthy side of nature, while heliocentric astrology may
be used to analyze the higher intellectual and spiritual faculties of
man.

The important point to be remembered is that when the sun was said to be
in a certain sign of the zodiac, the ancients really meant that the sun
occupied the opposite sign and cast its long ray into the house in which
they enthroned it. Therefore, when it is said that the sun is in Taurus,
it means (astronomically) that the sun is in the sign opposite to
Taurus, which is Scorpio. This resulted in two distinct schools of
philosophy: one geocentric and exoteric, the other heliocentric and
esoteric. While the ignorant multitudes worshiped the house of the sun's
reflection, which in the case described would be the Bull, the wise
revered the house of the sun's actual dwelling, which would be the
Scorpion, or the Serpent, the symbol of the concealed spiritual mystery.
This sign has three different symbols. The most common is that of a
Scorpion, who was called by the ancients the *backbiter*, being the
symbol of deceit and perversion; the second (and less common) form of
the sign is a Serpent, often used by the ancients to symbolize wisdom.

Probably the rarest form of Scorpio is that of an Eagle. The arrangement
of the stars of the constellation bears as much resemblance to a flying
bird as to a scorpion. Scorpio, being the sign of occult initiation, the
flying eagle--the king of birds--represents the highest and most
spiritual type of Scorpio, in which it transcends the venomous insect of
the earth. As Scorpio and Taurus are opposite each other in the zodiac,
their symbolism is often closely intermingled. The Hon. E. M. Plunket,
in *Ancient Calendars and Constellations*, says: "The Scorpion (the
constellation Scorpio of the Zodiac opposed to Taurus) joins with
Mithras in his attack upon the Bull, and always the genii of the spring
and autumn equinoxes are present in joyous and mournful attitudes."

The Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Babylonians, who knew the sun as a
Bull, called the zodiac a series of furrows, through which the great
celestial Ox dragged the plow of the sun. Hence the populace offered up
sacrifice and led through the streets magnificent steers, bedecked with
flowers and surrounded with priests, dancing girls of the temple, and
musicians. The philosophic elect did not participate in these idolatrous
ceremonials, but advocated them as most suitable for the types of mind
composing the mass of the population. These few possessed a far deeper
understanding, as the Serpent of Scorpio upon their foreheads--the
*Uræus*--bore witness.

The sun is often symbolized with its rays in the form of a shaggy mane.
Concerning the Masonic significance of Leo, Robert Hewitt Brown, 32°,
has written: "On the 21st of June, when the sun arrives at the summer
solstice, the constellation Leo--being but 30° in advance of the
sun--appears to be leading the way, and to aid by his powerful paw in
lifting the sun up to the summit of the zodiacal arch. \* \* \* This
visible connection between the constellation Leo and the return of the
sun to his place of power and glory, at the summit of the Royal Arch of
heaven, was the principal reason why that constellation was held in such
high esteem and reverence by the ancients. The astrologers distinguished
Leo as the 'sole house of the sun,' and taught that the world was
created when the sun was in that sign. 'The lion was adored in the East
and the West by the Egyptians and the Mexicans. The chief Druid of
Britain was styled a lion.'" (*Stellar Theology and Masonic Astronomy*.)
When the Aquarian Age is thoroughly established, the sun will be in Leo,
as will be noted from the explanation previously given in this chapter
regarding the distinction between geocentric and heliocentric astrology.
Then, indeed, will the secret religions of the world include once more
the raising to initiation by the Grip of the Lion's Paw. (Lazarus will
come forth.)

<span id="img_05500"></span>

[![THE CIRCULAR ZODIAC OF TENTYRA.](tn/05500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05500.jpg)  
THE CIRCULAR ZODIAC OF TENTYRA.  

From Cole's *Treatise--the Circular Zodiac of Tentyra, in Egypt*.

The oldest circular zodiac known is the one found at Tentyra, in Egypt,
and now in the possession of the French government. Mr. John Cole
describes this remarkable zodiac as follows: "The diameter of the
medallion in which the constellations are sculptured, is four feet nine
inches, French measure. It is surrounded by another circle of much
larger circumference, containing hieroglyphic characters; this second
circle is enclosed in a square, whose sides are seven feet nine inches
long. \* \* \* The asterisms, constituting the Zodiacal constellations
mixed with others, are represented in a spiral. The extremities of this
spiral, after one revolution, are Leo and Cancer. Leo is no doubt at the
head. It appears to be trampling on a serpent, and its tail to be held
by a woman. Immediately after the Lion comes the Virgin holding an ear
of corn, Further on, we perceive two scales of a balance, above which,
in a medal lion, is the figure of Harpocrates. Then follows the Scorpion
and Sagittarius, to whom the Egyptians gave wings, and two faces. After
Sagittarius are successively placed, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, the
Ram, the Bull, and the Twins. This Zodiacal procession is, as we have
already observed, terminated by Cancer, the Crab."

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

The antiquity of the zodiac is much in dispute. To contend that it
originated but a mere few thousand years before the Christian Era is a
colossal mistake on the part of those who have sought to compile data,
concerning its origin. The zodiac necessarily must be ancient enough to
go backward to that period when its signs and symbols coincided exactly
with the positions of the constellations whose various creatures in
their natural functions exemplified the outstanding features of the
sun's activity during each of the twelve months. One author, after many
years of deep study on the subject, believed man's concept of the zodiac
to be at least five million years old. In all probability it is one of
the many things for which the modem world is indebted to the Atlantean
or the Lemurian civilizations. About ten thousand years before the
Christian Era there was a period of many ages when knowledge of every
kind was suppressed, tablets destroyed, monuments torn down, and every
vestige of available material concerning previous civilizations
completely obliterated. Only a few copper knives, some arrowheads, and
crude carvings on the walls of caves bear mute witness of those
civilizations which preceded this age of destruction. Here and there a
few gigantic structures have remained which, like the strange monoliths
on Easter Island, are evidence of lost arts and sciences and lost races.
The human race is exceedingly old. Modern science counts its age in tens
of thousands of years; occultism, in tens of millions. There is an old
saying that "Mother Earth has shaken many civilizations from her back,"
and it is not beyond reason that the principles of astrology and
astronomy were evolved millions of years before the first white man
appeared.

The occultists of the ancient world had a most remarkable understanding
of the principle of evolution. They recognized all life as being in
various stages of *becoming*. They believed that grains of sand were in
the process of *becoming* human in consciousness but not necessarily in
form; that human creatures were in the process of *becoming* planets;
that planets were in the process of *becoming* solar systems; and that
solar systems were in the process of *becoming* cosmic chains; and so on
*ad infinitum*. One of the stages between the solar system and the
cosmic chain was called the *zodiac*; therefore they taught that at a
certain time a solar system breaks up into a zodiac. The house of the
zodiac become the thrones for twelve Celestial Hierarchies, or as
certain of the ancients state, ten Divine Orders. Pythagoras taught that
10, or the unit of the decimal system, was the most perfect of all
numbers, and he symbolized the number ten by the *lesser tetractys*, an
arrangement of ten dots in the form of an upright triangle.

The early star gazers, after dividing the zodiac into its houses,
appointed the three brightest scars in each constellation to be the
joint rulers of that house. Then they divided the house into three
sections of ten degrees each, which they called decans. These, in turn,
were divided in half, resulting in the breaking up of the zodiac into
seventy-two duodecans of five degrees each. Over each of these duodecans
the Hebrews placed a celestial intelligence, or angel, and from this
system, has resulted the Qabbalistic arrangement of the seventy-two
sacred names, which correspond to the seventy-two flowers, knops, and
almonds upon the seven-branched Candlestick of the Tabernacle, and the
seventy-two men who were chosen from the Twelve Tribes to represent
Israel.

The only two signs not already mentioned are Gemini and Sagittarius. The
constellation of Gemini is generally represented as two small children,
who, according to the ancients, were born out of eggs, possibly the ones
that the Bull broke with his horns. The stories concerning Castor and
Pollux, and Romulus and Remus, may be the result of amplifying the myths
of these celestial Twins. The symbols of Gemini have passed through many
modifications. The one used by the Arabians was the peacock. Two of the
important stars in the constellation of Gemini still bear the names of
Castor and Pollux. The sign of Gemini is supposed to have been the
patron of phallic worship, and the two obelisks, or pillars, in front of
temples and churches convey the same symbolism as the Twins.

The sign of Sagittarius consists of what the ancient Greeks called a
centaur--a composite creature, the lower half of whose body was in the
form of a horse, while the upper half was human. The centaur is
generally shown with a bow and arrow in his hands, aiming a shaft far
off into the stars. Hence Sagittarius stands for two distinct
principles: first, it represents the spiritual evolution of man, for the
human form is rising from the body of the beast; secondly, it is the
symbol of aspiration and ambition, for as the centaur aims his arrow at
the stars, so every human creature aims at a higher mark than he can
reach.

Albert Churchward, in *The Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man*, sums up
the influence of the zodiac upon religious symbolism in the following
words: "The division here \[is\] in twelve parts, the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, twelve tribes of Israel, twelve gates of heaven mentioned in
Revelation, and twelve entrances or portals to be passed through in the
Great Pyramid, before finally reaching the highest degree, and twelve
Apostles in the Christian doctrines, and the twelve original and perfect
points in Masonry."

The ancients believed that the theory of man's being made in the image
of God was to be understood literally. They maintained that the universe
was a great organism not unlike the human body, and that every phase and
function of the Universal Body had a correspondence in man. The most
precious Key to Wisdom that the priests communicated to the new
initiates was what they termed *the law of analogy*. Therefore, to the
ancients, the study of the stars was a sacred science, for they saw in
the movements of the celestial bodies the ever-present activity of the
Infinite Father.

The Pythagoreans were often undeservedly criticized for promulgating the
so-called doctrine of metempsychosis, or the transmigration of souls.
This concept as circulated among the uninitiated was merely a blind,
however, to conceal a sacred truth. Greek mystics believed that the
spiritual nature of man descended into material existence from the Milky
Way--the seed ground of souls--through one of the twelve gates of the
great zodiacal band. The spiritual nature was therefore said to
incarnate in the form of the symbolic creature created by Magian star
gazers to represent the various zodiacal constellations. If the spirit
incarnated through the sign of Aries, it was said to be born in the body
of a ram; if in Taurus, in the body of the celestial bull. All human
beings were thus symbolized by twelve mysterious creatures through the
natures of which they were able to incarnate into the material world.
The theory of transmigration was not applicable to the visible material
body of man, but rather to the invisible immaterial spirit wandering
along the pathway of the stars and sequentially assuming in the course
of evolution the forms of the sacred zodiacal animals.

In the Third Book of the *Mathesis* of Julius Firmicus Maternus appears
the following extract concerning the positions of the heavenly bodies at
the time of the establishment of the inferior universe: "According to
Æsculapius, therefore, and Anubius, to whom especially the divinity
Mercury committed the secrets of the astrological science, the geniture
of the world is as follows: They constituted the Sun in the 15th part of
Leo, the Moon in the 15th part of Cancer, Saturn in the 15th part of
Capricorn, Jupiter in the 15th part of Sagittary, Mars in the 15th part
of Scorpio, Venus in the 15th part of Libra, Mercury in the 15th part of
Virgo, and the Horoscope in the 15th part of Cancer. Conformably to this
geniture, therefore, to these conditions of the stars, and the
testimonies which they adduce in confirmation of this geniture, they are
of opinion that the destinies of men, also, are disposed in accordance
with the above arrangement, as maybe learnt from that book of Æsculapius
which is called Μυριογενεσις, (i.e. Ten Thousand, or an innumerable
multitude of Genitures) in order that nothing in the several genitures
of men may be found to be discordant with the above-mentioned geniture
of the world." The seven ages of man are under the control of the
planets in the following order: infancy, the moon; childhood, Mercury;
adolescence, Venus; maturity, the sun; middle age, Mars; advanced age,
Jupiter; and decrepitude and dissolution, Saturn.

<span id="img_05600"></span>

[![HIEROGLYPHIC PLAN, By HERMES, OF THE ANCIENT ZODIAC.](tn/05600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05600.jpg)  
HIEROGLYPHIC PLAN, By HERMES, OF THE ANCIENT ZODIAC.  

From Kircher's *Œdipus Ægyptiacus*.

The inner circle contains the hieroglyph of Hemphta, the triform and
pantamorphic deity. In the six concentric bands surrounding the inner
circle are (from within outward): (1) the numbers of the zodiacal houses
in figures and also in words; (2) the modern names of the houses.(3) the
Greek or the Egyptian names of the Egyptian deities assigned to the
houses; (4) the complete figures of these deities; (5) the ancient or
the modem zodiacal signs, sometimes both; (6) the number of decans or
subdivisions of the houses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bembine Table of Isis](sta13)
