[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta20)  [Next](sta22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# Fishes, Insects, Animals, Reptiles and Birds

### (Part Two)

AS appropriate emblems of various human and divine attributes birds were
included in religious and philosophic symbolism that of pagans and of
Christians alike. Cruelty was signified by the buzzard; courage by the
eagle; self-sacrifice by the pelican; and pride by the peacock. The
ability of birds to leave the earth and fly aloft toward the source of
light has resulted in their being associated with aspiration, purity,
and beauty. Wings were therefore often added to various terrene
creatures in an effort to suggest transcendency. Because their habitat
was among the branches of the sacred trees in the hearts of ancient
forests, birds were also regarded as the appointed messengers of the
tree spirits and Nature gods dwelling in these consecrated groves, and
through their clear notes the gods themselves were said to speak. Many
myths have been fabricated to explain the brilliant plumage of birds. A
familiar example is the story of Juno's peacock, in whose tail feathers
were placed the eyes of Argus. Numerous American Indian legends also
deal with birds and the origin of the various colors of feathers. The
Navahos declare that when all living things climbed to the stalk of a
bamboo to escape the Flood, the wild turkey was on the lowest branch and
his tail feathers trailed in the water; hence the color was all washed
out.

Gravitation, which is a law in the material world, is the impulse toward
the center of materiality; levitation, which is a law in the spiritual
world, is the impulse toward the center of spirituality. Seeming to be
capable of neutralizing the effect of gravity, the bird was said to
partake of a nature superior to other terrestrial creation; and its
feathers, because of their sustaining power, came to be accepted as
symbols of divinity, courage, and accomplishment. A notable example is
the dignity attached to eagle feathers by the American Indians, among
whom they are insignia of merit. Angels have been invested with wings
because, like birds, they were considered to be the intermediaries
between the gods and men and to inhabit the air or middle kingdom
betwixt heaven and earth. As the dome of the heavens was likened to a
skull in the Gothic Mysteries, so the birds which flew across the sky
were regarded as thoughts of the Deity. For this reason Odin's two
messenger ravens were called Hugin and Munin--*thought* and *memory*.

Among the Greeks and Romans, the eagle was the appointed bird of Jupiter
and consequently signified the swiftly moving forces of the Demiurgus;
hence it was looked upon as the mundane lord of the birds, in
contradistinction to the phœnix, which was symbolic of the celestial
ruler. The eagle typified the sun in its material phase and also the
immutable Demiurgic law beneath which all mortal creatures must bend.
The eagle was also the Hermetic symbol of sulphur, and signified the
mysterious fire of Scorpio--the most profoundly significant sign of the
zodiac and the *Gate of the Great Mystery*. Being one of the three
symbols of Scorpio, the eagle, like the Goat of Mendes, was an emblem of
the theurgic art and the secret processes by which the infernal fire of
the scorpion was transmuted into the spiritual *light-fire* of the gods.

Among certain American Indian tribes the thunderbird is held in peculiar
esteem. This divine creature is said to live above the clouds; the
flapping of its wings causes the rumbling which accompanies storms,
while the flashes from its eyes are the lightning. Birds were used to
signify the vital breath; and among the Egyptians, mysterious hawklike
birds with human heads, and carrying in their claws the symbols of
immortality, are often shown hovering as emblems of the liberated soul
over the mummified bodies of the dead. In Egypt the hawk was the sacred
symbol of the sun; and Ra, Osiris, and Horns are often depicted with the
heads of hawks. The cock, or rooster, was a symbol of Cashmala
(Cadmillus) in the Samothracian Mysteries, and is also a phallic symbol
sacred to the sun. It was accepted by the Greeks as the emblem of Ares
(Mars) and typified watchfulness and defense. When placed in the center
of a weather vane it signifies the sun in the midst of the four corners
of creation. The Greeks sacrificed a rooster to the gods at the time of
entering the Eleusinian Mysteries. Sir Francis Bacon is supposed to have
died as the result of stuffing a fowl with snow. May this not signify
Bacon's initiation into the pagan Mysteries which still existed in his
day?

Both the peacock and the ibis were objects of veneration because they
destroyed the poisonous reptiles which were popularly regarded as the
emissaries of the infernal gods. Because of the myriad of eyes in its
tail feathers the peacock was accepted as the symbol of wisdom, and on
account of its general appearance it was often confused with the fabled
phœnix of the Mysteries. There is a curious belief that the flesh of the
peacock will not putrefy even though kept for a considerable time. As an
outgrowth of this belief the peacock became the emblem of immortality,
because the spiritual nature of man--like the flesh of this bird--is
incorruptible.

The Egyptians paid divine honors to the ibis and it was a cardinal crime
to kill one, even by accident. It was asserted that the ibis could live
only in Egypt and that if transported to a foreign country it would die
of grief. The Egyptians declared this bird to be the preserver of crops
and especially worthy of veneration because it drove out the winged
serpents of Libya which the wind blew into Egypt. The ibis was sacred to
Thoth, and when its head and neck were tucked under its wing its body
closely resembled a human heart. (See Montfaucon's *Antiquities*.) The
black and white ibis was sacred to the moon; but all forms were revered
because they destroyed crocodile eggs, the crocodile being a symbol of
the detested Typhon.

Nocturnal birds were appropriate symbols of both sorcery and the secret
divine sciences: sorcery because black magic cannot function in the
light of truth (day) and is powerful only when surrounded by ignorance
(night); and the divine sciences because those possessing the arcana are
able to see through the darkness of ignorance and materiality. Owls and
bats were consequently often associated with either witchcraft or
wisdom. The goose was an emblem of the first primitive substance or
condition from which and within which the worlds were fashioned. In the
Mysteries, the universe was likened to an egg which the Cosmic Goose had
laid in space. Because of its blackness the crow was the symbol of chaos
or the chaotic darkness preceding the light of creation. The grace and
purity of the swan were emblematic of the spiritual grace and purity of
the initiate. This bird also represented the Mysteries which unfolded
these qualities in humanity. This explains the allegories of the gods
(the secret wisdom) incarnating in the body of a swan (the initiate).

Being scavengers, the vulture, the buzzard, and the condor signified
that form of divine power which by disposing of refuse and other matter
dangerous to the life and health of humanity cleanses and purifies the
lower spheres. These birds were therefore adopted as symbols of the
disintegrative processes which accomplish good while apparently
destroying, and by some religions have been mistakenly regarded as evil.
Birds such as the parrot and raven were accorded veneration because,
being able to mimic the human voice, they were looked upon as links
between the human and animal kingdoms.

The dove, accepted by Christianity as the emblem of the Holy Ghost, is
an extremely ancient and highly revered pagan yonic emblem. In many of
the ancient Mysteries it represented the third person of the Creative
Triad, or the Fabricator of the world. As the lower worlds were brought
into existence through a generative process, so the dove has been
associated with those deities identified with the procreative functions.
It is sacred to Astarte, Cybele, Isis, Venus, Juno, Mylitta, and
Aphrodite. On account of its gentleness and devotion to its young, the
dove was looked upon as the embodiment of the maternal instinct. The
dove is also an emblem of wisdom, for it represents the power and order
by which the lower worlds are maintained. It has long been accepted as a
messenger of the divine will, and signifies the activity of God.

The name dove has been given to oracles and to prophets. "The true name
of the dove was *Ionah* or *Iönas*; it was a very sacred emblem, and
atone time almost universally received; it was adopted by the Hebrews;
and the mystic Dove was regarded as a symbol

<span id="img_08900"></span>

[![THE PHNIX ON ITS NEST OF FLAMES.](tn/08900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08900.jpg)  
THE PHŒNIX ON ITS NEST OF FLAMES.  

From Lycosthenes' Prodigiorum, ac Ostentorum Chronicon.

The phœnix is the most celebrated of all the symbolic creatures
fabricated by the ancient Mysteries for the purpose of concealing the
great truths of esoteric philosophy. Though modern scholars of natural
history declare the existence of the phœnix to be purely mythical, Pliny
describes the capture of one of these birds and it exhibition in the
Roman Forum during the reign of the Emperor Claudius.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

from the days of Noah by all those who were of the Church of God. The
prophet sent to Ninevah as God's messenger was called Jonah or the Dove;
our Lord's forerunner, the Baptist, was called in Greek by the name of
Ioannes; and so was the Apostle of Love, the author Of the fourth Gospel
and of the Apocalypse, named Ioannes." (Bryant's *Analysis of Ancient
Mythology*.)

In Masonry the dove is the symbol of purity and innocence. It is
significant that in the pagan Mysteries the dove of Venus was crucified
upon the four spokes of a great wheel, thus foreshadowing the mystery of
the crucified Lord of Love. Although Mohammed drove the doves from the
temple at Mecca, occasionally he is depicted with a dove sitting upon
his shoulder as the symbol of divine inspiration. In ancient times the
effigies of doves were placed upon the heads of scepters to signify that
those bearing them were overshadowed by divine prerogative. In mediæval
art, the dove frequently was pictured as an emblem of divine
benediction.

### THE PHŒNIX

Clement, one of the ante-Nicæan Fathers, describes, in the first century
after Christ, the peculiar nature and habits of the phœnix, in this
wise: "There is a certain bird which is called a Phœnix. This is the
only one of its kind and lives five hundred years. And when the time of
its dissolution draws near that it must die, it builds itself a nest of
frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices, into which, when the time is
fulfilled, it enters and dies. But as the flesh decays a certain kind of
worm is produced, which, being nourished by the juices of the dead bird,
brings forth feathers. Then, when it has acquired strength, it takes up
that nest in which are the bones of its parent, and bearing these it
passes from the land of Arabia into Egypt, to the city called
Heliopolis. And, in open day, flying in the sight of all men, it places
them on the altar of the sun, and having done this, hastens back to its
former abode. The priests then inspect the registers of the dates, and
find that it has returned exactly as the five hundredth year was
completed."

Although admitting that he had not seen the phœnix bird (there being
only one alive at a time), Herodotus amplifies a bit the description
given by Clement: "They tell a story of what this bird does which does
not seem to me to be credible: that he comes all the way from Arabia,
and brings the parent bird, all plastered with myrrh, to the temple of
the sun, and there buries the body. In order to bring him, they say, he
first forms a ball of myrrh as big as he finds that he can carry; then
he hollows out the ball, and puts his parent inside; after which he
covers over the opening with fresh myrrh, and the ball is then of
exactly the same weight as at first; so he brings it to Egypt, plastered
over as I have said, and deposits it in the temple of the sun. Such is
the story they tell of the doings of this bird."

Both Herodotus and Pliny noted the general resemblance in shape between
the phœnix and the eagle, a point which the reader should carefully
consider, for it is reasonably certain that the modern Masonic eagle was
originally a phœnix. The body of the phœnix is described as having been
covered with glossy purple feathers, while its long tail feathers were
alternately blue and red. Its head was light in color and about its neck
was a circlet of golden plumage. At the back of its head the phœnix had
*a peculiar tuft of feathers*, a fact quite evident, although it has
been overlooked by most writers and symbolists.

The phœnix was regarded as sacred to the sun, and the length of its life
(500 to 1000 years) was taken as a standard for measuring the motion of
the heavenly bodies and also the cycles of time used in the Mysteries to
designate the periods of existence. The diet of the bird was unknown.
Some writers declare that it subsisted upon the atmosphere; others that
it ate at rare intervals but never in the presence of man. Modern Masons
should realize the special Masonic significance of the phœnix, for the
bird is described as using sprigs of acacia in the manufacture of its
nest.

The phœnix (which is the mythological Persian *roc*) is also the name of
a Southern constellation, and therefore it has both an astronomical and
an astrological significance. In all probability, the phœnix was the
swan of the Greeks, the eagle of the Romans, and the peacock of the Far
East. To the ancient mystics the phœnix was a most appropriate symbol of
the immortality of the human soul, for just as the phœnix was reborn out
of its own dead self seven times seven, so again and again the spiritual
nature of man rises triumphant from his dead physical body.

Mediæval Hermetists regarded the phœnix as a symbol of the
accomplishment of alchemical transmutation, a process equivalent to
human regeneration. The name *phœnix* was also given to one of the
secret alchemical formula. The familiar pelican of the Rose Croix
degree, feeding its young from its own breast, is in reality a phœnix, a
fact which can be confirmed by an examination of the head of the bird.
The ungainly lower part of the pelican's beak is entirely missing, the
head of the phœnix being far more like that of an eagle than of a
pelican. In the Mysteries it was customary to refer to initiates as
*phœnixes* or *men who had been born again*, for just as physical birth
gives man consciousness in the physical world, so the neophyte, after
nine degrees in the womb of the Mysteries, was born into a consciousness
of the Spiritual world. This is the mystery of initiation to which
Christ referred when he said, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God" (John iii. 3). The phœnix is a fitting symbol of
this spiritual truth.

European mysticism was not dead at the time the United States of America
was founded. The hand of the Mysteries controlled in the establishment
of the new government, for the signature of the Mysteries may still be
seen on the Great Seal of the United States of America. Careful analysis
of the seal discloses a mass of occult and Masonic symbols, chief among
them the so-called American eagle--a bird which Benjamin Franklin
declared unworthy to be chosen as the emblem of a great, powerful, and
progressive people. Here again only the student of symbolism can see
through the subterfuge and realize that the American eagle upon the
Great Seal is but a conventionalized phœnix, a fact plainly discernible
from an examination of the original seal. In his sketch of *The History
of the Seal of the United States*, Gaillard Hunt unwittingly brings
forward much material to substantiate the belief that the original seal
carried the Phœnix bird on its obverse surface and the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh upon its reverse surface. In a colored sketch submitted as a
design for the Great Seal by William Barton in 1782, an actual phœnix
appears sitting upon a nest of flames. This itself demonstrates a
tendency towards the use of this emblematic bird.

<span id="img_09000"></span>

[![PHNIX OR EAGLE, WHICH?](tn/09000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09000.jpg)  
PHŒNIX OR EAGLE, WHICH?  

On the left is the bird's head from the first Great Seal of the United
States (1782) and on the right the Great Seal of 1902. When the first
great Seal was actually cut, the bird represented upon it was very
different from the eagle which now appears; the neck was much longer and
the tuft of feathers, at the upper back part of the head was quite
noticeable; the beak bore little resemblance to that of the eagle; and
the entire bird was much thinner and its wings shorter. It requires very
little imagination to trace in this first so-called eagle the
mythological Phœnix of antiquity. What is more, there is every reason
why a phœnix bird should be used to represent a new country rising out
of an old, while as Benjamin Franklin caustically noted, the eagle was
not a bird of good moral character!

<span id="img_09001"></span>

[![AN EGYPTIAN PHNIX.](tn/09001.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09001.jpg)  
AN EGYPTIAN PHŒNIX.  

From Wilkinson's *Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians*.

The Egyptians occasionally represented the Phœnix as having the body of
a man and the wings of a bird. This biform, creature had a tuft of
feathers upon its head and its arms were upraised in an attitude of
prayer. As the phœnix was the symbol of regeneration, the tuft of
feathers on the back of its head might well symbolize the activity of
the Pineal gland, or third eye, the occult function of which was
apparently well understood by the ancient priestcraft.

<span id="img_09002"></span>

[![THE OBVERSE AND REVERSE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.](tn/09002.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09002.jpg)  
THE OBVERSE AND REVERSE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.  

From Hunt's *History of the Seal of the United States*.

The significance of the mystical number 13, which frequently appears
upon the Great Seal of the United States, is not limited to the number
of the original colonies. The sacred emblem of the ancient initiates,
here composed of 13 stars,, also appears above the head of the "eagle."
The motto, *E Pluribus Unum*, contains 13 letters, as does also the
inscription, *Annuit Cœptis*. The "eagle" clutches in its right talon a
branch bearing 13 leaves and 13 berries and in its left a sheaf of 13
arrows. The face of the pyramid, exclusive of the panel containing the
date, consists of 72 stones arranged in 13 rows.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

If any one doubts the presence of Masonic and occult influences at the
time the Great Seal was designed, he should give due consideration to
the comments of Professor Charles Eliot Norton of Harvard, who wrote
concerning the unfinished pyramid and the All-Seeing Eye which adorned
the reverse of the seal, as follows: "The device adopted by Congress is
practically incapable of effective treatment; it can hardly (however
artistically treated by the designer) look otherwise than as a dull
emblem of a Masonic fraternity." (The *History of the Seal of the United
States*.)

The eagles of Napoleon and Cæsar and the zodiacal eagle of Scorpio are
really phœnixes, for the latter bird--not the eagle--is the symbol of
spiritual victory and achievement. Masonry will be in a position to
solve many of the secrets of its esoteric doctrine when it realizes that
both its single- and double-headed eagles are phœnixes, and that to all
initiates and philosophers the phœnix is the symbol of the transmutation
and regeneration of the creative energy--commonly called the
accomplishment of the Great Work. The double-headed phœnix is the
prototype of an androgynous man, for according to the secret teachings
there will come a time when the human body will have two spinal cords,
by means of which vibratory equilibrium will be maintained in the body.

Not only were many of the founders of the United States Government
Masons, but they received aid from a secret and august body existing in
Europe, which helped them to establish this country for a peculiar and
particular purpose known only to the initiated few. The Great Seal is
the signature of this exalted body--unseen and for the most part
unknown--and the unfinished pyramid upon its reverse side is a
trestleboard setting forth symbolically the task to the accomplishment
of which the United States Government was dedicated from the day of its
inception.

### ANIMALS

The lion is the king of the animal family and, like the head of each
kingdom, is sacred to the sun, whose rays are symbolized by the lion's
shaggy mane. The allegories perpetuated by the Mysteries (such as the
one to the effect that the lion opens the secret book) signify that the
solar power opens the seed pods, releasing the spiritual life within.
There was also a curious belief among the ancients that the lion sleeps
with his eyes open, and for this reason the animal was chosen as a
symbol of vigilance. The figure of a lion placed on either side of doors
and gateways is an emblem of divine guardianship. King Solomon was often
symbolized as a lion. For ages the feline family has been regarded with
peculiar veneration. In several of the Mysteries--most notably the
Egyptian--the priests wore the skins of lions, tigers, panthers, pumas,
or leopards. Hercules and Samson (both solar symbols) slew the lion of
the constellation of Leo and robed themselves in his skin, thus
signifying that they represented the sun itself when at the summit of
the celestial arch.

At Bubastis in Egypt was the temple of the famous goddess Bast, the cat
deity of the Ptolemies. The Egyptians paid homage to the cat, especially
when its fur was of three shades or its eyes of different colors. To the
priests the cat was symbolic of the magnetic forces of Nature, and they
surrounded themselves with these animals for the sake of the astral fire
which emanated from their bodies. The cat was also a symbol of eternity,
for when it sleeps it curls up into a ball with its head and tail
touching. Among the Greeks and Latins the cat was sacred to the goddess
Diana. The Buddhists of India invested the cat with special
significance, but for a different reason. The cat was the only animal
absent at the death of the great Buddha, because it had stopped on the
way to chase a mouse. That the symbol of the lower astral forces should
not be present at the liberation of the Buddha is significant.

Regarding the cat, Herodotus says: "Whenever a fire breaks out, cats are
agitated with a kind of divine motion, which they that keep them
observe, neglecting the fire: The cats, however, in spite of their care,
break from them, leaping even over the heads of their keepers to throw
themselves into the fire. The Egyptians then make great mourning for
their death. If a cat dies a natural death in a house, all they of that
house shave their eyebrows: If a dog, they shave the head and all the
body. They used to embalm their dead cats, and carry them to Bubastis to
be interred in a sacred house. (Montfaucon's *Antiquities*.)

The most important of all symbolic animals was the Apis, or Egyptian
bull of Memphis, which was regarded as the sacred vehicle for the
transmigration of the soul of the god Osiris. It was declared that the
Apis was conceived by a bolt of lightning, and the ceremony attendant
upon its selection and consecration was one of the most impressive in
Egyptian ritualism. The Apis had to be marked in a certain manner.
Herodotus states that the bull must be black with a square white spot on
his forehead, the form of an eagle (probably a vulture) on his back, a
beetle upon (under) his tongue, and the hair of his tail lying two ways.
Other writers declare that the sacred bull was marked with twenty-nine
sacred symbols, his body was spotted, and upon his right side was a
white mark in the form of a crescent. After its sanctification the Apis
was kept in a stable adjacent to the temple and led in processionals
through the streets of the city upon certain solemn occasions. It was a
popular belief among the Egyptians that any child upon whom the bull
breathed would become illustrious. After reaching a certain age
(twenty-five years) the Apis was taken either to the river Nile or to a
sacred fountain (authorities differ on this point) and drowned, amidst
the lamentations of the populace. The mourning and wailing for his death
continued until the new Apis was found, when it was declared that Osiris
had reincarnated, whereupon rejoicing took the place of grief.

The worship of the bull was not confined to Egypt, but was prevalent in
many nations of the ancient world. In India, Nandi--the sacred white
bull of Siva--is still the object of much veneration; and both the
Persians and the Jews accepted the bull as an important religious
symbol. The Assyrians, Phœnicians, Chaldeans, and even the Greeks
reverenced this animal, and Jupiter turned himself into a white bull to
abduct Europa. The bull was a powerful phallic emblem signifying the
paternal creative power of the Demiurgus. At his death he was frequently
mummified and buried with the pomp and dignity of a god in a specially
prepared sarcophagus. Excavations in the Serapeum at Memphis have
uncovered the tombs of more than sixty of these sacred animals.

As the sign rising over the horizon at the vernal equinox constitutes
the starry body for the annual incarnation of the sun, the bull not only
was the celestial symbol of the Solar Man but, because the vernal
equinox took place in the constellation of Taurus, was called the
*breaker* or *opener* of the year. For this reason in astronomical
symbolism the bull is often shown breaking the annular egg with his
horns. The Apis further signifies that the God-Mind is incarnated in the
body of a beast and therefore that the physical beast form is the sacred
vehicle of divinity. Man's lower personality is the Apis in which Osiris
incarnates. The result of the combination is the creation of Sor-Apis
(Serapis)-the material soul as ruler of the irrational material body and
involved therein. After a certain period (which is determined by the
square of five, or twenty-five years), the body of the Apis is destroyed
and the soul liberated by the water which drowns the material life. This
was indicative of the washing away of the material nature by the
baptismal waters of divine light and truth. The drowning of the Apis is
the symbol of death; the resurrection of Osiris in the new bull is the
symbol of eternal renovation. The white bull was also symbolically
sacred as the appointed emblem of the initiates, signifying the
spiritualized material bodies of both man and Nature.

When the vernal equinox no longer occurred in the sign of Taurus, the
Sun God incarnated in the constellation of Aries and the ram then became
the vehicle of the solar power. Thus the sun rising in the sign of the
Celestial Lamb triumphs over the symbolic serpent of darkness. The lamb
is a familiar emblem of purity because of its gentleness and the
whiteness of its wool. In many of the pagan Mysteries it signified the
Universal Savior, and in Christianity it is the favorite symbol of
Christ. Early church paintings show a lamb standing upon a little hill,
and from its feet pour four streams of living water signifying the four
Gospels. The blood of the lamb is the solar life pouring into the world
through the sign of Aries.

The goat is both a phallic symbol and also an emblem of courage or
aspiration because of its surefootedness and ability to scale the
loftiest peaks. To the alchemists the goat's head was the symbol of
sulphur. The practice among the ancient Jews of choosing a scapegoat
upon which to heap the sins of mankind is merely an allegorical

<span id="page_09100">p. 09100</span>

From Kircher's *Sphinx Mystagoga*.

THE SACRED BULL, OR APIS.

The importance of the bull as the symbol of the sun at the vernal
equinox is discussed in the chapter on *The Zodiac and Its Signs*. The
bull and the ox are ancient emblems of the element of
earth--consequently of the planet itself. They also signify the animal
nature of man, and for this reason were sacrificed upon the altars of
such ancient Mysteries as the Jewish and Druidic. Plutarch wrote: "The
Apis ought to be regarded by us, as a fair and beautiful image of the
soul of Osiris." Osiris represents the spiritual nature of the lower
world which is murdered and distributed throughout the substance of the
physical spheres; Apis is the emblem of the material world within which
is the spiritual nature--Osiris. The Apis is also the symbol of the
exoteric (or profane) doctrine, in contradistinction to the esoteric (or
divine) teachings represented by the uræus worn upon the foreheads of
the priests. Front this is derived the mythological allegory of Serapis,
who in a certain sense is not only the composite figure of Osiris and
the lower world in which he is incarnated but also of the Mysteries,
which are the terrestrial bodies containing the secret teachings, or the
spiritual soul.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

depiction of the Sun Man who is the scapegoat of the world and upon whom
are cast the sins of the twelve houses (tribes) of the celestial
universe. Truth is the Divine Lamb worshiped throughout pagandom and
slain for the sins of the world, and since the dawn of time the Savior
Gods of all religions have been personifications of this Truth. The
Golden Fleece sought by Jason and his Argonauts is the Celestial
Lamb--the spiritual and intellectual sun. The secret doctrine is also
typified by the Golden Fleece--the wool of the Divine Life, the rays of
the Sun of Truth. Suidas declares the Golden Fleece to have been in
reality a book, written upon skin, which contained the formulæ for the
production of gold by means of chemistry. The Mysteries were
institutions erected for the transmutation of base ignorance into
precious illumination. The dragon of ignorance was the terrible creature
set to guard the Golden Fleece, and represents the darkness of the old
year which battles with the sun at the time of its equinoctial passage.

Deer were sacred in the Bacchic Mysteries of the Greeks; the Bacchantes
were often clothed in fawnskins. Deer were associated with the worship
of the moon goddess and the Bacchic orgies were usually conducted at
night. The grace and speed of this animal caused it to be accepted as
the proper symbol of esthetic abandon. Deer were objects of veneration
with many nations. In Japan, herds of them are still maintained in
connection with the temples.

The wolf is usually associated with the principle of evil, because of
the mournful discordance of its howl and the viciousness of its nature.
In Scandinavian mythology the Fenris Wolf was one of the sons of Loki,
the infernal god of the fires. With the temple of Asgard in flames about
them, the gods under the command of Odin fought their last great battle
against the chaotic forces of evil. With frothing jowls the Fenris Wolf
devoured Odin, the Father of the Gods, and thus destroyed the Odinic
universe. Here the Fenris Wolf represents those mindless powers of
Nature that overthrew the primitive creation.

The unicorn, or monoceros, was a most curious creation of the ancient
initiates. It is described by Thomas Boreman as "a beast, which though
doubted of by many writers, yet is by others thus described: He has but
one horn, and that an exceedingly rich one, growing out of the middle of
his forehead. His head resembles an hart's, his feet an elephant's, his
tail a boar's, and the rest of his body an horse's. The horn is about a
foot and half in length. His voice is like the lowing of an ox. His mane
and hair are of a yellowish colour. His horn is as hard as iron, and as
rough as any file, twisted or curled, like a flaming sword; very
straight, sharp, and every where black, excepting the point. Great
virtues are attributed to it, in expelling of poison and curing of
several diseases. He is not a beast of prey. " (See Redgrove's *Bygone
Beliefs*.)

While the unicorn is mentioned several times in Scripture, no proof has
yet been discovered of its existence. There are a number of drinking
horns in various museums presumably fashioned from its spike. It is
reasonably certain, however, that these drinking vessels were really
made either from the tusks of some large mammal or the horn of a
rhinoceros. J. P. Lundy believes that the horn of the unicorn symbolizes
the hem of salvation mentioned by St. Luke which, pricking the hearts of
men, turns them to a consideration of salvation through Christ. Mediæval
Christian mystics employed the unicorn as an emblem of Christ, and this
creature must therefore signify the spiritual life in man. The single
horn of the unicorn may represent the pineal gland, or third eye, which
is the spiritual cognition center in the brain. The unicorn was adopted
by the Mysteries as a symbol of the illumined spiritual nature of the
initiate, the horn with which it defends itself being the flaming sword
of the spiritual doctrine against, which nothing can prevail.

In the *Book of Lambspring*, a rare Hermetic tract, appears an engraving
showing a deer and a unicorn standing together in a wood. The picture is
accompanied by the following text: "The Sages say truly that two animals
are in this forest: One glorious, beautiful, and swift, a great and
strong deer; the other an unicorn. \* \* \* If we apply the parable of
our art, we shall call the forest the *body*. \* \* \* The unicorn will
be the *spirit* at all times. The deer desires no other name but that of
the *soul*; \* \* \*. He that knows how to tame and master them by art,
to couple them together, and to lead them in and our of the form, may
justly be called a Master."

The Egyptian devil, Typhon, was often symbolized by the *Set* monster
whose identity is obscure. It has a queer snoutlike nose and pointed
ears, and may have been a conventional hyena. The *Set* monster lived in
the sand storms and wandered about the world promulgating evil. The
Egyptians related the howling of the desert winds with the moaning cry
of the hyena. Thus when in the depths of the night the hyena sent forth
its doleful wail it sounded like the last despairing cry of a lost soul
in the clutches of Typhon. Among the duties of this evil creature was
that of protecting the Egyptian dead against: grave robbers.

Among other symbols of Typhon was the hippopotamus, sacred to the god
Mars because Mars was enthroned in the sign of Scorpio, the house of
Typhon. The ass was also sacred to this Egyptian demon. Jesus riding
into Jerusalem upon the back of an ass has the same significance as
Hermes standing upon the prostrate form of Typhon. The early Christians
were accused of worshiping the head of an ass. A most curious animal
symbol is the hog or sow, sacred to Diana, and frequently employed in
the Mysteries as an emblem of the occult art. The wild boar which
[gored](errata.htm#5) Atys shows the use of this animal in the
Mysteries.

According to the Mysteries, the monkey represents the condition of man
before the rational soul entered into his constitution. Therefore it
typifies the irrational man. By some the monkey is looked upon as a
species not ensouled by the spiritual hierarchies; by others as a fallen
state wherein man has been deprived of his divine nature through
degeneracy. The ancients, though evolutionists, did not trace man's
ascent through the monkey; the monkey they considered as having
separated itself from the main stem of progress. The monkey was
occasionally employed as a symbol of learning. Cynocephalus, the
dog-headed ape, was the Egyptian hieroglyphic symbol of writing, and was
closely associated with Thoth. Cynocephalus is symbolic of the moon and
Thoth of the planet Mercury. Because of the ancient belief that the moon
followed Mercury about the heavens the dog-ape was described as the
faithful companion of Thoth.

The dog, because of its faithfulness, denotes the relationship which
should exist between disciple and master or between the initiate and his
God. The shepherd dog was a type of the priestcraft. The dog's ability
to sense and follow unseen persons for miles symbolized the
transcendental power by which the philosopher follows the thread of
truth through the labyrinth of earthly error. The dog is also the symbol
of Mercury. The Dog Star, Sirius or Sothis, was sacred to the Egyptians
because it presaged the annual inundations of the Nile.

As a beast of burden the horse was the symbol of the body of man forced
to sustain the weight of his spiritual constitution. Conversely, it also
typified the spiritual nature of man forced to maintain the burden of
the material personality. Chiron, the centaur, mentor of Achilles,
represents the primitive creation which was the progenitor and
instructor of mankind, as described by Berossus. The winged horse and
the magic carpet both symbolize the secret doctrine and the
spiritualized body of man. The wooden horse of Troy, secreting an army
for the capture of the city, represents man's body concealing within it
those infinite potentialities which will later come forth and conquer
his environment. Again, like Noah's Ark, it represents the spiritual
nature of man as containing a host of latent potentialities which
subsequently become active. The siege of Troy is a symbolic account of
the abduction of the human soul (Helena) by the personality (Paris) and
its final redemption, through persevering struggle, by the secret
doctrine--the Greek army under the command of Agamemnon.

<span id="img_09200"></span>

[![ÆNEAS AND THE HARPIES.](tn/09200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09200.jpg)  
ÆNEAS AND THE HARPIES.  

From Virgil's *Æneid*. (Dryden's translation.)

Among the mythological creatures of the Mysteries were the
harpies--projections into material substance of beings existing in the
invisible world of Nature. They were described the Greeks as being
composite, with the heads of maidens and the bodies of birds. The wings
of the harpies were composed of metal and their flight was, accompanied
by a terrible clanging noise. During his wanderings, Æneas, the Trojan
hero, landed on the island of the harpies, where he and his followers
vainly battled with these monsters. One of the harpies perched upon a
cliff and there prophesied to Æneid that his attack upon them would
bring dire calamity to the Trojans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Flowers, Plants, Fruits, and Trees](sta22)
