[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta19)  [Next](sta21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

# Fishes, Insects, Animals, Reptiles and Birds

### Part One

THE creatures inhabiting the water, air, and earth were held in
veneration by all races of antiquity. Realizing that visible bodies are
only symbols of invisible forces, the ancients worshiped the Divine
Power through the lower kingdoms of Nature, because those less evolved
and more simply constituted creatures responded most readily to the
creative impulses of the gods. The sages of old studied living things to
a point of realization that God is most perfectly understood through a
knowledge of His supreme handiwork--animate and inanimate Nature.

Every existing creature manifests some aspect of the intelligence or
power of the Eternal One, who can never be known save through a study
and appreciation of His numbered but inconceivable parts. When a
creature is chosen, therefore, to symbolize to the concrete human mind
some concealed abstract principle it is because its characteristics
demonstrate this invisible principle in visible action. Fishes, insects,
animals, reptiles, and birds appear in the religious symbolism of nearly
all nations, because the forms and habits of these creatures and the
media in which they exist closely relate them to the various generative
and germinative powers of Nature, which were considered as prima-facie
evidence of divine omnipresence.

The early philosophers and scientists, realizing that all life has its
origin in water, chose the fish as the symbol of the life germ. The fact
that fishes are most prolific makes the simile still more apt. While the
early priests may not have possessed the instruments necessary to
analyze the spermatozoon, they concluded by deduction that it resembled
a fish.

Fishes were sacred to the Greeks and Romans, being connected with the
worship of Aphrodite (Venus). An interesting survival of pagan ritualism
is found in the custom of eating fish on Friday. *Freya*, in whose honor
the day was named, was the Scandinavian Venus, and this day was sacred
among many nations to the goddess of beauty and fecundity. This analogy
further links the fish with the procreative mystery. Friday is also
sacred to the followers of the Prophet Mohammed.

The word *nun* means both fish and growth, and as Inman says: "The Jews
were led to victory by the Son of the Fish whose other names were Joshua
and Jesus (the Savior). *Nun* is still the name of a female devotee" of
the Christian faith. Among early Christians three fishes were used to
symbolize the Trinity, and the fish is also one of the eight sacred
symbols of the great Buddha. It is also significant that the dolphin
should be sacred to both Apollo (the Solar Savior) and Neptune. It was
believed that this fish carried shipwrecked sailors to heaven on its
back. The dolphin was accepted by the early Christians as an emblem of
Christ, because the pagans had viewed this beautiful creature as a
friend and benefactor of man. The heir to the throne of France, *the
Dauphin*, may have secured his title from this ancient pagan symbol of
the divine preservative power. The first advocates of Christianity
likened converts to fishes, who at the time of baptism "returned again
into the sea of Christ."

Primitive peoples believed the sea and land were inhabited by strange
creatures, and early books on zoology contain curious illustrations of
composite beasts, reptiles, and fishes, which did not exist at the time
the mediæval authors compiled these voluminous books. In the ancient
initiatory rituals of the Persian, Greek, and Egyptian Mysteries the
priests disguised themselves as composite creatures, thereby symbolizing
different aspects of human consciousness. They used birds and reptiles
as emblems of their various deities, often creating forms of grotesque
appearance and assigning to them imaginary traits, habits, and places of
domicile, all of which were symbolic of certain spiritual and
transcendental truths thus concealed from the profane. The *phœnix* made
its nest of incense and flames. The *unicorn* had the body of a horse,
the feet of an elephant, and the tail of a wild boar. The upper half of
the *centaur's* body was human and the lower half equine. The *pelican*
of the Hermetists fed its young from its own breast, and to this bird
were assigned other mysterious attributes which could have been true
only allegorically.

Though regarded by many writers of the Middle Ages as actual living
creatures, none of these--the pelican excepted--ever existed outside the
symbolism of the Mysteries. Possibly they originated in rumors of
animals then little known. In the temple, however, they became a
reality, for there they signified the manifold characteristics of man's
nature. The *mantichora* had certain points in common with the hyena;
the *unicorn* may have been the single-horned rhinoceros. To the student
of the secret wisdom these composite animals. and birds simply represent
various forces working in the invisible worlds. This is a point which
nearly all writers on the subject of mediæval monsters seem to have
overlooked. (See Vlyssis Aldrovandi's *Monstrorum Historia*, 1642, and
*Physica Curiosa*, by P. Gaspare Schotto, 1697.)

There are also legends to the effect that long before the appearance of
human beings there existed a race or species of composite creatures
which was destroyed by the gods. The temples of antiquity preserved
their own historical records and possessed information concerning the
prehistoric world that has never been revealed to the uninitiated.
According to these records, the human race evolved from a species of
creature that partook somewhat of the nature of an amphibian, for at
that time primitive man had the gills of a fish and was partly covered
with scales. To a limited degree, the human embryo demonstrates the
possibility of such a condition. As a result of the theory of man's
origin in water, the fish was looked upon as the progenitor of the human
family. This gave rise to the ichthyolatry of the Chaldeans, Phœnicians,
and Brahmins. The American Indians believe that the waters of lakes,
rivers, and oceans are inhabited by a mysterious people, the "Water
Indians."

The fish has been used as an emblem of damnation; but among the Chinese
it typified contentment and good fortune, and fishes appear on many of
their coins. When Typhon, or Set, the Egyptian evil genius, had divided
the body of the god Osiris into fourteen parts, he cast one part into
the river Nile, where, according to Plutarch, it was devoured by three
fishes--the *lepidotus* (probably the *lepidosiren*), the *phagrus*, and
the *oxyrynchus* (a form of pike). For this reason the Egyptians would
not eat the flesh of these fishes, believing that to do so would be to
devour the body of their god. When used as a symbol of evil, the fish
represented the earth (man's lower nature) and the tomb (the sepulcher
of the Mysteries). Thus was Jonah three days in the belly of the "great
fish," as Christ was three days in the tomb.

Several early church fathers believed that the "whale" which swallowed
Jonah was the symbol of God the Father, who, when the hapless prophet
was thrown overboard, accepted Jonah into His own nature until a place
of safety was reached. The story of Jonah is really a legend of
initiation into the Mysteries, and the "great fish" represents the
darkness of ignorance which engulfs man when he is thrown over the side
of the ship (is born) into the sea (life). The custom of building ships
in the form of fishes or birds, common in ancient times, could give rise
to the story, and mayhap Jonah was merely picked up by

<span id="img_08500"></span>

[![THE FIRST INCARNATION, OR MATSYA AVATAR, OF VISHNU.](tn/08500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08500.jpg)  
THE FIRST INCARNATION, OR MATSYA AVATAR, OF VISHNU.  

From Picart's *Religious Ceremonials*.

The fish has often been associated with the World Saviors. Vishnu, the
Hindu Redeemer, who takes upon himself ten forms for the redemption of
the universe, was expelled from the mouth of a fish in his first
incarnation. Isis, while nursing the infant Horus, is often shown with a
fish on her headdress. Oannes, the Chaldean Savior (borrowed from the
Brahmins), is depicted with the head and body of a fish, from which his
human form protrudes at various points. Jesus was often symbolized by a
fish. He told His disciples that they should became "fishers of men."
The sign of the fish was also the first monogram of the Christians. The
mysterious Greek name of Jesus, ΙΧΘΥΣ, means "a fish." The fish was
accepted as a symbol of the Christ by a number of early canonized church
fathers. St. Augustine likened the Christ to a fish that had been
broiled, and it was also pointed out that the flesh of that Fish was the
food of righteous and holy men.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

another vessel and carried into port, the pattern of the ship causing it
to be called a "great fish." ("*Veritatis simplex oratio est!*") More
probably the "whale" of Jonah is based upon the pagan mythological
creature, *hippocampus*, part horse and part dolphin, for the early
Christian statues and carvings show the composite creature and not a
true whale.

It is reasonable to suppose that the mysterious sea serpents, which,
according to the Mayan and Toltec legends, brought the gods to Mexico
were Viking or Chaldean ships, built in the shape of composite sea
monsters or dragons. H. P. Blavatsky advances the theory that the word
*cetus*, the great whale, is derived from *keto*, a name for the fish
god, Dagon, and that Jonah was actually confined in a cell hollowed out
in the body of a gigantic statue of Dagon after he had been captured by
Phœnician sailors and carried to one of their cities. There is no doubt
a great mystery in the gigantic form of *cetus*, which is still
preserved as a constellation.

According to many scattered fragments extant, man's lower nature was
symbolized by a tremendous, awkward creature resembling a great sea
serpent, or dragon, called *leviathan*. All symbols having serpentine
form or motion signify the solar energy in one of its many forms. This
great creature of the sea therefore represents the solar life force
imprisoned in water and also the divine energy coursing through the body
of man, where, until transmuted, it manifests itself as a writhing,
twisting monster---man's greeds, passions, and lusts. Among the symbols
of Christ as the Savior of men are a number relating to the mystery of
His divine nature concealed within the personality of the lowly Jesus.

The Gnostics divided the nature of the Christian Redeemer into two
parts--the one Jesus, a mortal man; the other, Christos, a
personification of *Nous*, the principle of Cosmic Mind. *Nous*, the
greater, was for the period of three years (from baptism to crucifixion)
using the fleshly garment of the mortal man (Jesus). In order to
illustrate this point and still conceal it from the ignorant, many
strange, and often repulsive, creatures were used whose rough exteriors
concealed magnificent organisms. Kenealy, in his notes on the *Book of
Enoch*, observes: "Why the caterpillar was a symbol of the Messiah is
evident; because, under a lowly, creeping, and wholly terrestrial
aspect, he conceals the beautiful butterfly-form, with its radiant
wings, emulating in its varied colors the Rainbow, the Serpent, the
Salmon, the Scarab, the Peacock, and the dying Dolphin \* \* \*.

### INSECTS

In 1609 Henry Khunrath's *Amphitheatrum Sapientiæ Æternæ* was published.
Eliphas Levi declared that within its pages are concealed all the great
secrets of magical philosophy. A remarkable plate in this work shows the
Hermetic sciences being attacked by the bigoted and ignorant pedagogues
of the seventeenth century. In order to express his complete contempt
for his slanderers, Khunrath made out of each a composite beast, adding
donkey ears to one and a false tail to another. He reserved the upper
part of the picture for certain petty backbiters whom he gave
appropriate forms. The air was filled with strange creatures--great
dragon flies, winged frogs, birds with human heads, and other weird
forms which defy description--heaping venom, gossip, spite, slander, and
other forms of persecution upon the secret arcanum of the wise. The
drawing indicated that their attacks were ineffectual. Poisonous insects
were often used to symbolize the deadly power of the human tongue.

Insects of all kinds were also considered emblematic of the Nature
spirits and dæmons, for both were believed to inhabit the atmosphere.
Mediæval drawings showing magicians in the act of invoking spirits,
often portray the mysterious powers of the other world, which the
conjurer has exorcised, as appearing to him in composite part-insect
forms. The early philosophers apparently held the opinion that the
disease which swept through communities in the form of plagues were
actually living creatures, but instead of considering a number of tiny
germs they viewed the entire plague as one individuality and gave it a
hideous shape to symbolize its destructiveness. The fact that plagues
came in the air caused an insect or a bird to be used as their symbol.

Beautiful symmetrical forms were assigned to all natural benevolent
conditions or powers, but to unnatural or malevolent powers were
assigned contorted and abnormal figures. The Evil One was either
hideously deformed or else of the nature of certain despised animals. A
popular superstition during the Middle Ages held that the Devil had the
feet of a rooster, while the Egyptians assigned to Typhon (Devil) the
body of a hog.

The habits of the insects were carefully studied. Therefore the ant was
looked upon as emblematic of industry and foresight, as it stored up
supplies for the winter and also had strength to move objects many times
its own weight. The locusts which swept down in clouds, and in some
parts of Africa and Asia obscured the sun and destroyed every green
thing, were considered fit emblems of passion, disease, hate, and
strife; for these emotions destroy all that is good in the soul of man
and leave a barren desert behind them. In the folklore of various
nations, certain insects are given special significance, but the ones
which have received world-wide veneration and consideration ate the
scarab, the king of the insect kingdom; the scorpion, the great
betrayer; the butterfly, the emblem of metamorphosis; and the bee, the
symbol of industry.

The Egyptian scarab is one of the most remarkable symbolic figures ever
conceived by the mind of man. It was evolved by the erudition of the
priestcraft from a simple insect which, because of its peculiar habits
and appearance, properly symbolized the strength of the body, the
resurrection of the soul, and the Eternal and Incomprehensible Creator
in His aspect as Lord of the Sun. E. A. Wallis Budge says, in effect, of
the worship of the scarab by the Egyptians:

"Yet another view held in primitive times was that the sky was a vast
meadow over which a huge beetle crawled, pushing the disk of the sun
before him. This beetle was the Sky-god, and, arguing from the example
of the beetle (*Scarabæus sacer*), which was observed to roll along with
its hind legs a ball that was believed to contain its eggs, the early
Egyptians thought that the ball of the Sky-god contained his egg and
that the sun was his offspring. Thanks, however, to the investigations
of the eminent entomologist, Monsieur J. H. Fabre, we now know that the
ball which the *Scarabæus sacer* rolls along contains not its eggs, but
dung that is to serve as food for its egg, which it lays in a carefully
prepared place."

Initiates of the Egyptian Mysteries were sometimes called scarabs;
again, lions and panthers. The scarab was the emissary of the sun,
symbolizing light, truth, and regeneration. Stone scarabs, called heart
scarabs, about three inches long, were placed in the heart cavity of the
dead when that organ was removed to be embalmed separately as part of
the process of mummifying. Some maintain that the stone beetles were
merely wrapped in the winding cloths at the time of preparing the body
for eternal preservation. The following passage concerning this appears
in the great Egyptian book of initiation, *The Book of the Dead*: "And
behold, thou shalt make a scarab of green stone, which shalt be placed
in the breast of a man, and it shall perform for him, 'the opening of
the mouth.'" The funeral rites of many nations bear a striking
resemblance to the initiatory ceremonies of their Mysteries.

*Ra*, the god of the sun, had three important aspects. As the Creator of
the universe he was symbolized by the head of a scarab and was called
*Khepera*, which signified the resurrection of the soul and a new life
at the end of the mortal span. The mummy cases of the Egyptian dead were
nearly always ornamented with scarabs. Usually one of these beetles,
with outspread wings, was painted on the mummy case directly over the
breast of the dead. The finding of such great numbers of small stone
scarabs indicates that they were a favorite article of adornment among
the Egyptians. Because of its relationship to the sun, the scarab
symbolized the divine part of man's nature. The fact that its beautiful
wings were concealed under its glossy shell typified the winged soul of
man hidden within its earthly sheath. The Egyptian soldiers were given
the scarab as their special symbol because the ancients believed that
these creatures were all of the male sex and consequently appropriate
emblems of virility, strength, and courage.

Plutarch noted the fact that the scarab rolled its peculiar ball of dung
backwards, while the insect itself faced the opposite direction. This
made it an especially fitting symbol for the sun, because this orb
(according to Egyptian astronomy) was rolling from west to east,
although apparently moving in the opposite direction. An Egyptian
allegory states that the sunrise is caused by the scarab unfolding

<span id="img_08600"></span>

[![THE MANTICHORA.](tn/08600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08600.jpg)  
THE MANTICHORA.  

From Redgrove's *Bygone Beliefs*.

The most remarkable of allegorical creatures was the *mantichora*, which
Ctesias describes as having aflame-colored body, lionlike in shape,
three rows of teeth, a human head and ears, blue eyes, a tail ending in
a series of spikes and stings, thorny and scorpionlike, and a voice
which sounded like the blare of trumpets. This synthetic quadruped
ambled into mediæval works on natural history, but, though seriously
considered, had never been seen, because it inhabited inaccessible
regions and consequently was difficult to locate.

<span id="img_08601"></span>

[![ROYAL EGYPTIAN SCARAB.](tn/08601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08601.jpg)  
ROYAL EGYPTIAN SCARAB.  

From Hall's *Catalogue of Egyptian Scarabs, Etc., in the British
Museum*.

The flat under side of a scarab usually bears an inscription relating to
the dynasty during which it was cut. These scarabs were sometimes used
as seals. Some were cut from ordinary or precious stones; others were
made of clay, baked and glazed. Occasionally the stone scarabs were also
glazed. The majority of the small scarabs are pierced as though
originally used as beads. Some are so hard that they will cut glass. In
the picture above, A shows top and side views of the scarab, and B and B
the under surface with the name of Men-ka-Ra within the central
cartouche.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

its wings, which stretch out as glorious colors on each side of its
body--the solar globe--and that when it folds its wings under its dark
shell at sunset, night follows. *Khepera*, the scarab-headed aspect of
*Ra*, is often symbolized riding through the sea of the sky in a
wonderful ship called the *Boat of the Sun*.

The scorpion is the symbol of both wisdom and self-destruction. It was
called by the Egyptians the creature accursed; the time of year when the
sun entered the sign of Scorpio marked the beginning of the rulership of
Typhon. When the twelve signs of the zodiac were used to represent the
twelve Apostles (although the reverse is true), the scorpion was
assigned to Judas Iscariot--the betrayer.

The scorpion stings with its tail, and for this reason it has been
called a backbiter, a false and deceitful thing. Calmet, in his
*Dictionary of the Bible*, declares the scorpion to be a fit emblem of
the wicked and the symbol of persecution. The dry winds of Egypt are
said to be produced by Typhon, who imparts to the sand the blistering
heat of the infernal world and the sting of the scorpion. This insect
was also the symbol of the spinal fire which, according to the Egyptian
Mysteries, destroyed man when it was permitted to gather at the base of
his spine (the tail of the scorpion).The red star *Antares* in the back
of the celestial scorpion was considered the worst light in the heavens.
*Kalb al Akrab*, or the heart of the scorpion, was called by the
ancients the lieutenant or deputy of Mars. (See footnote to Ptolemy's
*Tetrabiblos*.) *Antares* was believed to impair the eyesight, often
causing blindness if it rose over the horizon when a child was born.
This may refer again to the sand storm, which was capable of blinding
unwary travelers.

The scorpion was also the symbol of wisdom, for the fire which it
controlled was capable of illuminating as well as consuming. Initiation
into the Greater Mysteries among the pagans was said to take place only
in the sign of the scorpion. In the papyrus of *Ani* (*The Book of the
Dead*), the deceased likens his soul to a scorpion, saying: "I am a
swallow, I am that scorpion, the daughter of Ra!" Elizabeth Goldsmith,
in her treatise on *Sex Symbolism*, states that the scorpions were a
"symbol of Selk, the Egyptian goddess of writing, and also \[were\]
revered by the Babylonians and Assyrians as guardians of the gateway of
the sun. Seven scorpions were said to have accompanied Isis when she
searched for the remains of Osiris scattered by Set" (Typhon).

In his *Chaldean Account of the Genesis*, George Smith, copying from the
cuneiform cylinders, in describing the wanderings of the hero *Izdubar*
(Nimrod), throws some light on the scorpion god who guards the sun. The
tablet which he translated is not perfect, but the meaning is fairly
clear: "\* \* \* who each day guard the rising sun. Their crown was at
the lattice of heaven, under hell their feet were placed \[the spinal
column\]. The scorpion man guarded the gate, burning with terribleness,
their appearance was like death, the might of his fear shook the forest.
At the rising of the sun and the setting of the sun, they guarded the
sun; Izdubar saw them and fear and terror came into his face." Among the
early Latins there was a machine of war called the scorpion. It was used
for firing arrows and probably obtained its name from a long beam,
resembling a scorpion's tail, which flew up to hurl the arrows. The
missiles discharged by this machine were also called scorpions.

The butterfly (under the name of *Psyche*, a beautiful maiden with wings
of opalescent light) symbolizes the human soul because of the stages it
passes through in order to unfold its power of flight. The three
divisions through which the butterfly passes in its unfoldment resemble
closely the three degrees of the Mystery School, which degrees are
regarded as consummating the unfoldment of man by giving him emblematic
wings by which he may soar to the skies. Unregenerate man, ignorant and
helpless, is symbolized by the stage between ovum and larva; the
disciple, seeking truth and dwelling in medication, by the second stage,
from larva to pupa, at which time the insect enters its chrysalis (the
tomb of the Mysteries); the third stage, from pupa to imago (wherein the
perfect butterfly comes forth), typifies the unfolded enlightened soul
of the initiate rising from the tomb of his baser nature.

Night moths typify the secret wisdom, because they are hard to discover
and are concealed by the darkness (ignorance). Some are emblems of
death, as *Acherontia atropos*, the death's-head moth, which has a
marking on its body somewhat like a human skull. The death-watch beetle,
which was believed to give warning of approaching death by a peculiar
ticking sound, is another instance of insects involved in human affairs.

Opinions differ concerning the spider. Its shape makes it an appropriate
emblem of the nerve plexus and ganglia of the human body. Some Europeans
consider it extremely bad luck to kill a spider--possibly because it is
looked upon as an emissary of the Evil One, whom no person desires to
offend. There is a mystery concerning all poisonous creatures,
especially insects. Paracelsus taught that the spider was the medium for
a powerful but evil force which the Black Magicians used in their
nefarious undertakings.

Certain plants, minerals, and animals have been sacred among all the
nations of the earth because of their peculiar sensitiveness to the
astral fire--a mysterious agency in Nature which the scientific world
has contacted through its manifestations as electricity and magnetism.
Lodestone and radium in the mineral world and various parasitic growths
in the plant kingdom are strangely susceptible to this cosmic electric
fire, or universal life force. The magicians of the Middle Ages
surrounded themselves with such creatures as bats, spiders, cats,
snakes, and monkeys, because they were able to appropriate the life
forces of these species and use them to the attainment of their own
ends. Some ancient schools of wisdom taught that all poisonous insects
and reptiles are germinated out of the evil nature of man, and that when
intelligent human beings no longer breed hate in their own souls there
will be no more ferocious animals, loathsome diseases, or poisonous
plants and insects.

Among the American Indians is the legend of a "Spider Man," whose web
connected the heaven worlds with the earth. The secret schools of India
symbolize certain of the gods who labored with the universe during its
making as connecting the realms of light with those of darkness by means
of webs. Therefore the builders of the cosmic system who held the
embryonic universe together with threads of invisible force were
sometimes referred to as the Spider Gods and their ruler was designated
The Great Spider.

The beehive is found in Masonry as a reminder that in diligence and
labor for a common good true happiness and prosperity are found. The bee
is a symbol of wisdom, for as this tiny insect collects pollen from the
flowers, so men may extract wisdom from the experiences of daily life.
The bee is sacred to the goddess Venus and, according to mystics, it is
one of several forms of life which came to the earth from the planet
Venus millions of years ago. Wheat and bananas are said to be of similar
origin. This is the reason why the origin of these three forms of life
cannot be traced. The fact that bees are ruled by queens is one reason
why this insect is considered a sacred feminine symbol.

In India the god Prana--the personification of the universal life
force--is sometimes shown surrounded by a circle of bees. Because of its
importance in pollenizing flowers, the bee is the accepted symbol of the
generative power. At one time the bee was the emblem of the French
kings. The rulers of France wore robes embroidered with bees, and the
canopies of their thrones were decorated with gigantic figures of these
insects.

The fly symbolizes the tormentor, because of the annoyance it causes to
animals. The Chaldean god Baal was often called Baal-Zebul, or the god
of the dwelling place. The word *zebub*, or *zabab*, means a fly, and
Baal-Zebul became Baalzebub, or Beelzebub, a word which was loosely
translated to mean Jupiter's fly. The fly was looked upon as a form of
the divine power, because of its ability to destroy decaying substances
and thus promote health. The fly may have obtained its name Zebub from
its peculiar buzzing or humming. Inman believes that Baalzebub, which
the Jews ridiculed as My Lord of Flies, really means My Lord Who Hums or
Murmurs.

Inman recalls the singing Memnon on the Egyptian desert, a tremendous
figure with an Æolian harp on the top of its head. When the wind blows
strongly this great Statue sighs, or hums. The Jews changed Baalzebub
into Beelzebub, and made him their prince of devils by interpreting
*dæmon* as "demon." Naudæus, in defending Virgil from accusations of
sorcery, attempted a wholesale denial of the miracles supposedly
performed by Virgil and produced enough evidence to convict the poet on
all counts. Among other strange fears, Virgil fashioned a fly out of
brass, and after certain mysterious ceremonies, placed it over one of
the gates of Naples. As a result, no flies entered the city for more
than eight years.

### REPTILES

The serpent was chosen as the head of the reptilian family. Serpent
worship in some form has permeated nearly all parts of the

<span id="img_08700"></span>

[![THE FLEUR-DE-LIS.](tn/08700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08700.jpg)  
THE FLEUR-DE-LIS.  

The bee was used as, a symbol of royalty by the immortal Charlemagne,
and it is probable that the fleur-de-lis, or lily of France, is merely a
conventionalized bee and not a flower. There is an ancient Greek legend
to the effect that the nine Muses occasionally assumed the form of bees.

<span id="img_08701"></span>

[![THE SCORPION TALISMAN.](tn/08701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08701.jpg)  
THE SCORPION TALISMAN.  

From Paracelsus' *Archidoxes Magica*.

The scorpion often appears upon the talismans and charms of the Middle
Ages. This hieroglyphic *Arachnida* was supposed to have the power of
curing disease. The scorpion shown above was composed of several metals,
and was made under certain planetary configurations. Paracelsus advised
that it be worn by those suffering from any derangement of the
reproductive system.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

earth. The serpent mounds of the American Indian; the carved-stone
snakes of Central and South America; the hooded cobras of India; Python,
the great snake o the Greeks; the sacred serpents of the Druids; the
Midgard snake of Scandinavia; the Nagas of Burma, Siam, and Cambodia;
the brazen serpent of the Jews; the mystic serpent of Orpheus; the
snakes at the oracle; of Delphi twining themselves around the tripod
upon which the Pythian priestess sat, the tripod itself being in the
form of twisted serpents; the sacred serpents preserved in the Egyptian
temples; the Uræus coiled upon the foreheads of the Pharaohs and
priests;--all these bear witness to the universal veneration in which
the snake was held. In the ancient Mysteries the serpent entwining a
staff was the symbol of the physician. The serpent-wound staff of Hermes
remains the emblem of the medical profession. Among nearly all these
ancient peoples the serpent was accepted as the symbol of wisdom or
salvation. The antipathy which Christendom feels towards the snake is
based upon the little-understood allegory of the Garden of Eden.

The serpent is true to the principle of wisdom, for it tempts man to the
knowledge of himself. Therefore the knowledge of self resulted from
man's disobedience to the *Demiurgus*, Jehovah. How the serpent came to
be in the garden of the Lord after God had declared that all creatures
which He had made during the six days of creation were good has not been
satisfactorily answered by the interpreters of Scripture. The tree that
grows in the midst of the garden is the spinal fire; the knowledge of
the use of that spinal fire is the gift of the great serpent.
Notwithstanding statements to the contrary, the serpent is the symbol
and prototype of the Universal Savior, who redeems the worlds by giving
creation the knowledge of itself and the realization of good and evil.
If this be not so, why did Moses raise a brazen serpent upon a cross in
the wilderness that all who looked upon it might be saved from the sting
of the lesser snakes? Was not the brazen serpent a prophecy of the
crucified Man to come? If the serpent be only a thing of evil, why did
Christ instruct His disciples to be as wise as serpents?

The accepted theory that the serpent is evil cannot be substantiated. It
has long been viewed as the emblem of immortality. It is the symbol of
reincarnation, or metempsychosis, because it annually sheds its skin,
reappearing, as it were, in a new body. There is an ancient superstition
to the effect that snakes never die except by violence and that, if
uninjured, they would live forever. It was also believed that snakes
swallowed themselves, and this resulted in their being considered
emblematic of the Supreme Creator, who periodically reabsorbed His
universe back into Himself.

In *Isis Unveiled*, H. P. Blavatsky makes this significant statement
concerning the origin of serpent worship: "Before our globe had become
egg-shaped or round it was a long trail of cosmic dust or fire-mist,
moving and writhing like a serpent. This, say the explanations, was the
Spirit of God moving on the chaos until its breath had incubated cosmic
matter and made it assume the annular shape of a serpent with its tail
in its month--emblem of eternity in its spiritual and of our world in
its physical sense."

The seven-headed snake represents the Supreme Deity manifesting through
His Elohim, or Seven Spirits, by whose aid He established His universe.
The coils of the snake have been used by the pagans to symbolize the
motion and also the orbits of the celestial bodies, and it is probable
that the symbol of the serpent twisted around the egg--which was common
to many of the ancient Mystery schools--represented both the apparent
motion of the sun around the earth, and the bands of astral light, or
the great magical agent, which move about the planet incessantly.

Electricity was commonly symbolized by the serpent because of its
motion. Electricity passing between the poles of a spark gap is
serpentine in its motion. Force projected through atmosphere was called
The Great Snake. Being symbolic of universal force, the serpent was
emblematic of both good and evil. Force can tear down as rapidly as it
can build up. The serpent with its tail in its mouth is the symbol of
eternity, for in this position the body of the reptile has neither
beginning nor end. The head and tail represent the positive and negative
poles of the cosmic life circuit. The initiates of the Mysteries were
often referred to as serpents, and their wisdom was considered analogous
to the divinely inspired power of the snake. There is no doubt that the
title "Winged Serpents" (the Seraphim?) was given to one of the
invisible hierarchies that labored with the earth during its early
formation.

There is a legend that in the beginning of the world winged serpents
[reigned](errata.htm#4) upon the earth. These were probably the demigods
which antedate the historical civilization of every nation. The symbolic
relationship between the sun and the serpent found literal witness in
the fact that life remains in the snake until sunset, even though it be
cut into a dozen parts. The Hopi Indians consider the serpent to be in
close communication with the Earth Spirit. Therefore, at the time of
their annual snake dance they send their prayers to the Earth Spirit by
first specially sanctifying large numbers of these reptiles and then
liberating them to return to the earth with the prayers of the tribe.

The great rapidity of motion manifested by lizards has caused them to be
associated with Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods, whose winged feet
traveled infinite distances almost instantaneously. A point which must
not be overlooked in connection with reptiles in symbolism is clearly
brought out by the eminent scholar, Dr. H. E. Santee, in his *Anatomy of
the Brain and Spinal Cord*: "In reptiles there are two pineal bodies, an
anterior and a posterior, of which the posterior remains undeveloped but
the anterior forms a rudimentary, cyclopean eye. In the Hatteria, a New
Zealand lizard, it projects through the parietal foramen and presents an
imperfect lens and retina and, in its long stalk, nerve fibers."

Crocodiles were regarded by the Egyptians both as symbols of Typhon and
emblems of the Supreme Deity, of the latter because while under water
the crocodile is capable of seeing--Plutarch asserts--though its eyes
are covered by a thin membrane. The Egyptians declared that no matter
how far away the crocodile laid its eggs, the Nile would reach up to
them in its next inundation, this reptile being endowed with a
mysterious sense capable of making known the extent of the flood months
before it took place. There were two kinds of crocodiles. The larger and
more ferocious was hated by the Egyptians, for they likened it to the
nature of Typhon, their destroying demon. Typhon waited to devour all
who failed to pass the judgment of the Dead, which rite took place in
the Hall of Justice between the earth and the Elysian Fields. Anthony
Todd Thomson thus describes the good treatment accorded the smaller and
tamer crocodiles, which the Egyptians accepted as personifications of
good: "They were fed daily and occasionally had mulled wine poured down
their throats. Their ears were ornamented with rings of gold and
precious stones, and their forefeet adorned with bracelets."

To the Chinese the turtle was a symbol of longevity. At a temple in
Singapore a number of sacred turtles are kept, their age recorded by
carvings on their shells. The American Indians use the ridge down the
back of the turtle shell as a symbol of the Great Divide between life
and death. The turtle is a symbol of wisdom because it retires into
itself and is its own protection. It is also a phallic symbol, as its
relation to long life would signify. The Hindus symbolized the universe
as being supported on the backs of four great elephants who, in turn,
are standing upon an immense turtle which is crawling continually
through chaos.

The Egyptian sphinx, the Greek centaur, and the Assyrian man-bull have
much in common. All are composite creatures combining human and animal
members; in the Mysteries all signify the composite nature of man and
subtly refer to the hierarchies of celestial beings that have charge of
the destiny of mankind. These hierarchies are the *twelve holy animals*
now known as constellations--star groups which are merely symbols of
impersonal spiritual impulses. Chiron, the centaur, teaching the sons of
men, symbolizes the intelligences of the constellation of Sagittarius,
who were the custodians of the secret doctrine while (geocentrically)
the sun was passing through the sign of Gemini. The five-footed Assyrian
man-bull with the wings of an eagle and the head of a man is a reminder
that the invisible nature of man has the wings of a god, the head of a
man, and the body of a beast. The same concept was expressed through the
sphinx--that armed guardian of the Mysteries who, crouching at the gate
of the temple, denied entrance to the profane. Thus placed between man
and his divine possibilities, the sphinx also represented the secret
doctrine itself. Children's fairy stories abound with descriptions of
symbolic monsters, for nearly all such tales are based upon the ancient
mystic folklore.

<span id="img_08800"></span>

[![THE URÆUS.](tn/08800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08800.jpg)  
THE URÆUS.  

From Kircher's *Œdipus Ægyptiacus*.

The spinal cord was symbolized by a snake, and the serpent coiled upon
the foreheads of the Egyptian initiates represented the Divine Fire
which had crawled serpentlike up the Tree of Life.

<span id="img_08801"></span>

[![GOOD AND EVIL CONTENDING FOR THE UNIVERSAL EGG.](tn/08801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08801.jpg)  
GOOD AND EVIL CONTENDING FOR THE UNIVERSAL EGG.  

From Maurice's *Indian Antiquities*.

Both Mithras, the Persian Redeemer, and Serapis, the Egyptian God of the
Earth, are symbolized by serpents coiled about their bodies. This
remarkable drawing shows the good and evil principles of
Persia--Ahura-Mazda and Ahriman--contending for the Egg of the Earth,
which each trying to wrench from the teeth of the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fishes, Insects, Animals, Reptiles and Birds (Part Two)](sta21)
