[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta31)  [Next](sta33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# The Tabernacle in the Wilderness

THERE is no doubt that much of the material recorded in the first five
books of the Old Testament is derived from the initiatory rituals of the
Egyptian Mysteries. The priests of Isis were deeply versed in occult
lore, and the Israelites during their captivity in Egypt learned from
them many things concerning the significance of Divinity and the manner
of worshiping It. The authorship of the first five books of the Old
Testament is generally attributed to Moses, but whether or not he was
the actual writer of them is a matter of controversy. There is
considerable evidence to substantiate the hypothesis that the Pentateuch
was compiled at a much later date, from oral traditions. Concerning the
authorship of these books, Thomas Inman makes a rather startling
statement: "It is true that we have books which purport to be the books
of Moses; so there are, or have been, books purporting to be written by
Homer, Orpheus, Enoch, Mormon, and Junius; yet the existence of the
writings, and the belief that they were written by those whose name they
bear, are no real evidences of the men or the genuineness of the works
called by their names. It is true also that Moses is spoken of
occasionally in the time of the early Kings of Jerusalem; but it is
clear that these passages are written by a late hand, and have been
introduced into the places where they are found, with the definite
intention of making it appear that the lawgiver was known to David and
Solomon." (See *Ancient Faiths Embodied in Ancient Names*.)

While this noted scholar undoubtedly had much evidence to support his
belief, it seems that this statement is somewhat too sweeping in
character. It is apparently based upon the fact that Thomas Inman
doubted the historical existence of Moses. This doubt was based upon the
etymological resemblance of the word Moses to an ancient name for the
sun. As the result of these deductions, Inman sought to prove that the
Lawgiver of Israel was merely another form of the omnipresent solar
myth. While Inman demonstrated that by transposing two of the ancient
letters the word *Moses* (משה) became *Shemmah* (שמה), an appellation of
the celestial globe, he seems to have overlooked the fact that in the
ancient Mysteries the initiates were often given names synonymous with
the sun, to symbolize the fact that the redemption and regeneration of
the solar power had been achieved within their own natures. It is far
more probable that the man whom we know as Moses was an accredited
representative of the secret schools, laboring--as many other emissaries
have labored--to instruct primitive races in the mysteries of their
immortal souls.

The true name of the Grand Old Man of Israel who is known to history as
Moses will probably never be ascertained. The word Moses, when
understood in its esoteric Egyptian sense, means one who has been
admitted into the Mystery Schools of Wisdom and \~as gone forth to teach
the ignorant concerning the will of the gods and the mysteries of life,
as these mysteries were explained within the temples of Isis, Osiris,
and Serapis. There is much controversy concerning the nationality of
Moses. Some assert that he was a Jew, adopted and educated by the ruling
house of Egypt; others hold the opinion that he was a full-blooded
Egyptian. A few even believe him to be identical with the immortal
Hermes, for both these illustrious founders of religious systems
received tablets from heaven supposedly written by the finger of God.
The stories told concerning Moses, his discovery in the ark of bulrushes
by Pharaoh's daughter, his adoption into the royal family of Egypt, and
his later revolt against Egyptian autocracy coincide exactly with
certain ceremonies through which the candidates of the Egyptian
Mysteries passed in their ritualistic wanderings in search of truth and
understanding. The analogy can also be traced in the movements of the
heavenly bodies.

It is not strange that the erudite Moses, initiated in Egypt, should
teach the Jews a philosophy containing the more important principles of
Egyptian esotericism. The religions of Egypt at the time of the
Israelitic captivity were far older than even the Egyptians themselves
realized. Histories were difficult to compile in those days, and the
Egyptians were satisfied to trace their race back to a mythological
period when the gods themselves walked the earth and with their own
power established the Double Empire of the Nile. The Egyptians did not
dream that these divine progenitors were the Atlanteans, who, forced to
abandon their seven islands because of volcanic cataclysms, had
immigrated into Egypt--then an Atlantean colony--where they established
a great philosophic and literary center of civilization which was later
to influence profoundly the religions and science of unnumbered races
and peoples. Today Egypt is forgotten, but things Egyptian will always
be remembered and revered. Egypt is dead--yet it lives immortal in its
philosophy, and architectonics.

As Odin founded his Mysteries in Scandinavia, and Quexalcoatl in Mexico,
so Moses, laboring with the then nomadic people of Israel's twelve
tribes, established in the midst of them his secret and symbolic school,
which has came to be known as The Tabernacle Mysteries. The Tabernacle
of: the Jews was merely a temple patterned after the temples of Egypt,
and transportable to meet the needs of that roving disposition which the
Israelites were famous. Every part of the Tabernacle and the enclosure
which surrounded it was symbolic of some great natural or philosophic
truth. To the ignorant it was but a place to which to bring offerings
and in which to make sacrifice; to the wise it was a temple of learning,
sacred to the Universal Spirit of Wisdom.

While the greatest, minds of the Jewish and Christian worlds have
realized that the Bible is a book of allegories, few seem to have taken
the trouble to investigate its symbols and parables. When Moses
instituted his Mysteries, he is said to have given to a chosen few
initiates certain oral teachings which could never be written but were
to be preserved from one generation to the next by word-of-mouth
transmission. Those instructions were in the form of philosophical keys,
by means of which the allegories were made to reveal their hidden
significance. These mystic keys to their sacred writings were called by
the Jews the *Qabbalah* (*Cabala*, *Kaballah*).

The modern world seems to have forgotten the existence of those
unwritten teachings which explained satisfactorily the apparent
contradictions of the written Scriptures, nor does it remember that the
pagans appointed their two-faced Janus as custodian of the key to the
Temple of Wisdom. Janus has been metamorphosed into St. Peter, so often
symbolized as holding in his hand the key to the gate of heaven. The
gold and silver keys of "God's Vicar on Earth," the Pope, symbolizes
this "secret doctrine" which, when properly understood, unlocks the
treasure chest of the Christian and Jewish Qabbalah.

The temples of Egyptian mysticism (from which the Tabernacle was copied)
were--according to their own priests--miniature representations of the
universe. The solar system was always regarded as a great temple of
initiation, which candidates entered through the gates of birth; after
threading the tortuous passageways of earthly existence, they finally
approached the veil of the Great Mystery--Death--through whose gate they
vanished back into the invisible world. Socrates subtly reminded his
disciples that Death was, in reality, the great initiation, for his last
words were: "Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to pay
the debt?" (As the rooster was sacred to the gods and the sacrifice of
this bird accompanied a candidate's introduction into the Mysteries,
Socrates implied that he was about to take his great initiation.)

Life is the great mystery, and only those who pass successfully through
its tests and trials, interpreting them aright and extracting the
essence of experience therefrom, achieve true understanding. Thus, the
temples were built in the form of the world and their rituals were based
upon life and its multitudinous problems. Nor only was the Tabernacle
itself patterned according to Egyptian mysticism; its utensils were also
of ancient and accepted form. The Ark

<span id="img_13300"></span>

[![THE ANCIENT OF DAYS.](tn/13300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13300.jpg)  
THE ANCIENT OF DAYS.  

From Montfaucon's *Antiquities*.

It is in this form that Jehovah is generally pictured by the Qabbalists.
The drawing is intended to represent the Demiurgus of the Greeks and
Gnostics, called by the Greeks "Zeus," the Immortal Mortal, and by the
Hebrews "IHVH."

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

of the Covenant itself was an adaptation of the Egyptian Ark, even to
the kneeling figures upon its lid. Bas-reliefs on the Temple of Philæ
show Egyptian priests carrying their Ark--which closely resembled the
Ark of the Jews--upon their shoulders by means of staves like those
described in Exodus.

The following description of the Tabernacle and its priests is based
upon the account of its construction and ceremonies recorded by Josephus
in the Third Book of his *Antiquities of the Jews*. The Bible references
are from a "Breeches" Bible (famous for its rendering of the seventh
verse of the third chapter of Genesis), printed in London in 1599, and
the quotations are reproduced in their original spelling and
punctuation.

### THE BUILDING OF THE TABERNACLE

Moses, speaking for Jehovah, the God of Israel, appointed two architects
to superintend the building of the Tabernacle. They were Besaleel, the
son of Uri, of the tribe of Judah, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of
the tribe of Dan. Their popularity was so great that they were also the
unanimous choice of the people. When Jacob upon his deathbed blessed his
sons (see Genesis xlix), he assigned to each a symbol. The symbol of
Judah was a lion; that of Dan a serpent or a bird (possibly an eagle).
The lion and the eagle are two of the four beasts of the Cherubim (the
fixed signs of the zodiac); and the Rosicrucian alchemists maintained
that the mysterious Stone of the Wise (the Soul) was compounded with the
aid of the Blood of the Red Lion and the Gluten of the White Eagle. It
seems probable that there is a hidden mystic relationship between fire
(the Red Lion), water (the White Eagle), as they were used in occult
chemistry, and the representatives of these two tribes whose symbols
were identical with these alchemical elements.

As the Tabernacle was the dwelling place of God among men, likewise the
soul body in man is the dwelling place of his divine nature, round which
gathers a twelvefold material constitution in the same manner that the
tribes of Israel camped about the enclosure sacred to Jehovah. The idea
that the Tabernacle was really symbolic of an invisible spiritual truth
outside the comprehension of the Israelites is substantiated by a
statement made in the eighth chapter of Hebrews: "Who serve unto the
paterne and shadowe of heavenly things, as Moses was warned by God, when
he was about to finish the Tabernacle." Here we find the material
physical place of worship called a "shadow" or symbol of a spiritual
institution, invisible but omnipotent.

The specifications of the Tabernacle are described in the book of
Exodus, twenty-fifth chapter: "Then the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
Speake unto the children of Israel that they receive an offering for me:
of every man, whose heart giveth it freely, yee shall take the offering
for me. And this is the offering which ye shall take of them, gold and
silver, and brass, and blue silke, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linnen and goats haire. And rammes skinnes coloured red, and the skinnes
of badgers, and the wood Shittim, oyle for the light, spices for
anoynting oyle, and for the perfume of sweet favour, onix stones, and
stories to be set in the Ephod, and in the breastplate. Also they shall
make me a Sanctuary, that I may dwell among them. According to all that
I shew thee, even so shall ye make the forme of the Tabernacle, and the
fashion of all the instruments thereof."

The court of the Tabernacle was an enclosed area, fifty cubits wide and
one hundred cubits long, circumscribed by a wall of linen curtains hung
from brazen pillars five cubits apart. (The cubit is an ancient standard
of measurement, its length being equal to the distance between the elbow
and the extreme end of the index finger, approximately eighteen inches.)
There were twenty of these pillars on each of the longer sides and ten
on the shorter. Each pillar had a base of brass and a capital of silver.
The Tabernacle was always laid out with the long sides facing north and
south and the short sides facing east and west, with the entrance to the
east, thus showing the influence of primitive sun worship.

The outer court served the principal purpose of isolating the tent of
the Tabernacle proper, which stood in the midst of the enclosure. At the
entrance to the courtyard, which was in the eastern face of the
rectangle, stood the Altar of Burnt Offerings, made of brass plates over
wood and ornamented with the horns of bulls and rams. Farther in, but on
a line with this altar, stood the Laver of Purification, a great vessel
containing water for priestly ablutions. The Laver was twofold in its
construction, the upper part being a large bowl, probably covered, which
served as a source of supply for a lower basin in which the priests
bathed themselves before participating in the various ceremonials. It is
supposed that this Laver was encrusted with the metal mirrors of the
women of the twelve tribes of Israel.

The dimensions of the Tabernacle proper were as follows: "Its length,
when it was set up, was thirty cubits, and its breadth was ten cubits.
The one of its walls was on the south, and the other was exposed to the
north, and on the back part of it remained the west. It was necessary
that its height should be equal to its breadth (ten cubits)."
(Josephus.)

It is the custom of bibliologists to divide the interior of the
Tabernacle into two rooms: one room ten cubits wide, ten cubits high,
and twenty cubits long, which was called the Holy Place and contained
three special articles of furniture, namely, the Seven-Branched
Candlestick, the Table of the Shewbread, and the Altar of Burnt Incense;
the other room ten cubits wide, ten cubits high, and ten cubits long,
which was called the Holy of Holies and contained but one article of
furniture--the Ark of the Covenant. The two rooms were separated from
each other by an ornamental veil upon which were embroidered many kinds
of flowers, but no animal or human figures.

Josephus hints that there was a third compartment which was formed by
subdividing the Holy Place, at least hypothetically, into two chambers.
The Jewish historian is not very explicit in his description of this
third room, and the majority of writers seem to have entirely overlooked
and neglected this point, although Josephus emphatically states that
Moses himself divided the inner tent into three sections. The veil
separating the Holy Place from the Holy of Holies was hung across four
pillars, which probably indicated in a subtle way the four elements,
while at the entrance to the tent proper the Jews placed seven pillars,
referring to the seven senses and the seven vowels of the Sacred Name.
That later only five pillars are mentioned may be accounted for by the
fact that at the present time man has only five developed senses and
five active vowels. The early Jewish writer of *The Baraitha* treats of
the curtains as follows:

"There were provided ten curtains of blue, of purple, and scarlet, and
fine-twined linen. As is said, 'Moreover thou shall make the tabernacle
with ten curtains of fine-twined linen, and blue, and purple, and
scarlet.' \* \* \* There were provided eleven curtains of goats' hair,
and the length of every one of them was thirty cubits, \* \* \*. Rabbi
Judah said, 'There were two covers-the lower one of rams' skins dyed
red, and the upper one of badgers' skins. '"

Calmet is of the opinion that the Hebrew word translated "badger" really
means "dark purple" and therefore did not refer to any particular
animal, but probably to a heavily woven waterproof fabric of dark and
inconspicuous color. During the time of Israel's wanderings through the
wilderness, it is supposed that a pillar of fire hovered over the
Tabernacle at night, while a column of smoke traveled with it by day.
This cloud was called by the Jews the *Shechinah* and was symbolic of
the presence of the Lord. In one of the early Jewish books rejected at
the time of the compiling of the Talmud the following description of the
*Shechinah* appears:

"Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the
Lord filled the Tabernacle. And that was one of the clouds of glory,
which served the Israelites in the wilderness forty years. One on the
right hand, and one on the left, and one before them, and one behind
them. And one over them, and a cloud dwelling in their midst (and the
cloud, the *Shechinah* which was in the tent), and the pillar of cloud
which moved before them, making low before them the high places, and
making high before them the low places, and killing serpents and
scorpions, and burning thorns and briars, and guiding them in the
straight way." (From *The Baraitha*, the Book of the Tabernacle.)

### THE FURNISHINGS OF THE TABERNACLE

There is no doubt that the Tabernacle, its furnishings and ceremonials,
when considered esoterically, are analogous to the structure, organs,
and functions of the human body. At the entrance to the outer court of
the Tabernacle stood the Altar of Burnt Offerings, five cubits long and
five cubits wide but only three cubits high. Its upper surface was a
brazen grill upon which the sacrifice was placed, while beneath was a
space for the fire. This altar signified

<span id="img_13400"></span>

[![ THE BREASTPLATE OF THE HIGH PRIEST.](tn/13400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13400.jpg)  
THE BREASTPLATE OF THE HIGH PRIEST.  

From Calmet's *Dictionary of the Holy Bible*.

The order of the stones and the tribe over which each administered were,
according to Calmet, as in the above diagram. These gems, according to
the Rosicrucians, were symbolic of the twelve great qualities and
virtues: Illumination, Love, Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Peace, Equilibrium,
Humility, Faith, Strength, Joy, Victory.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

that a candidate, when first entering the precincts of sanctuary, must
offer upon the brazen altar not a poor unoffending bull or ram but its
correspondence within his own nature. The bull, being symbolic of
earthiness, represented his own gross constitution which must be burned
up by the fire of his Divinity. (The sacrificing of beasts, and in some
cases human beings, upon the altars of the pagans was the result of
their ignorance concerning the fundamental principle underlying
sacrifice. They did not realize that their offerings must come from
within their own natures in order to be acceptable.)

Farther westward, in line with the Brazen Altar, was the Laver of
Purification already described. It signified to the priest that he
should cleanse not only his body but also his soul from all stains of
impurity, for none who is not clean in both body and mind can enter into
the presence of Divinity and live. Beyond the Laver of Purification was
the entrance to the Tabernacle proper, facing the east, so that the
first rays of the rising sun might enter and light the chamber. Between
the encrusted pillars could be seen the Holy Place, a mysterious
chamber, its walls hung with magnificent drapes embroidered with the
faces of Cherubs.

Against the wall on the southern side of the Holy Place stood the great
Candlestick, or lampstand, of cast gold, which was believed to weigh
about a hundred pounds. From its central shaft branched out six arms,
each ending in a cup-shaped depression in which stood an oil lamp. There
were seven lamps, three on the arms at each side and one on the central
stem. The Candlestick was ornamented with seventy-two almonds, knops,
and flowers. Josephus says seventy, but wherever this round number is
used by the Hebrews it really means seventy-two. Opposite the
Candlestick, against the northern wall, was a table bearing twelve
loaves of Shewbread in two stacks of six loaves each. (Calmet is of the
opinion that the bread was not stacked up but spread out on the table in
two rows, each containing six loaves.) On this table also stood two
lighted incensories, which were placed upon the tops of the stacks of
Shewbread so that the smoke of the incense might be an acceptable aroma
to the Lord, bearing with it in its ascent the soul of the Shewbread.

In the center of the room, almost against the partition leading into the
Holy of Holies, stood the Altar of Burnt Incense, made of wood overlaid
with golden plates. Its width and length were each a cubit and its
height was two cubits. This altar was symbolic of the human larynx, from
which the words of man's mouth ascend as an acceptable offering unto the
Lord, for the larynx occupies the position in the constitution of man
between the Holy Place, which is the trunk of his body, and the Holy of
Holies, which is the head with its contents.

Into the Holy of Holies none might pass save the High Priest, and he
only at certain prescribed times, The room contained no furnishings save
the Ark of the Covenant, which stood against the western wall, opposite
the entrance. In Exodus the dimensions of the Ark are given as two and a
half cubits for its length, one cubit and a half its breadth and one
cubit and a half its height. It was made of shittim-wood, gold plated
within and without, and contained the sacred tablets of the Law
delivered to Moses upon Sinai. The lid of the Ark was in the form of a
golden plate upon which knelt two mysterious creatures called Cherubim,
facing each other, with wings arched overhead. It was upon this mercy
seat between the wings of the celestials that the Lord of Israel
descended when He desired to communicate with His High Priest.

The furnishings of the Tabernacle were made conveniently portable. Each
altar and implement of any size was supplied with staves which could be
put: through rings; by this means it could be picked up and carried by
four or more bearers. The staves were never removed from the Ark of the
Covenant until it was finally placed in the Holy of Holies of the
Everlasting House, King Solomon's Temple.

There is no doubt that the Jews in early times realized, at least in
part, that their Tabernacle was a symbolic edifice. Josephus realized
this and while he has been severely criticized because he interpreted
the Tabernacle symbolism according to Egyptian and Grecian paganism, his
description of the secret meanings of its drapes and furnishings is well
worthy of consideration. He says:

"When Moses distinguished the tabernacle into three parts, and allowed
two of them to the priests, as a place accessible and common, he denoted
the land and the sea, these being of general access to all; but he set
apart the third division for God, because heaven is inaccessible to men.
And when he ordered twelve loaves to be set on a table, he denoted the
year, as distinguished into so many months. By branching out the
candlestick into seventy parts, he secretly intimated the Decani, or
seventy divisions of the planets; and as to the seven lamps upon the
candlesticks, they referred to the course of the planets, of which that
is the number. The veils too, which were composed of four things, they
declared the four elements; for the plain linen was proper to signify
the earth, because the flax grows out of the earth; the purple signified
the sea, because that color is dyed by the blood of a sea shell-fish;
the blue is fit to signify the air; and the scarlet will naturally be an
indication of fire.

"Now the vestment of the high-priest being made of linen, signified the
earth; the blue denoted the sky, being like lightning in its
pomegranates, and in the noise of the bells resembling thunder. And for
the Ephod, it showed that God had made the universe of four (elements);
and as for the gold interwoven, \* \* \* it related to the splendor by
which all things are enlightened. He also appointed the breastplate to
be placed in the middle of the Ephod, to resemble the earth, for that
has the very middle place of the world. And the girdle which encompassed
the high-priest round signified the ocean, for that goes round about and
includes the universe. Each of the sardonyxes declares to us the sun and
the moon, those, I mean, that were in the nature of buttons on the
high-priest's shoulders. And for the twelve stones, whether we
understand by them the months, or whether we understand the like number
of the signs of that circle which the Greeks call the Zodiac, we shall
not be mistaken in their meaning. And for the mitre, which was of a blue
colour, it seems to me to mean heaven; for how otherwise could the name
of God be inscribed upon it? That it was also illustrated with a crown,
and that of gold also, is because of that splendour with which God is
pleased." It is also symbolically significant that the Tabernacle was
built in seven months and dedicated to God at the time of the new moon.

The metals used in the building of the Tabernacle were all emblematic.
Gold represents spirituality, and the golden plates laid over the
shittim-wood were emblems of the spiritual nature which glorifies the
human nature symbolized by the wood. Mystics have taught that man's
physical body is surrounded by a series of invisible bodies of diverse
colors and great splendor. In the majority of people the spiritual
nature is concealed and imprisoned in the material nature, but in a few
this internal constitution has been objectified and the spiritual nature
is outside, so that it surrounds man's personality with a great
radiance.

Silver, used as the capitals for the pillars, has its reference to the
moon, which was sacred to the Jews and the Egyptians alike. The priests
held secret ritualistic ceremonies at the time of the new and the full
moon, both of which periods were sacred to Jehovah. Silver, so the
ancients taught, was gold with its sun-ray turned inward instead of
objectified. While gold symbolized the spiritual soul, silver
represented the purified and regenerated human nature of man.

The brass used in the outer altars was a composite substance consisting
of an alloy of precious and base metals. Thus, it represented the
constitution of the average individual, who is a combination of both the
higher and the lower elements.

The three divisions of the Tabernacle should have a special interest to
Freemasons, for they represent the three degrees of the Blue Lodge,
while the three orders of priests who served the Tabernacle are
preserved to modern Masonry as the Entered Apprentice, the Fellow
Craftsman, and the Master Mason. The Hawaiian Islanders built a
Tabernacle not unlike that of the Jews, except that their rooms were one
above another and not one behind another, as in the case of the
Tabernacle of the Israelites. The three rooms are also the three
important chambers of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

### THE ROBES OF GLORY

As explained in the quotation from Josephus, the robes and adornments of
the Jewish priests had a secret significance, and even to this day there
is a religious cipher language concealed in the colors, forms, and uses
of sacred garments, not only among the Christian and Jewish priests but
also among pagan religions. The vestments of the Tabernacle priests were
called *Cahanææ*; those of the High Priest were termed *Cahanææ Rabbæ*.
Over the *Machanese*, an undergarment resembling short trousers, they
wore the *Chethone*, a finely woven linen robe, which reached to the
ground and had long sleeves tied to the arms of the wearer. A brightly
embroidered sash, twisted several times around the waist (a little
higher than is customary), with one end pendent in front, and a closely
fitting linen cap, designated *Masnaemphthes*, completed the costume of
the ordinary priest.

<span id="img_13500"></span>

[![THE GARMENTS OF GLORY.](tn/13500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13500.jpg)  
THE GARMENTS OF GLORY.  

From *Mosaize Historie der Hebreeuwse Kerke*.

Th. robe of the High Priest of Israel were often called "The Garments of
Glory", for they resembled the regenerated and spiritualized nature of
man, symbolized by a vestment which all must weave from the threads of
character and virtue before they can become High Priests after the Order
of Melchizedek.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

The vestments of the High Priest were the same as those of the lesser
degrees, except that certain garments and adornments were added. Over
the specially woven white linen robe the High Priest wore a seamless and
sleeveless habit, sky-blue in color and reaching nearly to his feet.
This was called the *Meeir* and was ornamented with a fringe of
alternated golden bells and pomegranates. In Ecclesiasticus (one of the
books rejected from the modern Bible), these bells and their purpose are
described in the following words: "And he compassed him with
pomegranates, and with many golden bells round about, that as he went,
there might be a sound and a noise that might be heard in the temple,
for a memorial to the children of his people." The *Meeir* was also
bound in with a variegated girdle finely embroidered and with gold wire
inserted through the embroidery.

The *Ephod*, a short vestment described by Josephus as resembling a coat
or jacket, was worn over the upper part of the *Meeir*. The threads of
which the *Ephod* was woven were of many colors, probably red, blue,
purple, and white, like the curtains and coverings of the Tabernacle.
Fine gold wires were also woven into the fabric. The *Ephod* was
fastened at each shoulder with a large onyx in the form of a button, and
the names of the twelve sons of Jacob were engraven upon these two
stones, six on each. These onyx buttons were supposed to have oracular
powers, and when the High Priest asked certain questions, they emitted a
celestial radiance. When the onyx on the right shoulder was illuminated,
it signified that Jehovah answered the question of the High Priest: in
the affirmative, and when the one on the left gleamed, it indicated a
negative answer to the query.

In the middle of the front surface of the *Ephod* was a space to
accommodate the *Essen*, or *Breastplate of Righteousness and Prophecy*,
which, as its name signifies, was also an oracle of great power. This
pectoral was roughly square in shape and consisted of a frame of
embroidery into which were set twelve stones, each held in a socket of
gold. Because of the great weight of its stones, each of which was of
considerable size and immense value, the breastplate was held in
position by special golden chains and ribbons. The twelve stones of the
breastplate, like the onyx stones at the shoulders of the *Ephod*, had
the mysterious power of lighting up with Divine glory and so serving as
oracles. Concerning the strange power of these flashing symbols of
Israel's twelve tribes, Josephus writes:

"Yet will I mention what is still more wonderful than this: For God
declared beforehand, by those twelve stones which the High Priest bare
upon his breast and which were inserted into his breastplate, when they
should be victorious in battle; for so great a splendor shone forth from
them before the army began to march, that all the people were sensible
of God's being present for their assistance. Whence it came to pass that
those Greeks, who had a veneration for our laws, because they could not
possibly contradict this, called the breastplate, 'the Oracle'." The
writer then adds that the stones ceased to light up and gleam some two
hundred years before he wrote his history, because the Jews had broken
the laws of Jehovah and the God of Israel was no longer pleased with His
chosen people.

The Jews learned astronomy from the Egyptians, and it is not unlikely
that the twelve jewels of the breastplate were symbolic of the twelve
constellations of the zodiac. These twelve celestial hierarchies were
looked upon as jewels adorning the breastplate of the Universal Man, the
Macroprosophus, who is referred to in the Zohar as The Ancient of Days.
The number *twelve* frequently occurs among ancient peoples, who in
nearly every case had a pantheon consisting of twelve demigods and
goddesses presided over by The Invincible One, who was Himself subject
to the Incomprehensible All-Father. This use of the number twelve is
especially noted in the Jewish and Christian writings. The twelve
prophets, the twelve patriarchs, the twelve tribes, and the twelve
Apostles--each group has a certain occult significance, for each refers
to the Divine Duodecimo, or Twelvefold Deity, whose emanations are
manifested in the tangible created Universe through twelve
individualized channels. The secret doctrine also caught the priests
that the jewels represented centers of life within their own
constitutions, which when unfolded according to the esoteric
instructions of the Temple, were capable of absorbing into themselves
and radiating forth again the Divine light of the Deity. (The East
Indian lotus blossoms have a similar meaning.) The Rabbis have taught
that each twisted linen thread used in weaving the Tabernacle curtains
and ornamentations consisted of twenty-four separate strands, reminding
the discerning that the experience, gained during the twenty-four hours
of the day (symbolized in Masonry by the twenty-four-inch rule) becomes
the threads from which are woven the Garments of Glory.

### THE URIM AND THUMMIM

In the reverse side of the *Essen*, or breastplate, was a pocket
containing mysterious objects--the *Urim* and *Thummim*. Aside from the
fact that they were used in divination, little is now known about these
objects. Some writers contend that they were small stones (resembling
the fetishes still revered by certain aboriginal peoples) which the
Israelites had brought with them out of Egypt because of their belief
that they possessed divine power. Others believe that the *Urim* and
*Thummim* were in the form of dice, used for deciding events by being
cast upon the ground. A few have maintained that they were merely sacred
names, written on plates of gold and carried as talismans. "According to
some, the *Urim* and the *Thummim* signify 'lights and perfections,' or
'light and truth' which last present a striking analogy to the. two
figures of Re (Ra) and Themi in the breastplate worn by the Egyptians."
(Gardner's *The Faiths of the World*.)

Not the least remarkable of the vestments of the High Priest was his
bonnet, or headdress. Over the plain white cap of the ordinary priest
this dignitary wore an outer cloth of blue and a crown of gold, the
crown consisting of three bands, one above the other like the triple
miter of the Persian Magi. This crown symbolized that the High Priest
was ruler not only over the three worlds which the ancients had
differentiated (heaven, earth, and hell), but also over the threefold
divisions of man and the universe--the spiritual, intellectual, and
material worlds. These divisions were also symbolized by the three
apartments of the Tabernacle itself.

At the peak of the headdress was a tiny cup of gold, made in the form of
a flower. This signified that the nature of the priest was receptive and
that he had a vessel in his own soul which, cuplike, was capable of
catching the eternal waters of life pouring upon him from the heavens
above. This flower over the crown of his head is similar in its esoteric
meaning to the rose growing out of a skull, so famous in Templar
symbology. The ancients believed that the spiritual nature escaping from
the body passed upward through the crown of the head; therefore, the
flowerlike calyx, or cup, symbolized also the spiritual consciousness.
On the front of the golden crown were inscribed in Hebrew, *Holiness
unto the Lord*.

Though robes and ornaments augmented the respect and veneration of the
Israelites for their High Priest, such trappings meant nothing to
Jehovah. Therefore, before entering the Holy of Holies, the High Priest
removed his earthly finery and entered into the presence of the Lord God
of Israel unclothed. There he could be robed only in his own virtues,
and his spirituality must adorn him as a garment.

There is a legend to the effect that any who chanced to enter the Holy
of Holies unclean were destroyed by a bolt of Divine fire from the Mercy
Seat. If the High Priest had but one selfish thought, he would be struck
dead. As no man knows when an unworthy thought may flash through his
mind, precautions had to be taken in case the High Priest should be
struck dead while in the presence of Jehovah. The other priests could
not enter the sanctuary therefore, when their leader was about to go in
and receive the commands of the Lord, they tied a chain around one of
his feet so that if he were struck down while behind the veil they could
drag the body out.

<span id="img_13600"></span>

[![ THE HEADDRESS OF THE PRIESTS.](tn/13600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13600.jpg)  
THE HEADDRESS OF THE PRIESTS.  

From *Mosaize Historie der Hebreeuwse Kerke*.

Over the plain white cap of the ordinary priests the High Priest wore an
overcloth of blue and a band of gold. On the front of the golden band
were inscribed the Hebrew words "Holiness unto the Lord." This
illustration shows the arrangement of the bonnet both with and without
the golden crown.

<span id="img_13601"></span>

[![ THE ARK WITH ITS CHERUBIM.](tn/13601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13601.jpg)  
THE ARK WITH ITS CHERUBIM.  

From Calmet's *Dictionary of the Holy Bible*.

 

Josephus tells its that the Cherubim were flying creatures but different
in appearance, from anything to be seen on earth; therefore impossible
to describe. Moses is supposed to have seen these beings kneeling at the
footstool of God when he was picked up and brought into the Presence of
Jehovah. It is probable that they resembled, at least in general
appearance, the famous Cherubim of Ezekiel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fraternity of the Rose Cross](sta33)
