[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta43)  [Next](sta45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

# Mystic Christianity

THE true story of the life of Jesus of Nazareth has never been unfolded
to the world, either in the accepted Gospels or in the Apocrypha,
although a few stray hints may be found in some of the commentaries
written by the ante-Nicene Fathers. The facts concerning His identity
and mission are among the priceless mysteries preserved to this day in
the secret vaults beneath the "Houses of the Brethren." To a few of the
Knights Templars, who were initiated into the arcana of the Druses,
Nazarenes, Essenes, Johannites, and other sects still inhabiting the
remote and inaccessible fastnesses of the Holy Land, part of the strange
story was told. The knowledge of the Templars concerning the early
history of Christianity was undoubtedly one of the main reasons for
their persecution and final annihilation. The discrepancies in the
writings of the early Church Fathers not only are irreconcilable, but
demonstrate beyond question that even during the first five centuries
after Christ these learned men had for the basis of their writings
little more substantial than folklore and hearsay. To the easy believer
everything is possible and there are no problems. The unemotional person
in search of facts, however, is confronted by a host of problems with
uncertain factors, of which the following are typical:

According to popular conception, Jesus was crucified during the
thirty-third year of His life and in the third year of His ministry
following His baptism. About A.D. 180, St. Irenæus, Bishop of Lyons, one
of the most eminent of the ante-Nicene theologians, wrote *Against
Heresies*, an attack on the doctrines of the Gnostics. In this work
Irenæus declared upon the authority of the Apostles themselves that
Jesus lived to old age. To quote: "They, however, that they may
establish their false opinion regarding that which is written, 'to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,' maintain that He preached for
one year only, and then suffered in the twelfth month. \[In speaking
thus\], they are forgetful of their own disadvantage, destroying His
whole work, and robbing Him of that age which is both more necessary and
more honourable than any other; that more advanced age, I mean, during
which also as a teacher He excelled all others. For how could He have
had His disciples, if He did not teach? And how could He have taught,
unless He had reached the age of a Master? For when He came to be
baptised, He had not yet completed His thirtieth year, but was beginning
to be about thirty years of age (for thus Luke, who has mentioned His
years, has expressed it: 'Now Jesus was, as it were, beginning to be
thirty years old,' when He came to receive baptism); and, (according to
these men,) He preached only one year reckoning from His baptism. On
completing His thirtieth year He suffered, being in fact still a young
man, and who had by no means attained to advanced age. Now, that the
first stage of early life embraces thirty years, and that this extends
onward to the fortieth year, every one will admit; but from the fortieth
and fiftieth year a man begins to decline towards old age, *which Our
Lord possessed while He still fulfilled the office of a Teacher*, even
as the Gospel and all the elders testify; those who were conversant in
Asia with John, the disciple of the Lord, (affirming) that John conveyed
to them that information. And he remained among them up to the time of
Trajan. Some of them, moreover, saw not only John, but the other
apostles also, and heard the very same account from them, and bear
testimony as to the'(validity of) the statement. Whom then should we
rather believe? Whether such men as these, or Ptolemæus, who never saw
the apostles, and who never even in his dreams attained to the slightest
trace of an apostle?"

Commenting on the foregoing passage, Godfrey Higgins remarks that it has
fortunately escaped the hands of those destroyers who have attempted to
render the Gospel narratives consistent by deleting all such statements.
He also notes that the doctrine of the crucifixion was a *vexata
questio* among Christians even during the second century. "The evidence
of Irenæus," he says, "cannot be touched. On every principle of sound
criticism, and of the doctrine of probabilities, it is unimpeachable."

It should further be noted that Irenæus prepared this statement to
contradict another apparently current in his time to the effect that the
ministry of Jesus lasted but *one* year. Of all the early Fathers,
Irenæus, writing within eighty years after the death of St. John the
Evangelist, should have had reasonably accurate information. If the
disciples themselves related that Jesus lived to advanced age in the
body, why has the mysterious number 33 been arbitrarily chosen to
symbolize the duration of His life? Were the incidents in the life of
Jesus purposely altered so that His actions would fit more closely into
the pattern established by the numerous Savior-Gods who preceded Him?
That these analogies were recognized and used as a leverage in
converting the Greeks and Romans is evident from a perusal of the
writings of Justin Martyr, another second-century authority. In his
*Apology*, Justin addresses the pagans thus:

"And when we say also that the Word, who is the first-birth of God, was
produced without sexual union, and that He, Jesus Christ, Our Teacher,
was crucified and died, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, we
propound nothing different from what you believe regarding those whom
you esteem sons of Jupiter. \* \* \* And if we assert that the Word of
God was born of God in a peculiar manner, different from ordinary
generation, let this, as said above, be no extraordinary thing to you,
who say that Mercury is the angelic word of God. But if any one objects
that He was crucified, in this also He is on a par with those reputed
sons of Jupiter of yours, who suffered as we have now enumerated."

From this it is evident that the first missionaries of the Christian
Church were far more willing to admit the similarities between their
faith and the faiths of the pagans than were their successors in later
centuries.

In an effort to solve some of the problems arising from any attempt to
chronicle accurately the life of Jesus, it has been suggested that there
may have lived in Syria at that time two or more religious teachers
bearing the name *Jesus*, *Jehoshua* or *Joshua*, and that the lives of
these men may have been confused in the Gospel stories. In his *Secret
Sects of Syria and the Lebanon*, Bernard H. Springett, a Masonic author,
quotes from an early book, the name of which he was not at liberty to
disclose because of its connection with the ritual of a sect. The last
part of his quotation is germane to the subject at hand:

"But Jehovah prospered the seed of the Essenians, in holiness and love,
for many generations. Then came the chief of the angels, according to
the commandment of GOD, to raise up an heir to the Voice of Jehovah.
And, in four generations more, an heir was born, and named Joshua, and
he was the child of Joseph and Mara, devout worshippers of Jehovah, who
stood aloof from all other people save the Essenians. And this Joshua,
in Nazareth, reestablished Jehovah, and restored many of the lost rites
and ceremonies. In the thirty-sixth year of his age he was stoned to
death in Jerusalem \* \* \*"

<span id="img_17700"></span>

[![THE ROUND TABLE OF KING ARTHUR.](tn/17700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17700.jpg)  
THE ROUND TABLE OF KING ARTHUR.  

From Jennings' *The Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries*.

According to tradition, Arthur, when a boy of fifteen, was crowned King
of Britain, in A.D. 516. Soon after his ascension to the throne he
founded the Order of the Knights of the Round Table at Windsor.
Thereafter the Knights met annually at Carleon, Winchester, or at
Camelot, to celebrate Pentecost. From all parts of Europe came the brave
and the bold, seeking admission into this noble order of British
knighthood. Nobility, virtue, and valor were its requirements, and those
possessing these qualities to a marked degree were welcomed to King
Arthur's court at Camelot. Having gathered the bravest and noblest
Knights of Europe about him, King Arthur chose twenty-four who excelled
all the others in daring and integrity and formed of them his Circle of
the Round Table. According to legend, each of these Knights was so great
in dignity and power that none could occupy a more exalted seat than
another, so when they gathered at the table to celebrate the anniversary
of their foundation it was necessary to use a round table that all might
occupy chairs of equal importance.

While it is probable that the Order of the Round Table had its
distinctive rituals and symbols, the knowledge of them has not survived
the ages. Elias Ashmole, in his volume on the Order of the Garter,
inserted a double-page plate showing the insignia of all the orders of
knighthood, the block set aside for the symbol of the Round Table being
left blank. The chief reason for the loss of the symbolism of the Round
Table was the untimely death of King Arthur upon the field of Kamblan
(A.D. 542) in the forty-first year of his life. While he destroyed his
bitter enemy, Mordred, in this famous battle, it cast him not only his
own life but the lives of nearly all his Knights of the Round Table, who
died defending their commander.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Within the last century several books have been published to supplement
the meager descriptions in the Gospels of Jesus and His ministry. In
some instances these narratives claim to be founded upon early
manuscripts recently discovered; in others, upon direct spiritual
revelation. Some of these writings are highly plausible, while others
are incredible. There are persistent rumors that Jesus visited and
studied in both Greece and India, and that a coin struck in His honor in
India during the first century has been discovered. Early Christian
records are known to exist in Tibet, and the monks of a Buddhist
monastery in Ceylon still preserve a record which indicates that Jesus
sojourned with them and became conversant with their philosophy.

Although early Christianity shows every evidence of Oriental influence,
this is a subject the modern church declines to discuss. If it is ever
established beyond question that Jesus was an initiate of the pagan
Greek or Asiatic Mysteries, the effect upon the more conservative
members of the Christian faith is likely to be cataclysmic. If Jesus was
God incarnate, as the solemn councils of the church discovered, why is
He referred to in the New Testament as "called of God an high prim after
the order of Melchizedek"? The words "after the order" make Jesus one of
a line or order of which there must have been others of equal or even
superior dignity. If the "Melchizedeks" were the divine or priestly
rulers of the nations of the earth before the inauguration of the system
of temporal rulers, then the statements attributed to St. Paul would
indicate that Jesus either was one of these "philosophic elect" or was
attempting to reestablish their system of government. It will be
remembered that Melchizedek also performed the same ceremony of the
drinking of wine and the breaking of bread as did Jesus at the Last
Supper.

George Faber declares the original name of Jesus was Jescua Hammassiah.
Godfrey Higgins has discovered two references, one in the
*Midrashjoholeth* and the other in the *Abodazara* (early Jewish
commentaries on the Scriptures), to the effect that the surname of
Joseph's family was *Panther*, for in both of these works it is stated
that a man was healed "in the name of Jesus ben Panther." The name
*Panther* establishes a direct connection between Jesus and Bacchus--who
was nursed by panthers and is sometimes depicted riding either on one of
these animals or in a chariot drawn by them. The skin of the panther was
also sacred in certain of the Egyptian initiatory ceremonials. The
monogram IHS, now interpreted to mean *Iesus Hominum Salvator* (Jesus
Savior of Men), is another direct link between the Christian and the
Bacchic rites. IHS is derived from the Greek ΥΗΣ, which, as its
numerical value (608) signifies, is emblematic of the sun and
constituted the sacred and concealed name of Bacchus. (See *The Celtic
Druids* by Godfrey Higgins.) The question arises, Was early Roman
Christianity confused with the worship of Bacchus because of the
numerous parallelisms in the two faiths? If the affirmative can be
proved, many hitherto incomprehensible enigmas of the New Testament will
be solved.

It is by no means improbable that Jesus Himself originally propounded as
allegories the cosmic activities which were later con fused with His own
life. That the Χριστός, *Christos*, represents the solar power
reverenced by every nation of antiquity cannot be controverted. If Jesus
revealed the nature and purpose of this solar power under the name and
personality of *Christos*, thereby giving to this abstract power the
attributes of a god-man, He but followed a precedent set by all previous
World-Teachers. This god-man, thus endowed with all the qualities of
Deity, signifies the latent divinity in every man. Mortal man achieves
deification only through at-one-ment with this divine Self. Union with
the immortal Self constitutes immortality, and he who finds his true
Self is therefore "saved." This *Christos*, or divine man in man, is
man's real hope of salvation--the living Mediator between abstract Deity
and mortal humankind. As Atys, Adonis, Bacchus, and Orpheus in all
likelihood were originally illumined men who later were confused with
the symbolic personages whom they created as personifications of this
divine power, so Jesus has been confused with the *Christos*, or
god-man, whose wonders He preached. Since the *Christos* was the god-man
imprisoned in every creature, it was the first duty of the initiate to
liberate, or "resurrect, " this Eternal One within himself. He who
attained reunion with his *Christos* was consequently termed a
*Christian*, or *Christened*, man.

One of the most profound doctrines of the pagan philosophers concerned
the Universal Savior-God who lifted the souls of regenerated men to
heaven through His own nature. This concept was unquestionably the
inspiration for the words attributed to Jesus: "I am the way, the truth,
and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by me." In an effort to
make a single person out of Jesus and His Christos, Christian writers
have patched together a doctrine which must be resolved back into its
original constituents if the true meaning of Christianity is to be
rediscovered. In the Gospel narratives the Christos represents the
perfect man who, having passed through the various stages of the "World
Mystery" symbolized by the thirty-three years, ascends to the heaven
sphere where he is reunited with his Eternal Father. The story of Jesus
as now preserved is--like the Masonic story of Hiram Abiff--part of a
secret initiatory ritualism belonging to the early Christian and pagan
Mysteries.

During the centuries just prior to the Christian Era, the secrets of the
pagan Mysteries had gradually fallen into the hands of the profane. To
the student of comparative religion it is evident that these secrets,
gathered by a small group of faithful philosophers and mystics, were
reclothed in new symbolical garments and thus preserved for several
centuries under the name of *Mystic Christianity*. It is generally
supposed that the Essenes were the custodians of this knowledge and also
the initiators and educators of Jesus. If so, Jesus was undoubtedly
initiated in the same temple of Melchizedek where Pythagoras had studied
six centuries before.

The Essenes--the most prominent of the early Syrian sects--were an order
of pious men and women who lived lives of asceticism, spending their
days in simple labor and their evenings in prayer. Josephus, the great
Jewish historian, speaks of them in the highest terms. "They teach the
immortality of the soul," he says, "and esteem that the rewards of
righteousness are to be earnestly striven for." In another place he
adds, "Yet is their course of life better than that of other men and
they entirely addict themselves to husbandry. " The name *Essenes* is
supposed to be derived from an ancient Syrian word meaning "physician,"
and these kindly folk are believed to have held as their purpose of
existence the healing of the sick in mind, soul, and body. According to
Edouard Schuré, they had two principal communities, or centers, one in
Egypt on the banks of Lake Maoris, the other in Palestine at Engaddi,
near the Dead Sea. Some authorities trace the Essenes back to the
schools of Samuel the Prophet, but most agree on either an Egyptian or
Oriental origin. Their methods of prayer, meditation, and fasting were
not unlike those of the holy men of the Far East. Membership in the
Essene Order was possible only after a year of probation. This Mystery
school, like so many others, had three degrees, and only a few
candidates passed successfully through all. The Essenes were divided
into two distinct communities, one consisting of celibates and the other
of members who were married.

The Essenes never became merchants or entered into the commercial life
of cities, but maintained themselves by agriculture and the raising of
sheep for wool; also by such crafts as pottery and carpentry. In the
Gospels and Apocrypha, Joseph, the father of Jesus, is referred to as
both a carpenter and a potter. In the Apocryphal Gospel of Thomas and
also that of Pseudo-Matthew, the child Jesus is described as making
sparrows out of clay which came to life and flew away when he clapped
his hands. The Essenes were regarded as among the better educated class
of Jews and there are accounts of their having been chosen as tutors for
the children of Roman officers stationed in Syria. The fact that so many
artificers were listed among their number is responsible for the order's
being considered as a progenitor of modern Freemasonry. The symbols of
the Essenes include a number of builders' tools, and they were secretly
engaged

<span id="img_17800"></span>

[![THE GREAT GEORGE AND COLLAR OF THE GARTER.](tn/17800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17800.jpg)  
THE GREAT GEORGE AND COLLAR OF THE GARTER.  

From Ashmole's *Order of the Garter*.

The Order of the Garter was probably formed by Edward III in imitation
of King Arthur's Knights of the Round Table, which institution was
hopelessly scattered after the battle of Kamblan. The popular story to
the effect that the Countess of Salisbury's garter was the original
inspiration for the foundation of the order is untenable. The motto of
the Order of the Carter is "Honi soit qui mal y pense" (Shamed be he who
thinks evil of it). St. George is looked upon as the Patron of the
order, for he typifies the higher nature of man overcoming the dragon of
his own lower nature. While St. George is supposed to have lived during
the third century, it is probable that he was a mythological personage
borrowed from pagan mythology.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

in the erection of a spiritual and philosophical temple to serve as a
dwelling place for the living God.

Like the Gnostics, the Essenes were emanationists. One of their chief
objects was the reinterpretation of the Mosaic Law according to certain
secret spiritual keys preserved by them from the time of the founding of
their order. It would thus follow that the Essenes were Qabbalists and,
like several other contemporary sects flourishing in Syria, were
awaiting the advent of the *Messiah* promised in the early Biblical
writings. Joseph and Mary, the parents of Jesus, are believed to have
been members of the Essene Order. Joseph was many years the senior of
Mary. According to *The Protevangelium*, he was a widower with grown
sons, and in the *Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew* he refers to Mary as a
little child less in age than his own grandchildren. In her infancy Mary
was dedicated to the Lord, and the Apocryphal writings contain many
accounts of miracles associated with her early childhood. When she was
twelve years old, the priests held counsel as to the future of this
child who had dedicated herself to the Lord, and the Jewish high priest,
bearing the breastplate, entered into the Holy of Holies, where an angel
appeared to him, saying, "Zacharias, go forth and summon the widowers of
the people and let them take a rod apiece and she shall be the wife of
him to whom the Lord shall show a sign." Going forth to meet the priests
at the head of the widowers, Joseph collected the rods of all the other
men and gave them into the keeping of the priests. Now Joseph's rod was
but half as long as the others, and the priests on returning the rods to
the widowers paid no attention to Joseph's but left it behind in the
Holy of Holies. When all the other widowers had received back their
wands, the priests awaited a sign from heaven, but none came. Joseph,
because of his advanced age, did not: ask for the return of his rod, for
to him it was inconceivable that he should be chosen. But an angel
appeared to the high priest, ordering him to give back the short rod
which lay unnoticed in the Holy of Holies. As the high priest handed the
rod to Joseph, a white dove flew from the end of it and rested upon the
head of the aged carpenter, and to him was given the child.

The editor of *The Sacred Books and Early Literature of the East* calls
attention to the peculiar spirit with which the childhood of Jesus is
treated in most of the Apocryphal books of the New Testament,
particularly in one work attributed to the doubting Thomas, the earliest
known Greek version of which dates from about A.D. 200: "The child
Christ is represented almost as an imp, cursing and destroying those who
annoy him." This Apocryphal work, calculated to inspire its readers with
fear and trembling, was popular during the Middle Ages because it was in
full accord with the cruel and persecuting spirit of mediæval
Christianity. Like many other early sacred books, the book of Thomas was
fabricated for two closely allied purposes: first, to outshine the
pagans in miracle working; second, to inspire all unbelievers with the
"fear of the Lord." Apocryphal writings of this sort have no possible
basis in fact. At one time an asset, the "miracles" of Christianity have
become its greatest liability. Supernatural phenomena, in a credulous
age interpolated to impress the ignorant, in this century have only
achieved the alienation of the intelligent.

In *The Greek Gospel of Nicodemus* it is declared that when Jesus was
brought into the presence of Pilate the standards borne by the Roman
guards bowed their tops in homage to him in spite of every effort made
by the soldiers to prevent it. In *The Letters of Pilate* the statement
also appears that Cæsar, being wroth at Pilate for executing a just man,
ordered him to be decapitated. Praying for forgiveness, Pilate was
visited by an angel of the Lord, who reassured the Roman governor by
promising him that all Christendom should remember his name and that
when Christ came the second time to judge His people he (Pilate) should
come before Him as His witness.

Stories like the foregoing represent the incrustations that have
attached themselves to the body of Christianity during the centuries.
The popular mind itself has been the self-appointed guardian and
perpetuator of these legends, bitterly opposing every effort to divest
the faith of these questionable accumulations. While popular tradition
often contains certain basic elements of truth, these elements are
usually distorted out of all proportion. Thus, while the generalities of
the story may be fundamentally true, the details are hopelessly
erroneous. Of truth as of beauty it may be said that it is most adorned
when unadorned. Through the mist of fantastic accounts which obscure the
true foundation of the Christian faith is faintly visible to the
discerning few a great and noble doctrine communicated to the world by a
great and noble soul. Joseph and Mary, two devout and holy-minded souls,
consecrated to the service of God and dreaming of the coming of a
Messiah to serve Israel, obeyed the injunctions of the high priest of
the Essenes to prepare a body for the coming of a great soul. Thus of an
immaculate conception Jesus was born. By *immaculate* is meant clean,
rather than supernatural.

Jesus was reared and educated by the Essenes and later initiated into
the most profound of their Mysteries. Like all great initiates, He must
travel in an easterly direction, and the silent years of His life no
doubt were spent in familiarizing Himself with that secret teaching
later to be communicated by Him to the world. Having consummated the
ascetic practices of His order, He attained to the *Christening*. Having
thus reunited Himself with His own spiritual source, He then went forth
in the name of the One who has been crucified since before the worlds
were and, gathering about Him disciples and apostles, He instructed them
in that secret teaching which had been lost--in part, at least--from the
doctrines of Israel. His fate is unknown, but in all probability He
suffered that persecution which is the lot of those who seek to
reconstruct the ethical, philosophical, or religious systems of their
day.

To the multitudes Jesus spoke in parables; to His disciples He also
spoke in parables, though of a more exalted and philosophic nature.
Voltaire said that Plato should have been canonized by the Christian
Church, for, being the first propounder of the *Christos* mystery, he
contributed more to its fundamental doctrines than any other single
individual. Jesus disclosed to His disciples that the lower world is
under the control of a great spiritual being which had fashioned it
according to the will of the Eternal Father. The mind of this great
angel was both the mind of the world and also the worldly mind. So that
men should not die of worldliness the Eternal Father sent unto creation
the eldest and most exalted of His powers--the Divine Mind. This Divine
Mind offered Itself as a living sacrifice and was broken up and eaten by
the world. Having given Its spirit and Its body at a secret and sacred
supper to the twelve manners of rational creatures, this Divine Mind
became a part of every living thing. Man was thereby enabled to use this
power as a bridge across which he might pass and attain immortality. He
who lifted up his soul to this Divine Mind and served It was righteous
and, having attained righteousness, liberated this Divine Mind, which
thereupon returned again in glory to Its own divine source. And because
He had brought to them this knowledge, the disciples said one to
another: "Lo, He is Himself this Mind personified!"

### THE ARTHURIAN CYCLE AND LEGEND OF THE HOLY GRAIL

According to legend, the body of the Christos (the Spiritual Law) was
given into the keeping of two men, of whom the Gospels make

<span id="img_17900"></span>

[![JAKOB BÖHME, THE TEUTONIC THEOSOPHER.](tn/17900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17900.jpg)  
JAKOB BÖHME, THE TEUTONIC THEOSOPHER.  

From William Law's Translation of *The Works of Jakob Böhme*.

 

Jakob Böhme was born in the year 1575 in a village near Gorlitz, and
died in Silesia in 1624. He had but little schooling and was apprenticed
at an early age to a shoemaker. He later became a journeyman shoemaker,
married and had four children One day while tending his master's shoe
shop, a mysterious stranger entered who while he seemed to possess but
little of this world's goods, appeared to be most wise and noble in
spiritual attainment. The stranger asked the price of a pair of shoes,
but young Böhme did not dare to name a figure, for fear that he would
displease his master. The stranger insisted and Böhme finally placed a
valuation which he was all that his master possibly could hope to secure
for the shoes. The stranger immediately bought them and departed. A
short distance down the street the mysterious stranger stopped and cried
out in a loud voice, "Jakob, Jakob come forth." In amazement and fright,
Böhme ran out of the house. The strange man fixed his yes upon the
youth--great eyes which sparkled and seemed filled with divine light. He
took the boy's right hand and addressed him as follows--"Jakob, thou art
little, but shalt be great, and become another Man, such a one as at
whom the World shall wonder. Therefore be pious, fear God, and reverence
His Word. Read diligently the Holy Scriptures, wherein you have Comfort
and Instruction. For thou ust endure much Misery and Poverty, and suffer
Persecution, but be courageous and persevere, far God loves, and is
gracious to thee." Deeply impressed by the prediction, Böhme became ever
more intense in his search for truth. At last his labors were reworded.
For seven days he remained in a mysterious condition during which time
the mysteries of the invisible world were revealed to him. It has been
said of Jakob Böhme that he revealed to all mankind the deepest secrets
of alchemy. He died surrounded by his family, his last words being "Now
I go hence into Paradise."

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

but brief mention. These were Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, both
devout men who, though not listed among the disciples or apostles of the
Christos, were of all men chosen to be custodians of His sacred remains.
Joseph of Arimathea was one of the initiated brethren and is called by
A. E. Waite, in his *A New Encyclopædia of Freemasonry*, "the first
bishop of Christendom." just as the temporal (or visible) power of the
Holy See was established by St. Peter(?), so the spiritual (or
invisible) body of the faith was entrusted to the "Secret Church of the
Holy Grail" through apostolic succession from Joseph of Arimathea, into
whose keeping had been given the perpetual symbols of the covenant--the
ever-flowing cup and the bleeding spear.

Presumably obeying instructions of St. Philip, Joseph of Arimathea,
carrying the sacred relics, reached Britain after passing through many
and varied hardships. Here a site was allotted to him for the erection
of a church, and in this manner Glastonbury Abbey was founded. Joseph
planted his staff in the earth and it took root, becoming a miraculous
thorn bush which blossomed twice a year and which is now called the
Glastonbury thorn. The end of the life of Joseph of Arimathea is
unknown. By some it is believed that, like Enoch, he was translated; by
others, that he was buried in Glastonbury Abbey. Repeated attempts have
been made to find the Holy Grail, which many believe to have been hidden
in a crypt beneath the ancient abbey. The Glastonbury chalice recently
discovered and by the devout supposed to be the original Sangreal can
scarcely be accepted as genuine by the critical investigator. Beyond its
inherent interest as a relic, like the famous Antioch chalice it
actually proves nothing when it is realized that practically little more
was known about the Christian Mysteries eighteen centuries ago than can
be discovered today.

The origin of the Grail myth, as of nearly every other element in the
great drama, is curiously elusive. Sufficient foundation for it may be
found in the folklore of the British Isles, which contains many accounts
of magic cauldrons, kettles, cups, and drinking horns. The earliest
Grail legends describe the cup as a veritable horn of plenty. Its
contents were inexhaustible and those who served it never hungered or
thirsted. One account states that no matter how desperately ill a person
might be he could not die within eight days of beholding the cup. Some
authorities believe the Holy Grail to be the perpetuation of the holy
cup used in the rites of Adonis and Atys. A communion cup or chalice was
used in several of the ancient Mysteries, and the god Bacchus is
frequently symbolized in the form of a vase, cup, or urn. In Nature
worship the ever-flowing Grail signifies the bounty of the harvest by
which the life of man is sustained; like Mercury's bottomless pitcher,
it is the inexhaustible fountain of natural re source. From the evidence
at hand it would indeed be erroneous to ascribe a purely Christian
origin to the Grail symbolism.

In the Arthurian Cycle appears a strange and mysterious figure--Merlin,
the magician. In one of the legends concerning him it is declared that
when Jesus was sent to liberate the world from the bondage of evil, the
Adversary determined to send an Antichrist to undo His labors. The Devil
therefore in the form of a horrible dragon overshadowed a young woman
who had taken refuge in sanctuary to escape the evil which had dcstroyed
her family. When Merlin, her child, was born he partook of the
characteristics of his human mother and demon father. Merlin, however,
did not serve the powers of darkness but, being converted to the true
light, retained only two of the supernatural powers inherited from his
father: prophecy and miracle working. The story of Merlin's infernal
father must really be considered as an allegorical allusion to the fact
that he was a "philosophical son" of the serpent or dragon, a title
applied to all initiates of the Mysteries, who thus acknowledge Nature
as their mortal mother and wisdom in the form of the serpent or dragon
as their immortal Father. Confusion of the dragon and serpent with the
powers of evil has resulted as an inevitable consequence from
misinterpretation of the early chapters of Genesis.

Arthur while an infant was given into the keeping of Merlin, the Mage,
and in his youth instructed by him in the secret doctrine and probably
initiated into the deepest secrets of natural magic. With Merlin's
assistance, Arthur became the leading general of Britain, a degree of
dignity which has been confused with kingship. After Arthur had drawn
the sword of Branstock from the anvil and thus established his divine
right to leadership, Merlin further assisted him to secure from the Lady
of the Lake the sacred sword Excalibur. After the establishment of the
Round Table, having fulfilled his duty, Merlin disappeared, according to
one account vanishing into the air, where he still exists as a shadow
communicating at will with mortals; according to another, retiring of
his own accord into a great stone vault which he sealed from within.

It is reasonably certain that many legends regarding Charlemagne were
later associated with Arthur, who is most famous for establishing the
Order of the Round Table at Winchester. Reliable information is not to
be had concerning the ceremonies and initiatory rituals of the "Table
Round." In one story the Table was endowed with the powers of expansion
and contraction so that fifteen or fifteen hundred could be seated
around it, according to whatever need might arise. The most common
accounts fix the number of knights who could be seated at one time at
the Round Table at either twelve or twenty-four. The twelve signified
the signs of the zodiac and also the apostles of Jesus. The knights'
names and also their heraldic arms were emblazoned upon their chairs.
When twenty-four are shown seated at the Table, each of the twelve signs
of the zodiac is divided into two parts--a light and a dark half--to
signify the nocturnal and diurnal phases of each sign. As each sign of
the zodiac is ascending for two hours every day, so the twenty-four
knights represent the hours, the twenty-four elders before the throne in
*Revelation*, and twenty-four Persian deities who represent the spirits
of the divisions of the day. In the center of the Table was the symbolic
rose of the Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, the symbol of resurrection
in that He "rose" from the dead. There was also a mysterious empty seat
called the *Siege Perilous* in which none might sit except he who was
successful in his quest for the Holy Grad.

In the personality of Arthur is to be found a new form of the
ever-recurrent cosmic myth. The prince of Britain is the sun, his
knights are the zodiac, and his flashing sword may be the sun's ray with
which he fights and vanquishes the dragons of darkness or it may
represent the earth's axis. Arthur's Round Table is the universe; the
*Siege Perilous* the throne of the perfect man. In its terrestrial
sense, Arthur was the Grand Master of a secret Christian-Masonic
brotherhood of philosophic mystics who termed themselves *Knights*.
Arthur received the exalted position of Grand Master of these Knights
because he had faithfully accomplished the withdrawal of the sword
(spirit) from the anvil of the base metals (his lower nature). As
invariably happens, the historical Arthur soon was confused with the
allegories and myths of his order until now the two are inseparable.
After Arthur's death on the field of Kamblan his Mysteries ceased, and
esoterically he was borne away on a black barge, as is so beautifully
described by Tennyson in his *Morte d'Arthur*. The great sword
*Excalibur* was also cast back into the waters of eternity--all of which
is a vivid portrayal of the descent of cosmic night at the end of the
Day of Universal Manifestation. The body of the historical Arthur was
probably interred at Glastonbury Abbey, a building closely identified
with the mystic rites of both the Grail and the Arthurian Cycle.

The mediæval Rosicrucians were undoubtedly in possession of the true
secret of the Arthurian Cycle and the Grail legend, much of their
symbolism having been incorporated into that order. Though the most
obvious of all keys to the Christos mystery, the Grail legend has
received the least consideration.

<span id="img_18000"></span>

[![THE NIMBUS AND AUREOLE IN SYMBOLISM.](tn/18000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18000.jpg)  
THE NIMBUS AND AUREOLE IN SYMBOLISM.  

From Audsley's *Handbook of Christian Symbolism*.

The golden halos around the heads of pagan gods and Christian saints
refer both to their being bathed in the glory of the sun and also to the
fact that a spiritual sun within their own natures is radiating its
*glow-ray* and surrounding them with celestial splendor. Whenever the
nimbus is composed of straight radiant lines, it is solar in
significance; whenever curved lines are used for beams, it partakes
lunar nature; whenever they are united, it symbolizes a, harmonious
blending of both principles. The circular nimbus is solar and masculine,
while the lozenge-shaped nimbus, or *vesica piscis*, is lunar and
feminine. The same symbolism is preserved in the circular and
lozenge-shaped windows of cathedrals. There is a complete science
contained in the shape, color, and adornments of the halos of saints and
martyrs. A plain golden ring usually surrounds the head of a canonized
saint, while God the Father and God the Son have a far more ornate
aureole, usually adorned with a St. George Cross, a flowered cross, or a
lilied cross, with only three of the arms visible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cross and the Crucifixion](sta45)
