[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta39)  [Next](sta41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

# The Chemical Marriage

THE self-admitted author of *The Chemical Marriage*, Johann Valentin
Andreæ, born in Württemberg in 1586, was twenty-eight years of age when
that work was first published. It was presumably written about twelve
years prior to its publication--or when the author was fifteen or
sixteen years old. The fact is almost incredible that one so young could
produce a volume containing the wealth of symbolic thought and
philosophy hidden between the lines of *The Chemical Marriage*. This
book makes the earliest known reference to Christian Rosencreutz, and is
generally regarded as the third of the series of original Rosicrucian
manifestoes. As a symbolic work, the book itself is hopelessly
irreconcilable with the statements made by Andreæ concerning it. The
story of *The Chemical Marriage* relates in detail a series of incidents
occurring to an aged man, presumably the Father C.R.C. of the *Fama* and
*Confessio*. If Father C.R.C. was born in 1378, as stated in the
*Confessio*, and is identical with the Christian Rosencreutz of *The
Chemical Marriage*, he was elevated to the dignity of a Knight of the
Golden Stone in the eighty-first year of his life (1459). In the light
of his own statements, it is inconceivable that Andreæ could have been
Father Rosy Cross.

Many figures found in the various books on symbolism published in the
early part of the seventeenth century bear a striking resemblance to the
characters and episodes in *The Chemical Marriage*. The alchemical
wedding may prove to be the key to the riddle of Baconian
Rosicrucianism. The presence in the German text of *The Chemical
Marriage* of some words in English indicates its author to have been
conversant also with that language. The following summary of the main
episodes of the seven days of *The Chemical Marriage* will give the
reader a fairly comprehensive idea of the profundity of its symbolism.

### THE FIRST DAY

Christian Rosencreutz, having prepared in his heart the Paschal Lamb
together with a small unleavened loaf, was disturbed while at prayer one
evening before Easter by a violent storm which threatened to demolish
not only his little house but the very hill on which it stood. In the
midst of the tempest he was touched on the back and, turning, he beheld
a glorious woman with wings filled with eyes, and robed in sky-colored
garments spangled with stars. In one hand she held a trumpet and in the
other a bundle of letters in every language. Handing a letter to C.R.C.,
she immediately ascended into the air, at the same time blowing upon her
trumpet a blast which shook the house. Upon the seal of the letter was a
curious cross and the words *In hoc signo vinces*. Within, traced in
letters of gold on an azure field, was an invitation to a royal wedding.

C.R.C. was deeply moved by the invitation because it was the fulfillment
of a prophecy which he had received seven years before, but so unworthy
did he feel that he was paralyzed with fear. At length, after resorting
to prayer, he sought sleep. In his dreams he found himself in a
loathsome dungeon with a multitude of other men, all bound and fettered
with great chains. The grievousness of their sufferings was increased as
they stumbled over each other in the darkness. Suddenly from above came
the sound of trumpets; the cover of the dungeon was lifted, and a ray of
light pierced the gloom. Framed in the light stood a hoary-headed man
who announced that a rope would be lowered seven times and whoever could
cling to the rope would be drawn up to freedom.

Great confusion ensued. All sought to grasp the rope and many were
pulled away from it by others. C.R.C. despaired of being saved, but
suddenly the rope swung towards him and, grasping it, he was raised from
the dungeon. An aged woman called the "Ancient Matron" wrote in a golden
yellow book the names of those drawn forth, and each of the redeemed was
given for remembrance a piece of gold bearing the symbol of the sun and
the letters *D L S*. C.R.C., who had been injured while clinging to the
rope, found it difficult to walk. The aged woman bade him not to worry,
but to thank God who had permitted him to come into so high a light.
Thereupon trumpets sounded and C.R.C. awoke, but so vivid was the dream
that he was still sensible of the wounds received while asleep.

With renewed faith C. R. C. arose and prepared himself for the *Hermetic
Marriage*. He donned a white linen coat and bound a red ribbon crosswise
over his shoulders. In his hat he stuck four roses and for food he
carried bread, water, and salt. Before leaving his cottage, he knelt and
vowed that whatever knowledge was revealed to him he would devote to the
service of his neighbor. He then departed from his house with joy.

### THE SECOND DAY

As he entered the forest surrounding his little house, it seemed to
C.R.C. that all Nature had joyously prepared for the wedding. As he
proceeded singing merrily, he came to a green heath in which stood three
great cedars, one bearing a tablet with an inscription describing the
four paths that led to the palace of the King: the first short and
dangerous, the second circuitous, the third a pleasant and royal road,
and the fourth suitable only for incorruptible bodies. Weary and
perplexed, C.R.C. decided to rest and, cutting a slice of bread, was
about to partake thereof when a white dove begged it from him. The dove
was at once attacked by a raven, and in his efforts to separate the
birds C.R.C. unknowingly ran a considerable distance along one of the
four paths--that leading southward. A terrific wind preventing him from
retracing his steps, the wedding guest resigned himself to the loss of
his bread and continued along the road until he espied in the distance a
great gate. The sun being low, he hastened towards the portal, upon
which, among other figures, was a tablet bearing the words *Procul hinc
procul ite profani*.

A gatekeeper in sky-colored habit immediately asked C.R.C. for his
letter of invitation and, on receiving it, bade him enter and requested
that he purchase a token. After describing himself as a Brother of the
Red Rosie Cross, C.R.C. received in exchange for his water bottle a
golden disk bearing the letters *S C*. Night drawing near, the wanderer
hastened on to a second gate, guarded by a lion, and to which was
affixed a tablet with the words *Date et dabitur volis*, where he
presented a letter given him by the first gatekeeper. Being urged to
purchase a token bearing the letters *S M*, he gave his little package
of salt and then hastened on to reach the palace gates before they were
locked for the night.

A beautiful virgin called *Virgo Lucifera* was extinguishing the castle
lights as C.R.C. approached, and he was barely able to squeeze through
the closing gates. As they closed they caught part of his coat, which he
was forced to leave behind. Here his name was written in the Lord
Bridegroom's little vellum book and he was presented with a new pair of
shoes and also a token bearing the letters *S P N*. He was then
conducted by pages to a small chamber where the "ice-grey locks" were
cut from the crown of his head by invisible barbers, after which he was
ushered into a spacious hall where a goodly number of kings, princes,
and commoners were assembled. At the sound of trumpets each seated
himself at the table, taking a position corresponding to his dignity, so
that C.R.C. received a very humble seat. Most of the pseudo-philosophers
present being vain pretenders, the banquet became an orgy, which,
however, suddenly ceased at the sound of

<span id="img_16100"></span>

[![TITLE PAGE OF 1616 EDITION OF CHYMISCHE HOCHZEIT: CHRISTIAN
ROSENCREUTZ.](tn/16100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16100.jpg)  
TITLE PAGE OF 1616 EDITION OF CHYMISCHE HOCHZEIT: CHRISTIAN
ROSENCREUTZ.  

From Rosencreutz' *Chemical Marriage*.

The most remarkable of all the publications involved in the Rosicrucian
controversy is that of *The Chemical Marriage*, published in Strasbourg.
This work, which is very rare, should be reproduced in exact facsimile
to provide students with the opportunity of examining the actual text
for the various forms of cipher employed. Probably no other volume in
the history or literature created such a profound disturbance as this
unpretentious little book. Immediately following its publication the
purpose for which the volume was intended became the subject of popular
speculation. It was both attacked and defended by theologians and
philosophers alike, but when the various contending elements are
simmered down the mysteries surrounding the book remain unsolved. That
its author was a man of exceptional learning was admitted, and it is
noteworthy that those minds which possessed the deepest understanding of
Nature's mysteries were among those profoundly impressed by the contents
of *The Chemical Marriage*.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

stately and inspired music. For nearly half an hour no one spoke. Then
amidst a great sound the door of the dining hall swung open and
thousands of lighted tapers held by invisible hands entered. These were
followed by the two pages lighting the beautiful *Virgo Lucifera* seated
on a self-moving throne. The white-and-gold-robed Virgin then rose and
announced that to prevent the admission of unworthy persons to the
mystical wedding a set of scales would be erected the following day upon
which each guest would be weighed to determine his integrity. Those
unwilling to undergo this ordeal she stated should remain in the dining
hall. She then withdrew, but many of the tapers stayed to accompany the
guests to their quarters for the night.

Most of those present were presumptuous enough to believe that they
could be safety weighed, but nine--including C.R.C.--felt their
shortcomings so deeply that they feared the outcome and remained in the
hall while the others were led away to their sleeping chambers. These
nine were bound with ropes and left alone in darkness. C.R.C. then
dreamed that he saw many men suspended over the earth by threads, and
among them flew an aged man who, cutting here and there a thread, caused
many to fall to earth. Those who in arrogance had soared to lofty
heights accordingly fell a greater distance and sustained more serious
injury than the more humble ones who, falling but a short distance,
often landed without mishap. Considering this dream to be a good omen,
C.R.C. related it to a companion, continuing in discourse with him until
dawn.

### THE THIRD DAY

Soon after dawn the trumpets sounded and the *Virgo Lucifera*, arrayed
in red velvet, girded with a white sash, and crowned with a laurel
wreath, entered accompanied by two hundred men in red-and-white livery.
She intimated to C.R.C. and his eight companions that they might fare
better than the other, self-satisfied guests. Golden scales were then
hung in the midst of the hall and near them were placed seven weights,
one good-sized, four small, and two very large. The men in livery, each
carrying a naked sword and a strong rope, were divided into seven groups
and from each group was chosen a captain, who was given charge of one of
the weights. Having remounted her high throne, *Virgo Lucifera* ordered
the ceremony to begin. The first to step on the scales was an emperor so
virtuous that the balances did not tip until six weights had been placed
upon the opposite end. He was therefore turned over to the sixth group.
The rich and poor alike stood upon the scales, but only a few passed the
test successfully. To these were given velvet robes and wreaths of
laurel, after which they were seated upon the steps of *Virgo
Lucifera's* throne. Those who failed were ridiculed and scourged.

The "inquisition" being finished, one of the captains begged *Virgo
Lucifera* to permit the nine men who had declared themselves unworthy
also to be weighed, and this caused C.R.C. anguish and fear. Of the
first seven one succeeded and was greeted with joy. C.R.C. was the
eighth and he not only withstood all the weights but even when three men
hung on the opposite end of the beam he could not be moved. A page cried
out: "THAT IS HE!" C.R.C. was quickly set at liberty and permitted to
release one of the captives. He chose the first emperor. *Virgo
Lucifera* then requested the red roses that C.R.C. carried, which he
immediately gave her. The ceremony of the scales ended about ten o'clock
in the forenoon.

After agreeing upon the penalties to be imposed upon those whose
shortcomings had been thus exposed, a dinner was served to all. The few
successful "artists," including C.R.C., were given the chief seats,
after which the Golden Fleece and a Flying Lion were bestowed upon them
in the name of the Bridegroom. *Virgo Lucifera* then presented a
magnificent goblet to the guests, stating that the King had requested
all to share its contents, Following this, C.R.C. and his companions
were taken out upon a scaffolding where they beheld the various
penalties suffered by those who failed. Before leaving the palace, each
of the rejected guests was given a draught of forgetfulness. The elect
then returned to the castle, where to each was assigned a learned page,
who conducted them through the various parts of the edifice. C.R.C. saw
many things his companions were not privileged to behold, including the
Royal Sepulcher, where he learned "more than is extant in all books." He
also visited a magnificent library and an observatory containing a great
globe thirty feet in diameter and with all the countries of the world
marked upon it.

At supper the various guests propounded enigmas and C.R.C. solved the
riddle which *Virgo Lucifera* asked concerning her own identity. Then
entered the dining hall two youths and six virgins beautifully robed,
followed by a seventh virgin wearing a coronet. The latter was called
the Duchess, and was mistaken for the Hermetic Bride. The Duchess told
C.R.C. that he had received more than the others, therefore should make
a greater return. The Duchess then asked each of the virgins to pick up
one of the seven weights which still remained in the great room. To
*Virgo Lucifera* was given the heaviest weight, which was hung in the
Queen's chamber during the singing of a hymn. In the second chamber the
first virgin hung her weight during a similar ceremony; thus they
proceeded from room to room until the weights had been disposed of. The
Duchess then presented her hand to C. R. C. and his companions and,
followed by her virgins, withdrew. Pages then conducted the guests to
their sleeping chambers. The one assigned to C.R.C. was hung with rare
tapestries and with beautiful paintings.

### THE FOURTH DAY

After washing and drinking in the garden from a fountain which bore
several inscriptions--among them one reading, "Drink, brothers, and
live"--the guests, led by *Virgo Lucifera*, ascended the 365 steps of
the royal winding stairs. The guests were given wreaths of laurel and, a
curtain being raised, found themselves in the presence of the King and
Queen. C.R.C. was awestruck by the glory of the throne room and
especially by the magnificence of the Queen's robes, which were so
dazzling that he could not gaze upon them. Each guest was presented to
the King by one of the virgins and after this ceremony the *Virgo
Lucifera* made a short speech in which she recited the achievements of
the honest "artists" and begged that each be questioned as to whether
she had properly fulfilled her duty. Old Atlas then stepped forward and
in the name of their Royal Majesties greeted the intrepid band of
philosophers and assured *Virgo Lucifera* that she should receive a
royal reward.

The length of the throne room was five times its width. To the west was
a great porch in which stood three thrones, the central one elevated. On
each throne sat two persons: on the first an ancient king with a young
consort; on the third a black king with a veiled matron beside him; and
on the central throne two young persons over whose heads hung a large
and costly crown, about which hovered a little Cupid who shot his arrows
first at the two lovers and then about the hall. Before the Queen a book
bound in black velvet lay on a small altar, on which were golden
decorations. Beside this were a burning candle, a celestial globe, a
small striking-watch, a little crystal pipe from which ran a stream of
clear blood-red liquor, and a skull with a white serpent crawling in and
out of the orbits. After their presentations, the guests retired down
the winding stairs to the great hall.

<span id="img_16200"></span>

[![KEY TO THE GREAT PHILOSOPHICAL SECRET.](tn/16200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16200.jpg)  
KEY TO THE GREAT PHILOSOPHICAL SECRET.  

From Ashmole's *Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum*.

This plate, which is the key to mystic Christian alchemy, is missing
from almost every copy of the *Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum*, a work
compiled by Elias Ashmole and containing about a score of pieces by
English poets treating of the Philosopher's Stone and the Hermetic
mysteries. In view of the consistent manner in which the plate
disappeared, it is possible that the diagram was purposely removed
because it revealed too plainly the Rosicrucian arcana. Worthy of notice
also is the care with which owners' names have been effaced from early
books pertaining to alchemy and Hermeticism. The original names are
usually rendered illegible being covered with heavy ink lines, the
procedure often seriously defacing the volume, While an occasional
exception is found, in practically every instance the mutilated books
either deal with Rosicrucianism or contain cryptic writings of suspected
Rosicrucian origin. It is presumed that this Practice of obliterating
the owners names was to prevent the early Rosicrucians and Hermetists
from being discovered through the volumes composing their libraries.
Elias Ashmole's plate shows the analogies between the life of Christ and
the four grand divisions of the alchemical process. Herein is also
revealed the teaching that the Philosopher's Stone itself is a macrocosm
and a microcosm, embodying the principles of astronomy and cosmogony,
both universal and human.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Later the *Virgo Lucifera* announced that a comedy was to be performed
for the benefit of the six royal guests in a building called the House
of the Sun. C.R.C. and his companions formed part of the royal
procession, which after a considerable walk arrived at the theater. The
play was in seven acts, and after its happy ending all returned through
the garden and up the winding stairs to the throne room. C.R.C. noticed
the young King was very sad and that at the banquet following he often
sent meat to the white serpent in the skull. The feast over, the young
King, holding in his hand the little black book from the altar, asked
the guests if they would all be true to him through prosperity and
adversity, and when they tremblingly agreed he asked that each should
sign his name in the little black book as proof of his fealty. The royal
persons then drank from the little crystal fountain, the others
afterwards doing likewise. This was called the "Draught of Silence." The
royal persons then sadly shook hands with all present. Suddenly a little
bell tinkled and immediately the kings and queens took off their white
garments and donned black ones, the room was hung in sable draperies,
and the tables were removed. The eyes of the royal persons were bound
with six black taffeta scarfs and six coffins were placed in the center
of the room. An executioner, a Moor, robed in black and bearing an axe,
entered, and beheaded in turn each of the six royal persons. The blood
of each was caught in a golden goblet, which was placed in the coffins
with the body. The executioner was also decapitated and his head placed
in a small chest.

The *Virgo Lucifera*, after assuring C.R.C. and his companions that all
should be well if they were faithful and true, ordered the pages to
conduct them to their rooms for the night while she remained to watch
with the dead. About midnight C.R.C. awakened suddenly and, looking from
his window, beheld seven ships sailing upon a lake. Above each hovered a
flame; these he believed to be the spirits of the beheaded. When the
ships reached shore, the *Virgo Lucifera* met them and on each of six of
the vessels was placed a covered coffin. As soon as the coffins had been
thus disposed of, the lights were extinguished and the flames passed
back over the lake so that there remained but one light for a watch in
each ship. After beholding this strange ceremony, C.R.C. returned to his
bed and slept till morning.

### THE FIFTH DAY

Rising at daybreak and entreating his page to show him other treasures
of the palace, C.R.C. was conducted down many steps to a great iron door
bearing a curious inscription, which he carefully copied. Passing
through, he found himself in the royal treasury, the light in which came
entirely from some huge carbuncles. In the center stood the triangular
sepulcher of Lady Venus. Lifting a copper door in the pavement, the page
ushered C.R.C. into a crypt where stood a great bed upon which, when his
guide had raised the coverlets, C.R.C. beheld the body of Venus. Led by
his page, C.R.C. then rejoined his companions, saying nothing to them of
his experience.

*Virgo Lucifera*, robed in black velvet and accompanied by her virgins,
then led the guests out into the courtyard where stood six coffins, each
with eight pallbearers. C.R.C. was the only one of the group of
"artists" who suspected the royal bodies were no longer in these
coffins. The coffins were lowered into graves and great stones rolled
over them. The *Virgo Lucifera* then made a short oration in which she
exhorted each to assist in restoring the royal persons to life,
declaring that they should journey with her to the Tower of Olympus,
where the medicines necessary to the resurrection of the six royal
persons could alone be found. C.R.C. and his companions followed *Virgo
Lucifera* to the seashore, where all embarked on seven ships disposed
according to a certain strange order. As the ships sailed across the
lake and through a narrow channel into the open sea, they were attended
by sirens, nymphs, and sea goddesses, who in honor of the wedding
presented a great and beautiful pearl to the royal couple. When the
ships came in sight of the Tower of Olympus, *Virgo Lucifera* ordered
the discharge of cannon to signal their approach. Immediately a white
flag appeared upon the tower and a small gilded pinnace, containing an
ancient man--the warden of the tower--with his white-clad guards came
out to meet the ships.

The Tower of Olympus stood upon an island which was exactly square and
was surrounded by a great wall. Entering the gate, the group was led to
the bottom of the central tower, which contained an excellent laboratory
where the guests were fain to beat and wash plants, precious stones, and
all sorts of things, extract their juice and essence, and put these
latter into glasses. *Virgo Lucifera* set the "artists" to work so
arduously that they felt they were mere drudges. When the day's work was
finished, each was assigned a mattress on the stone floor. Being unable
to sleep, C.R.C. wandered about contemplating the stars. Chancing upon a
flight of steps leading to the top of the wall, he climbed up and looked
out upon the sea. Remaining here for some time, about midnight he beheld
seven flames which, passing over the sea towards him, gathered
themselves on the top of the spire of the central tower. Simultaneously
the winds arose, the sea became tempestuous, and the moon was covered
with clouds. With some fear C.R.C. ran down the stairs and returned to
the tower and, lying down on his mattress, was lulled to sleep by the
sound of a gently flowing fountain in the laboratory.

### THE SIXTH DAY

The next morning the aged warden of the tower, after examining the work
performed by the wedding guests in the laboratory and finding it
satisfactory, caused ladders, ropes, and large wings to be brought
forth, and addressed the assembled "artists" thus: "My dear sons, one of
these three things must each of you this day constantly bear about with
him." Lots were cast and to C.R.C., much to his chagrin, fell a heavy
ladder. Those who secured wings had them fastened to their backs so
cunningly that it was impossible to detect that they were artificial.
The aged warden then locked the "artists" in the lower room of the
tower, but in a short time a round hole was uncovered in the ceiling and
*Virgo Lucifera* invited all to ascend. Those with wings flew at once
through the opening, those with ropes had many difficulties, while
C.R.C. with his ladder made reasonable speed. On the second floor the
wedding guests, musicians, and *Virgo Lucifera* gathered about a
fountain-like contrivance containing the bodies of the six royal
persons.

*Virgo Lucifera* then placed the if Moor's head in a kettle-like
receptacle in the upper part of the fountain and poured upon it the
substances prepared on the previous day in the laboratory. The virgins
placed lamps beneath. These substances when they boiled passed out
through holes in the sides of the kettle and, falling upon the bodies in
the fountain below, dissolved them. The six royal bodies having been
reduced thus to a liquid state, a tap was opened in the lower end of the
fountain and the fluid drained into an immense golden globe, which, when
filled, was of great weight. All but the wedding guests then retired and
shortly a hole in the ceiling opened as before and the guests ascended
pell-mell to the third floor. Here the globe were suspended by a strong
chain. The walls of the apartment were of glass, and mirrors were so
arranged that the sun's rays were concentrated upon the central globe,
thus causing it to become very hot. Later the sun's rays were deflected
and the globe permitted to cool, after which it was cut open with a
diamond, revealing a beautiful white egg. Carrying this with her, *Virgo
Lucifera* departed.

The guests, having ascended through another trap door, found

<span id="img_16300"></span>

[![THE UNIVERSE CREATED BY THE DUAL PRINCIPLE OF LIGHT AND
DARKNESS.](tn/16300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16300.jpg)  
THE UNIVERSE CREATED BY THE DUAL PRINCIPLE OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS.  

From Fludd's *Philosophia Mosaica*.

The Supreme Deity is symbolized by the small globe at the top, which is
divided into two hemispheres, the dark half representing the divine
darkness with which the Deity surround Himself and which serves as His
hiding place. The radiant hemisphere signifies the divine light which is
in God and which, pouring forth, manifests as the objective creative
power. The large dark globe to the left and beneath the dark half of the
upper sphere signifies the potential darkness which was upon the face of
the primordial deep and within which moved the Spirit of God. The light
globe to the right is the Deity who is revealed out of the darkness.
Here the shining Word has dissipated the shadows and a glorious universe
has been formed. The divine power of this radiant globe is cognizable to
man as the sun. The large light and a dark section represents the
created universes partaking of the light and darkness which are in the
nature of the Creator. The dark half represents the Deep, or Chaos, the
Eternal Waters pouring forth out of the Deity; the light half-circle
containing the figure of Apollo represents the diurnal hemisphere of the
world, which in the ancient Mysteries was ruled over by Apollo. The dark
half-circle is the nocturnal hemisphere ruled over by Dionysius
(Dionysos), whose figure is faintly visible in the gloom.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

themselves upon the fourth floor, where stood a square kettle filled
with silver sand warmed by a gentle fire. The great white egg was placed
upon the warm sand to mature. In a short time it cracked and there
emerged an ugly, ill-tempered bird, which was fed with the blood of the
beheaded royal persons diluted with prepared water. At each feeding its
feathers changed color; from black they turned to white and at last they
became varicolored, the disposition of the bird improving the while.
Dinner was then served, after which *Virgo Lucifera* departed with the
bird. The guests ascended with ropes, ladders, and wings to the fifth
floor, where a bath colored with fine white powder had been prepared for
the bird, which enjoyed bathing in it until the lamps placed beneath the
bath caused the water to become uncomfortably warm. When the heat had
removed all the bird's feathers it was taken out, but the fire continued
until nothing remained in the bath save a sediment in the form of a blue
stone. This was later pounded up and made into a pigment; with this, all
of the bird except the head was painted.

The guests thereupon ascended to the sixth floor, where stood a small
altar resembling that in the King's throne room. The bird drank from the
little fountain and was fed with the blood of the white serpent which
crawled through the openings in the skull. The sphere by the altar
revolved continuously. The watch struck one, two, and then three, at
which time the bird, laying its neck upon the book, suffered itself to
be decapitated. Its body was burned to ashes, which were placed in a box
of cypress wood. *Virgo Lucifera* told C.R.C. and three of his comrades
that they were lazy and sluggish "labourators" and would therefore be
excluded from the seventh room. Musicians were sent for, who with
cornets were to "blow" the four in ridicule from the chamber. C.R.C. and
his three companions were disheartened until the musicians told them to
be of good cheer and led them up a winding stair to the eighth floor of
the tower directly beneath the roof. Here the old warden, standing upon
a little round furnace, welcomed them and congratulated them upon being
chosen by *Virgo Lucifera*, for this greater work. *Virgo Lucifera* then
entered, and after laughing at the perplexity of her guests, emptied the
ashes of the bird into another vessel, filling the cypress box with
useless matter. She thereupon returned to the seventh floor, presumably
to mislead those assembled there by setting them to work upon the false
ashes in the box.

C.R.C. and his three friends were set to work moistening the bird's
ashes with specially prepared water until the mixture became of
doughlike consistency, after which it was heated and molded into two
miniature forms. Later these were opened, disclosing two bright and
almost transparent human images about four inches high (homunculi), one
male and the other female. These tiny forms were laid upon satin
cushions and fed drop by drop with the blood of the bird until they grew
to normal size and of great beauty. Though the bodies had the
consistency of flesh, they showed no signs of life, for the soul was not
in them. The bodies were next surrounded with torches and their faces
covered with silk. *Virgo Lucifera* then appeared, bearing two curious
white garments. The virgins also entered, among them six bearing great
trumpets. A trumpet was placed upon the mouth of one of the two figures
and C.R.C. saw a tiny hole open in the dome of the tower and a ray of
light descend through the tube of the trumpet and enter the body. This
process was repeated three times on each body. The two newly ensouled
forms were then removed upon a traveling couch. In about half an hour
the young King and Queen awakened and the *Virgo Lucifera* presented
them with the white garments. These they donned and the King in his own
person most graciously returned thanks to C.R.C. and his companions,
after which the royal persons departed upon a ship. C.R.C. and his three
privileged friends then rejoined the other "artists," making no mention
of that which they had seen. Later the entire party were assigned
handsome chambers, where they rested till morning.

### THE SEVENTH DAY

In the morning *Virgo Lucifera* announced that each of the wedding
guests had become a "Knight of the Golden Stone. " The aged warden then
presented each man with a gold medal, bearing on one side the
inscription "At. Nat. Mi. " and on the other, "Tem. Na. F." The entire
company returned in twelve ships to the King's palace. The flags on the
vessels bore the signs of the zodiac, and C.R.C. sat under that of
Libra. As they entered the lake, many ships met them and the King and
Queen, together with their lords, ladies, and virgins, rode forth on a
golden barge to greet the returning guests. Atlas then made a short
oration in the King's behalf, also asking for the royal presents. In
reply the aged warden delivered to Cupid, who hovered about the royal
pair, a small, curious-shaped casket. C.R.C. and the old lord, each
bearing a snow-white ensign with a red cross on it, rode in the carriage
with the King. At the first gate stood the porter with blue clothes,
who, upon seeing C.R.C., begged him to intercede with the King to
release him from that post of servitude. The King replied that the
porter was a famous astrologer who was forced to keep the gate as a
punishment for the crime of having gazed upon Lady Venus reposing upon
her couch. The King further declared that the porter could be released
only when another was found who had committed the same crime. Upon
hearing this, C.R.C.'s heart sank, for he realized himself to be the
culprit, but he remained silent at that time.

The newly created Knights of the Golden Stone were obliged to subscribe
to five articles drawn up by His Royal Highness: (1) That they would
ascribe their Order only to God and His handmaid, Nature. (2) That they
should abominate all uncleanness and vice. (3) That they should always
be ready to assist the worthy and needy. (4) That they should not use
their knowledge and power for the attainment of worldly dignity. (5)
That they should not desire to live longer than God had decreed. They
were then duly installed as Knights, which ceremony was ratified in a
little chapel where C. R. C. hung up his Golden Fleece and his hat for
an eternal memorial, and here he inscribed the following: *Summa
Scientia nihil Scire, Fr. Christianus Rosencreutz. Eques aurei Lapidis*.
Anno 1459.

After the ceremony, C.R.C. admitted that he was the one who had beheld
Venus and consequently must become the porter of the gate. The King
embraced him fondly and he was assigned to a great room containing three
beds--one for himself, one for the aged lord of the tower, and the third
for old Atlas.

The *Chemical Marriage* here comes to an abrupt end, leaving the
impression that C.R.C. was to assume his duties as porter on the
following morning. The book ends in the middle of a sentence, with a
note in italics presumably by the editor.

Under the symbolism of an alchemical marriage, mediæval philosophers
concealed the secret system of spiritual culture whereby they hoped to
coordinate the *disjecta membra* of both the human and social organisms.
Society, they maintained, was a threefold structure and had its analogy
in the triune constitution of man, for as man consists of spirit, mind,
and body, so society is made up of the church, the state, and the
populace. The bigotry of the church, the tyranny of the state, and the
fury of the mob are the three murderous agencies of society which seek
to destroy Truth as recounted in the Masonic legend of Hiram Abiff. The
first six days of The *Chemical Marriage* set forth the processes of
philosophical "creation" through which every organism must pass. The
three kings are the threefold spirit of man and their consorts the
corresponding vehicles of their expression in the lower world. The
executioner is the mind, the higher part of which--symbolized by the
head--is necessary to the achievement of the philosophical labor. Thus
the parts of man--by the alchemists symbolized as planets and
elements--when blended together according to a certain Divine formula
result in the creation of two philosophic "babes" which, fed upon the
blood of the alchemical bird, become rulers of the world.

From an ethical standpoint, the young King and Queen resurrected at the
summit of the tower and ensouled by Divine Life represent the forces of
Intelligence and Love which must ultimately guide society. Intelligence
and Love are the two great ethical luminaries of the world and
correspond to enlightened spirit and regenerated body. The bridegroom is
*reality* and the bride the regenerated being who attains perfection by
becoming one with *reality* through a cosmic marriage wherein the mortal
part attains immortality by being united with its own immortal Source.
In the *Hermetic Marriage* divine and human consciousness are united in
holy wedlock and he in whom this sacred ceremony takes place is
designated as "Knight of the Golden Stone"; he thereby becomes a divine
philosophic *diamond* composed of the quintessence of his own sevenfold
constitution.

Such is the true interpretation of the mystical process of becoming "a
bride of the Lamb." The Lamb of God is signified by the Golden Fleece
that Jason was forced to win before he could assume his kingship. The
Flying Lion is illumined will, an absolute prerequisite to the
achievement of the Great Work. The episode of weighing the souls of men
has its parallel in the ceremony described in the Egyptian *Book of the
Dead*. The walled city entered by C.R.C. represents the sanctuary of
wisdom wherein dwell the real rulers of the world--the initiated
philosophers.

Like the ancient Mysteries after which it was patterned, the Order of
the Rose Cross possessed a secret ritual which was lived by the
candidate for a prescribed number of years before he was eligible to the
inner degrees of the society. The various floors of the Tower of Olympus
represent the orbits of the planets. The ascent of the philosophers from
one floor to another also parallels certain rituals of the Eleusinian
Mysteries and the rites of Mithras wherein the candidate ascended the
seven rungs of a ladder or climbed the seven steps of a pyramid in order
to signify release from the influences of the Planetary Governors. Man
becomes master of the seven spheres only when he transmutes the impulses
received from them. He who masters the seven worlds and is reunited with
the Divine Source of his own nature consummates the *Hermetic Marriage*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bacon, Shakspere, and the Rosicrucians](sta41)
