[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scl07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part VI

If I were asked where English poetry got these three things, its turn
for style, its turn for melancholy, and its turn for natural magic, for
catching and rendering the charm of nature in a wonderfully near and
vivid way,--I should answer, with some doubt, that it got much of its
turn for style from a Celtic source; with less doubt, that it got much
of its melancholy from a Celtic source; with no doubt at all, that from
a Celtic source it got nearly all its natural magic.

Any German with penetration and tact in matters of literary criticism
will own that the principal deficiency of German poetry is in style;
that for style, in the highest sense, it shows but little feeling. Take
the eminent masters of style, the poets who best give the idea of what
the peculiar power which lies in style is, Pindar, Virgil, Dante,
Milton. An example of the peculiar effect which these poets produce, you
can hardly give from German poetry. Examples enough you can give from
German poetry of the effect produced by genius, thought, and feeling
expressing themselves in clear language, simple language, passionate
language, eloquent language, with harmony and melody; but not of the
peculiar effect exercised by eminent power of style. Every reader of
Dante can at once call to mind what the peculiar effect I mean is; I
spoke of it in my lectures on translating Homer, and there I took an
example of it from Dante, who perhaps manifests it more eminently than
any other poet. But from Milton, too, one may take examples of it
abundantly; compare this from Milton:--

. . . nor sometimes forget  
Those other two equal with me in fate,  
So were I equall'd with them in renown,  
Blind Thamyris and blind Maeonides--

with this from Goethe:--

Es bildet ein Talent sich in der Stille,  
Sich ein Character in dem Strom der Welt.

Nothing can be better in its way than the style in which Goethe there
presents his thought, but it is the style of prose as much as of poetry;
it is lucid, harmonious, earnest, eloquent, but it has not received that
peculiar kneading, heightening, and re-casting which is observable in
the style of the passage from Milton,--a style which seems to have for
its cause a certain pressure of emotion, and an ever-surging, yet
bridled, excitement in the poet, giving a special intensity to his way
of delivering himself. In poetical races and epochs this turn for style
is peculiarly observable; and perhaps it is only on condition of having
this somewhat heightened and difficult manner, so different from the
plain manner of prose, that poetry gets the privilege of being loosed,
at its best moments, into that perfectly simple, limpid style, which is
the supreme style of all, but the simplicity of which is still not the
simplicity of prose. The simplicity of Menander's style is the
simplicity of prose, and is the same kind of simplicity as that which
Goethe's style, in the passage I have quoted, exhibits; but Menander
does not belong to a great poetical moment, he comes too late for it; it
is the simple passages in poets like Pindar or Dante which are perfect,
being masterpieces of *poetical* simplicity. One may say the same of the
simple passages in Shakspeare; they are perfect, their simplicity being
a *poetical* simplicity. They are the golden, easeful, crowning moments
of a manner which is always pitched in another key from that of prose; a
manner changed and heightened; the Elizabethan style, regnant in most of
our dramatic poetry to this day, is mainly the continuation of this
manner of Shakspeare's. It was a manner much more turbid and strewn with
blemishes than the manner of Pindar, Dante, or Milton; often it was
detestable; but it owed its existence to Shakspeare's instinctive
impulse towards *style* in poetry, to his native sense of the necessity
for it; and without the basis of style everywhere, faulty though it may
in some places be, we should not have had the beauty of expression,
unsurpassable for effectiveness and charm, which is reached in
Shakspeare's best passages. The turn for style is perceptible all
through English poetry, proving, to my mind, the genuine poetical gift
of the race; this turn imparts to our poetry a stamp of high
distinction, and sometimes it doubles the force of a poet not by nature
of the very highest order, such as Gray, and raises him to a rank beyond
what his natural richness and power seem to promise. Goethe, with his
fine critical perception, saw clearly enough both the power of style in
itself, and the lack of style in the literature of his own country; and
perhaps if we regard him solely as a German, not as a European, his
great work was that he laboured all his life to impart style into German
literature, and firmly to establish it there. Hence the immense
importance to him of the world of classical art, and of the productions
of Greek or Latin genius, where style so eminently manifests its power.
Had he found in the German genius and literature an element of style
existing by nature and ready to his hand, half his work, one may say,
would have been saved him, and he might have done much more in poetry.
But as it was, he had to try and create out of his own powers, a style
for German poetry, as well as to provide contents for this style to
carry; and thus his labour as a poet was doubled.

It is to be observed that power of style, in the sense in which I am
here speaking of style, is something quite different from the power of
idiomatic, simple, nervous, racy expression, such as the expression of
healthy, robust natures so often is, such as Luther's was in a striking
degree. Style, in my sense of the word, is a peculiar re-casting and
heightening, under a certain condition of spiritual excitement, of what
a man has to say, in such a manner as to add dignity and distinction to
it; and dignity and distinction are not terms which suit many acts or
words of Luther. Deeply touched with the Gemeinheit which is the bane of
his nation, as he is at the same time a grand example of the honesty
which is his nation's excellence, he can seldom even show himself brave,
resolute and truthful, without showing a strong dash of coarseness and
commonness all the while; the right definition of Luther, as of our own
Bunyan, is that he is a Philistine of genius. So Luther's sincere
idiomatic German,--such language is this: 'Hilf lieber Gott, wie manchen
Jammer habe ich gesehen, dass der gemeine Mann doch so gar nichts weiss
von der christlichen Lehre!'--no more proves a power of style in German
literature, than Cobbett's sinewy idiomatic English proves it in English
literature. Power of style, properly so-called, as manifested in masters
of style like Dante or Milton in poetry, Cicero, Bossuet or Bolingbroke
in prose, is something quite different, and has, as I have said, for its
characteristic effect, this: to add dignity and distinction.

Style, then, the Germans are singularly without, and it is strange that
the power of style should show itself so strongly as it does in the
Icelandic poetry, if the Scandinavians are such genuine Teutons as is
commonly supposed. Fauriel used to talk of the Scandinavian Teutons and
the German Teutons, as if they were two divisions of the same people,
and the common notion about them, no doubt, is very much this. Since the
war in Schleswig-Holstein, however, all one's German friends are
exceedingly anxious to insist on the difference of nature between
themselves and the Scandinavians; when one expresses surprise that the
German sense of nationality should be so deeply affronted by the rule
over Germans, not of Latins or Celts, but of brother Teutons or next
door to it, a German will give you I know not how long a catalogue of
the radical points of unlikeness, in genius and disposition, between
himself and a Dane. This emboldens me to remark that there is a fire, a
sense of style, a distinction, in Icelandic poetry, which German poetry
has not. Icelandic poetry, too, shows a powerful and developed technic;
and I wish to throw out, for examination by those who are competent to
sift the matter, the suggestion that this power of style and development
of technic in the Norse poetry seems to point towards an early Celtic
influence or intermixture. It is curious that Zeuss, in his grammar,
quotes a text which gives countenance to this notion; as late as the
ninth century, he says, there were Irish Celts in Iceland; and the text
he quotes to show this, is as follows: -'In 870 A.D., when the
Norwegians came to Iceland, there were Christians there, who departed,
and left behind them Irish books, bells, and other things; from whence
it may be inferred that these Christians were Irish.' I speak, and ought
to speak, with the utmost diffidence on all these questions of
ethnology; but I must say that when I read this text in Zeuss, I caught
eagerly at the clue it seemed to offer; for I had been hearing the
Nibelungen read and commented on in German schools (German schools have
the good habit of reading and commenting on German poetry, as we read
and comment on Homer and Virgil, but do *not* read and comment on
Chaucer and Shakspeare), and it struck me how the fatal humdrum and want
of style of the Germans had marred their way of telling this magnificent
tradition of the Nibelungen, and taken half its grandeur and power out
of it; while in the Icelandic poems which deal with this tradition, its
grandeur and power are much more fully visible, and everywhere in the
poetry of the Edda there is a force of style and a distinction as unlike
as possible to the want of both in the German Nibelungen. \[a\] At the
same time the Scandinavians have a realism, as it is called, in their
genius, which abundantly proves their relationship with the Germans; any
one whom Mr. Dasent's delightful books have made acquainted with the
prose tales of the Norsemen, will be struck with the stamp of a Teutonic
nature in them; but the Norse poetry seems to have something which from
Teutonic sources alone it could not have derived; which the Germans have
not, and which the Celts have.

This something is *style*, and the Celts certainly have it in a
wonderful measure. Style is the most striking quality of their poetry.
Celtic poetry seems to make up to itself for being unable to master the
world and give an adequate interpretation of it, by throwing all its
force into style, by bending language at any rate to its will, and
expressing the ideas it has with unsurpassable intensity, elevation, and
effect. It has all through it a sort of intoxication of style,--a
Pindarism, to use a word formed from the name of the poet, on whom,
above all other poets, the power of style seems to have exercised an
inspiring and intoxicating effect; and not in its great poets only, in
Taliesin, or Llywarch Hen, or Ossian, does the Celtic genius show this
Pindarism, but in all its productions:--

The grave of March is this, and this the grave of Gwythyr;  
Here is the grave of Gwgawn Gleddyfreidd;  
But unknown is the grave of Arthur.

That comes from the Welsh Memorials of the Graves of the Warriors, and
if we compare it with the familiar memorial inscriptions of an English
churchyard (for we English have so much Germanism in us that our
productions offer abundant examples of German want of style as well as
of its opposite):--

Afflictions sore long time I bore,  
Physicians were in vain,  
Till God did please Death should me seize  
And ease me of my pain--

if, I say, we compare the Welsh memorial lines with the English, which
in their Gemeinheit of style are truly Germanic, we shall get a clear
sense of what that Celtic talent for style I have been speaking of is.

Or take this epitaph of an Irish Celt, Angus the Culdee, whose Felire,
or festology, I have already mentioned; a festology in which, at the end
of the eighth or beginning of the ninth century, he collected from 'the
countless hosts of the illuminated books of Erin' (to use his own words)
the festivals of the Irish saints, his poem having a stanza for every
day in the year. The epitaph on Angus, who died at Cluain Eidhnech, in
Queen's County, runs thus:--

Angus in the assembly of Heaven,  
Here are his tomb and his bed;  
It is from hence he went to death,  
In the Friday, to holy Heaven.  
It was in Cluain Eidhnech he was rear'd;  
It was in Cluain Eidhnech he was buried;  
In Cluain Eidhnech, of many crosses,  
He first read his psalms.

That is by no eminent hand; and yet a Greek epitaph could not show a
finer perception of what constitutes propriety and felicity of style in
compositions of this nature. Take the well-known Welsh prophecy about
the fate of the Britons:--

Their Lord they will praise,  
Their speech they will keep,  
Their land they will lose,  
Except wild Wales.

To however late an epoch that prophecy belongs, what a feeling for
style, at any rate, it manifests! And the same thing may be said of the
famous Welsh triads. We may put aside all the vexed questions as to
their greater or less antiquity, and still what important witness they
bear to the genius for literary style of the people who produced them!

Now we English undoubtedly exhibit very often the want of sense for
style of our German kinsmen. The churchyard lines I just now quoted
afford an instance of it: but the whole branch of our literature,--and a
very popular branch it is, our hymnology,--to which those lines are to
be referred, is one continued instance of it. Our German kinsmen and we
are the great people for hymns. The Germans are very proud of their
hymns, and we are very proud of ours; but it is hard to say which of the
two, the German hymn-book or ours, has least poetical worth in itself,
or does least to prove genuine poetical power in the people producing
it. I have not a word to say against Sir Roundell Palmer's choice and
arrangement of materials for his Book of Praise; I am content to put
them on a level (and that is giving them the highest possible rank) with
Mr. Palgrave's choice and arrangement of materials for his Golden
Treasury; but yet no sound critic can doubt that, so far as poetry is
concerned, while the Golden Treasury is a monument of a nation's
strength, the Book of Praise is a monument of a nation's weakness. Only
the German race, with its want of quick instinctive tact, of delicate,
sure perception, could have invented the hymn as the Germans and we have
it; and our non-German turn for style,--style, of which the very essence
is a certain happy fineness and truth of poetical perception,--could not
but desert us when our German nature carried us into a kind of
composition which can please only when the perception is somewhat blunt.
Scarcely any one of us ever judges our hymns fairly, because works of
this kind have two sides,--their side for religion and their side for
poetry. Everything which has helped a man in his religious life,
everything which associates itself in his mind with the growth of that
life, is beautiful and venerable to him; in this way, productions of
little or no poetical value, like the German hymns and ours, may come to
be regarded as very precious. Their worth in this sense, as means by
which we have been edified, I do not for a moment hold cheap; but there
is an edification proper to all our stages of development, the highest
as well as the lowest, and it is for man to press on towards the highest
stages of his development, with the certainty that for those stages,
too, means of edification will not be found wanting. Now certainly it is
a higher state of development when our fineness of perception is keen
than when it is blunt. And if,--whereas the Semitic genius placed its
highest spiritual life in the religious sentiment, and made that the
basis of its poetry,--the Indo-European genius places its highest
spiritual life in the imaginative reason, and makes that the basis of
its poetry, we are none the better for wanting the perception to discern
a natural law, which is, after all, like every natural law,
irresistible; we are none the better for trying to make ourselves
Semitic, when Nature has made us Indo-European, and to shift the basis
of our poetry. We may mean well; all manner of good may happen to us on
the road we go; but we are not on our real right road, the road we must
in the end follow.

That is why, when our hymns betray a false tendency by losing a power
which accompanies the poetical work of our race on our other more
suitable lines, the indication thus given is of great value and
instructiveness for us. One of our main gifts for poetry deserts us in
our hymns, and so gives us a hint as to the one true basis for the
spiritual work of an Indo-European people, which the Germans, who have
not this particular gift of ours, do not and cannot get in this way,
though they may get it in others. It is worth noticing that the
masterpieces of the spiritual work of Indo-Europeans, taking the pure
religious sentiment, and not the imaginative reason, for their basis,
are works like the Imitation, the Dies Irae, the Stabat Mater--works
clothing themselves in the middle-age Latin, the genuine native voice of
no Indo-European nation. The perfection of their kind, but that kind not
perfectly legitimate, they take a language not perfectly legitimate; as
if to show, that when mankind's Semitic age is once passed, the age
which produced the great incomparable monuments of the pure religious
sentiment, the books of Job and Isaiah, the Psalms,--works truly to be
called inspired, because the same divine power which worked in those who
produced them works no longer,--as if to show us, that, after this
primitive age, we Indo-Europeans must feel these works without
attempting to re-make them; and that our poetry, if it tries to make
itself simply the organ of the religious sentiment, leaves the true
course, and must conceal this by not speaking a living language. The
moment it speaks a living language, and still makes itself the organ of
the religious sentiment only, as in the German and English hymns, it
betrays weakness;-- the weakness of all false tendency.

But if by attending to the Germanism in us English and to its works, one
has come to doubt whether we, too, are not thorough Germans by genius
and with the German deadness to style, one has only to repeat to oneself
a line of Milton,--a poet intoxicated with the passion for style as much
as Taliesin or Pindar,--to see that we have another side to our genius
beside the German one. Whence do we get it? The Normans may have brought
in among us the Latin sense for rhetoric and style,--for, indeed, this
sense goes naturally with a high spirit and a strenuousness like
theirs,--but the sense for style which English poetry shows is something
finer than we could well have got from a people so positive and so
little poetical as the Normans; and it seems to me we may much more
plausibly derive it from a root of the poetical Celtic nature in us.

Its chord of penetrating passion and melancholy, again, its Titanism as
we see it in Byron,--what other European poetry possesses that like the
English, and where do we get it from? The Celts, with their vehement
reaction against the despotism of fact, with their sensuous nature,
their manifold striving, their adverse destiny, their immense
calamities, the Celts are the prime authors of this vein of piercing
regret and passion,--of this Titanism in poetry. A famous book,
Macpherson's Ossian, carried in the last century this vein like a flood
of lava through Europe. I am not going to criticise Macpherson's Ossian
here. Make the part of what is forged, modern, tawdry, spurious, in the
book, as large as you please; strip Scotland, if you like, of every
feather of borrowed plumes which on the strength of Macpherson's Ossian
she may have stolen from that vetus et major Scotia, the true home of
the Ossianic poetry, Ireland; I make no objection. But there will still
be left in the book a residue with the very soul of the Celtic genius in
it, and which has the proud distinction of having brought this soul of
the Celtic genius into contact with the genius of the nations of modern
Europe, and enriched all our poetry by it. Woody Morven, and echoing
Sora, and Selma with its silent halls!--we all owe them a debt of
gratitude, and when we are unjust enough to forget it, may the Muse
forget us! Choose any one of the better passages in Macpherson's Ossian
and you can see even at this time of day what an apparition of newness
and power such a strain must have been to the eighteenth century:--

'I have seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were desolate. The fox
looked out from the windows, the rank grass of the wall waved round her
head. Raise the song of mourning, O bards, over the land of strangers.
They have but fallen before us, for one day we must fall. Why dost thou
build the hall, son of the winged days? Thou lookest from thy towers
to-day; yet a few years, and the blast of the desert comes; it howls in
thy empty court, and whistles round thy half-worn shield. Let the blast
of the desert come! we shall be renowned in our day.'

All Europe felt the power of that melancholy; but what I wish to point
out is, that no nation of Europe so caught in its poetry the passionate
penetrating accent of the Celtic genius, its strain of Titanism, as the
English. Goethe, like Napoleon, felt the spell of Ossian very
powerfully, and he quotes a long passage from him in his Werther. But
what is there Celtic, turbulent, and Titanic about the German Werther,
that amiable, cultivated, and melancholy young man, having for his
sorrow and suicide the perfectly definite motive that Lotte cannot be
his? Faust, again, has nothing unaccountable, defiant and Titanic in
him; his knowledge does not bring him the satisfaction he expected from
it, and meanwhile he finds himself poor and growing old, and baulked of
the palpable enjoyment of life; and here is the motive for Faust's
discontent. In the most energetic and impetuous of Goethe's
creations,--his Prometheus,--it is not Celtic self-will and passion, it
is rather the Germanic sense of justice and reason, which revolts
against the despotism of Zeus. The German Sehnsucht itself is a wistful,
soft, tearful longing, rather than a struggling, fierce, passionate one.
But the Celtic melancholy is struggling, fierce, passionate; to catch
its note, listen to Llywarch Hen in old age, addressing his crutch:--

O my crutch! is it not autumn, when the fern is red, the water flag
yellow? Have I not hated that which I love?

O my crutch! is it not winter-time now, when men talk together after
that they have drunken? Is not the side of my bed left desolate?

O my crutch! is it not spring, when the cuckoo passes through the air,
when the foam sparkles on the sea? The young maidens no longer love me.

O my crutch! is it not the first day of May? The furrows, are they not
shining; the young corn, is it not springing? Ah! the sight of thy
handle makes me wroth.

O my crutch! stand straight, thou wilt support me the better; it is very
long since I was Llywarch.

Behold old age, which makes sport of me, from the hair of my head to my
teeth, to my eyes, which women loved.

The four things I have all my life most hated fall upon me
together,--coughing and old age, sickness and sorrow.

I am old, I am alone, shapeliness and warmth are gone from me; the couch
of honour shall be no more mine: I am miserable, I am bent on my crutch.

How evil was the lot allotted to Llywarch, the night when he was brought
forth sorrows without end, and no deliverance from his burden.

There is the Titanism of the Celt, his passionate, turbulent,
indomitable reaction against the despotism of fact; and of whom does it
remind us so much as of Byron

The fire which on my bosom preys  
Is lone as some volcanic isle;  
No torch is kindled at its blaze;  
A funeral pile!

Or, again:--

Count o'er the joys thine hours have seen,  
Count o'er thy days from anguish free,  
And know, whatever thou hast been,  
'Tis something better not to be.

One has only to let one's memory begin to fetch passages from Byron
striking the same note as that passage from Llywarch Hen, and she will
not soon stop. And all Byron's heroes, not so much in collision with
outward things, as breaking on some rock of revolt and misery in the
depths of their own nature; Manfred, self-consumed, fighting blindly and
passionately with I know not what, having nothing of the consistent
development and intelligible motive of Faust,--Manfred, Lara, Cain, what
are they but Titanic? Where in European poetry are we to find this
Celtic passion of revolt so warm-breathing, puissant, and sincere;
except perhaps in the creation of a yet greater poet than Byron, but an
English poet, too, like Byron,--in the Satan of Milton?

. . . What though the field be lost?  
All is not lost; the unconquerable will,  
And study of revenge, immortal hate,  
And courage never to submit or yield,  
And what is else not to be overcome.

There, surely, speaks a genius to whose composition the Celtic fibre was
not wholly a stranger!

And as, after noting the Celtic Pindarism or power of style present in
our poetry, we noted the German flatness coming in in our hymns, and
found here a proof of our compositeness of nature; so, after noting the
Celtic Titanism or power of rebellious passion in our poetry, we may
also note the Germanic patience and reasonableness in it, and get in
this way a second proof how mixed a spirit we have. After Llywarch
Hen's:-- How evil was the lot allotted to Llywarch, the night when he
was brought forth--after Byron's:--

Count o'er the joys thine hours have seen -  
take this of Southey's, in answer to the question whether he would like
to have his youth over again:--  
Do I regret the past?  
Would I live o'er again  
The morning hours of life?  
Nay, William, nay, not so!  
Praise be to God who made me what I am,  
Other I would not be.

There we have the other side of our being; the Germanic goodness,
docility, and fidelity to nature, in place of the Celtic Titanism.

The Celt's quick feeling for what is noble and distinguished gave his
poetry style; his indomitable personality gave it pride and passion; his
sensibility and nervous exaltation gave it a better gift still, the gift
of rendering with wonderful felicity the magical charm of nature. The
forest solitude, the bubbling spring, the wild flowers, are everywhere
in romance. They have a mysterious life and grace there; they are
nature's own children, and utter her secret in a way which makes them
something quite different from the woods, waters, and plants of Greek
and Latin poetry. Now of this delicate magic, Celtic romance is so
pre-eminent a mistress, that it seems impossible to believe the power
did not come into romance from the Celts. \[b\] Magic is just the word
for it,--the magic of nature; not merely the beauty of nature,--that the
Greeks and Latins had; not merely an honest smack of the soil, a
faithful realism,--at the Germans had; but the intimate life of nature,
her weird power and her fairy charm. As the Saxon names of places, with
the pleasant wholesome smack of the soil in them,--Weathersfield,
Thaxted, Shalford,--are to the Celtic names of places, with their
penetrating, lofty beauty,--Velindra, Tyntagel, Caernarvon,--so is the
homely realism of German and Norse nature to the fairy-like loveliness
of Celtic nature. Gwydion wants a wife for his pupil: 'Well,' says Math,
'we will seek, I and thou, by charms and illusions, to form a wife for
him out of flowers. So they took the blossoms of the oak, and the
blossoms of the broom, and the blossoms of the meadow-sweet, and
produced from them a maiden, the fairest and most graceful that man ever
saw. And they baptized her, and gave her the name of Flower-Aspect.'
Celtic romance is full of exquisite touches like that, showing the
delicacy of the Celt's feeling in these matters, and how deeply nature
lets him come into her secrets. The quick dropping of blood is called
'faster than the fall of the dewdrop from the blade of reed-grass upon
the earth, when the dew of June is at the heaviest.' And thus is Olwen
described: 'More yellow was her hair than the flower of the broom, and
her skin was whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands
and her fingers than the blossoms of the wood-anemony amidst the spray
of the meadow fountains.' For loveliness it would be hard to beat that;
and for magical clearness and nearness take the following:--

'And in the evening Peredur entered a valley, and at the head of the
valley he came to a hermit's cell, and the hermit welcomed him gladly,
and there he spent the night. And in the morning he arose, and when he
went forth, behold, a shower of snow had fallen the night before, and a
hawk had killed a wild-fowl in front of the cell. And the noise of the
horse scared the hawk away, and a raven alighted upon the bird. And
Peredur stood and compared the blackness of the raven, and the whiteness
of the snow, and the redness of the blood, to the hair of the lady whom
best he loved, which was blacker than the raven, and to her skin, which
was whiter than the snow, and to her two cheeks, which were redder than
the blood upon the snow appeared to be.'

And this, which is perhaps less striking, is not less beautiful:--

'And early in the day Geraint and Enid left the wood, and they came to
an open country, with meadows on one hand and mowers mowing the meadows.
And there was a river before them, and the horses bent down and drank
the water. And they went up out of the river by a steep bank, and there
they met a slender stripling with a satchel about his neck; and he had a
small blue pitcher in his hand, and a bowl on the mouth of the pitcher.'

And here the landscape, up to this point so Greek in its clear beauty,
is suddenly magicalised by the romance touch:--

'And they saw a tall tree by the side of the river, one-half of which
was in flames from the root to the top, and the other half was green and
in full leaf.'

Magic is the word to insist upon,--a magically vivid and near
interpretation of nature; since it is this which constitutes the special
charm and power of the effect I am calling attention to, and it is for
this that the Celt's sensibility gives him a peculiar aptitude. But the
matter needs rather fine handling, and it is easy to make mistakes here
in our criticism. In the first place, Europe tends constantly to become
more and more one community, and we tend to become Europeans instead of
merely Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germans, Italians; so whatever aptitude or
felicity one people imparts into spiritual work, gets imitated by the
others, and thus tends to become the common property of all. Therefore
anything so beautiful and attractive as the natural magic I am speaking
of, is sure, now-a-days, if it appears in the productions of the Celts,
or of the English, or of the French, to appear in the productions of the
Germans also, or in the productions of the Italians; but there will be a
stamp of perfectness and inimitableness about it in the literatures
where it is native, which it will not have in the literatures where it
is not native. Novalis or Ruckert, for instance, have their eye fixed on
nature, and have undoubtedly a feeling for natural magic; a
rough-and-ready critic easily credits them and the Germans with the
Celtic fineness of tact, the Celtic nearness to nature and her secret;
but the question is whether the strokes in the German's picture of
nature \[c\] have ever the indefinable delicacy, charm, and perfection
of the Celt's touch in the pieces I just now quoted, or of Shakspeare's
touch in his daffodil, Wordsworth's in his cuckoo, Keats's in his
Autumn, Obermann's in his mountain birch-tree, or his Easter-daisy among
the Swiss farms. To decide where the gift for natural magic originally
lies, whether it is properly Celtic or Germanic, we must decide this
question.

In the second place, there are many ways of handling nature, and we are
here only concerned with one of them; but a rough-and-ready critic
imagines that it is all the same so long as nature is handled at all,
and fails to draw the needful distinction between modes of handling her.
But these modes are many; I will mention four of them now: there is the
conventional way of handling nature, there is the faithful way of
handling nature, there is the Greek way of handling nature, there is the
magical way of handling nature. In all these three last the eye is on
the object, but with a difference; in the faithful way of handling
nature, the eye is on the object, and that is all you can say; in the
Greek, the eye is on the object, but lightness and brightness are added;
in the magical, the eye is on the object, but charm and magic are added.
In the conventional way of handling nature, the eye is not on the
object; what that means we all know, we have only to think of our
eighteenth-century poetry:-- As when the moon, refulgent lamp of
night--to call up any number of instances. Latin poetry supplies plenty
of instances too; if we put this from Propertius's Hylas:--

. . . manus heroum . . .  
Mollia composita litora fronde togit--

side by side with the line of Theocritus by which it was suggested:--

\[Greek verse\]--

we get at the same moment a good specimen both of the conventional and
of the Greek way of handling nature. But from our own poetry we may get
specimens of the Greek way of handling nature, as well as of the
conventional: for instance, Keats's:--

What little town by river or seashore,  
Or mountain-built with quiet citadel,  
Is emptied of its folk, this pious morn?

is Greek, as Greek as a thing from Homer or Theocritus; it is composed
with the eye on the object, a radiancy and light clearness being added.
German poetry abounds in specimens of the faithful way of handling
nature; an excellent example is to be found in the stanzas called
Zueignung, prefixed to Goethe's poems; the morning walk, the mist, the
dew, the sun, are as faithful as they can be, they are given with the
eye on the object, but there the merit of the work, as a handling of
nature, stops; neither Greek radiance nor Celtic magic is added; the
power of these is not what gives the poem in question its merit, but a
power of quite another kind, a power of moral and spiritual emotion. But
the power of Greek radiance Goethe could give to his handling of nature,
and nobly too, as any one who will read his Wanderer--the poem in which
a wanderer falls in with a peasant woman and her child by their hut,
built out of the ruins of a temple near Cuma,--may see. Only the power
of natural magic Goethe does not, I think, give; whereas Keats passes at
will from the Greek power to that power which is, as I say, Celtic; from
his:--

What little town, by river or seashore--to his:--

White hawthorn and the pastoral eglantine,  
Fast-fading violets cover'd up in leaves--

or his:--

. . . magic casements, opening on the foam  
Of perilous seas, in fairy lands forlorn--

in which the very same note is struck as in those extracts which I
quoted from Celtic romance, and struck with authentic and unmistakeable
power.

Shakspeare, in handling nature, touches this Celtic note so exquisitely,
that perhaps one is inclined to be always looking for the Celtic note in
him, and not to recognise his Greek note when it comes. But if one
attends well to the difference between the two notes, and bears in mind,
to guide one, such things as Virgil's

'moss-grown springs and grass softer than sleep:' -  
Muscosi fontes et somno mollior herba -  
as his charming flower-gatherer, who -  

Pallentes violas et summa papavera carpens  
Narcissum et florem jungit bene olentis anethi -  
as his quinces and chestnuts:--

. . . cana legam tenera lanugine mala  
Castaneasque nuces . . .

then, I think, we shall be disposed to say that in Shakspeare's--

I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,  
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,  
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,  
With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine--

it is mainly a Greek note which is struck. Then, again in his:--

. . . look how the floor of heaven  
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold!

we are at the very point of transition from the Greek note to the
Celtic; there is the Greek clearness and brightness, with the Celtic
aerialness and magic coming in. Then we have the sheer, inimitable
Celtic note in passages like this:--

Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,  
By paved fountain or by rushy brook,  
Or in the beached margent of the sea--

or this, the last I will quote:--

The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,  
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,  
And they did make no noise, in such a night  
Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls -  
. . . in such a night

Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew -. . in such a night  
Stood Dido, with a willow in her hand,  
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waved her love  
To come again to Carthage.

And those last lines of all are so drenched and intoxicated with the
fairy-dew of that natural magic which is our theme, that I cannot do
better then end with them.

And now, with the pieces of evidence in our hand, let us go to those who
say it is vain to look for Celtic elements in any Englishman, and let us
ask them, first, if they seize what we mean by the power of natural
magic in Celtic poetry; secondly, if English poetry does not eminently
exhibit this power; and, thirdly, where they suppose English poetry got
it from?

I perceive that I shall be accused of having rather the air, in what I
have said, of denying this and that gift to the Germans, and of
establishing our difference from them a little ungraciously and at their
expense. The truth is, few people have any real care to analyse closely
in their criticism; they merely employ criticism as a means for heaping
all praise on what they like, and all blame on what they dislike. Those
of us (and they are many) who owe a great debt of gratitude to the
German spirit and to German literature, do not like to be told of any
powers being lacking there; we are like the young ladies who think the
hero of their novel is only half a hero unless he has all perfections
united in him. But nature does not

work, either in heroes or races, according to the young ladies' notion.
We all are what we are, the hero and the great nation are what they are,
by our limitations as well as by our powers, by lacking something as
well as by possessing something. It is not always gain to possess this
or that gift, or loss to lack this or that gift. Our great, our only
first-rate body of contemporary poetry is the German; the grand business
of modern poetry,--a moral interpretation, from an independent point of
view, of man and the world,--it is only German poetry, Goethe's poetry,
that has, since the Greeks, made much way with. Campbell's power of
style, and the natural magic of Keats and Wordsworth, and Byron's
Titanic personality, may be wanting to this poetry; but see what it has
accomplished without them! How much more than Campbell with his power of
style, and Keats and Wordsworth with their natural magic, and Byron with
his Titanic personality! Why, for the immense serious task it had to
perform, the steadiness of German poetry, its going near the ground, its
patient fidelity to nature, its using great plainness of speech,
poetical drawbacks in one point of view, were safeguards and helps in
another. The plainness and earnestness of the two lines I have already
quoted from Goethe:--

Es bildet ein Talent sich in der Stille,  
Sich ein Character in dem Strom der Welt--

compared with the play and power of Shakspeare's style or Dante's,
suggest at once the difference between Goethe's task and theirs, and the
fitness of the faithful laborious German spirit for its own task.
Dante's task was to set forth the lesson of the world from the point of
view of mediaeval Catholicism; the basis of spiritual life was given,
Dante had not to make this anew. Shakspeare's task was to set forth the
spectacle of the world when man's spirit re-awoke to the possession of
the world at the Renaissance. The spectacle of human life, left to bear
its own significance and tell its own story, but shown in all its
fulness, variety, and power, is at that moment the great matter; but, if
we are to press deeper, the basis of spiritual life is still at that
time the traditional religion, reformed or unreformed, of Christendom,
and Shakspeare has not to supply a new basis. But when Goethe came,
Europe had lost her basis of spiritual life; she had to find it again;
Goethe's task was,--the inevitable task for the modern poet henceforth
is,--as it was for the Greek poet in the days of Pericles, not to preach
a sublime sermon on a given text like Dante, not to exhibit all the
kingdoms of human life and the glory of them like Shakspeare, but to
interpret human life afresh, and to supply a new spiritual basis to it.
This is not only a work for style, eloquence, charm, poetry; it is a
work for science; and the scientific, serious German spirit, not carried
away by this and that intoxication of ear, and eye, and self-will, has
peculiar aptitudes for it.

We, on the other hand, do not necessarily gain by the commixture of
elements in us; we have seen how the clashing of natures in us hampers
and embarrasses our behaviour; we might very likely be more attractive,
we might very likely be more successful, if we were all of a piece. Our
want of sureness of taste, our eccentricity, come in great measure, no
doubt, from our not being all of a piece, from our having no fixed,
fatal, spiritual centre of gravity. The Rue de Rivoli is one thing, and
Nuremberg is another, and Stonehenge is another; but we have a turn for
all three, and lump them all up together. Mr. Tom Taylor's translations
from Breton poetry offer a good example of this mixing; he has a genuine
feeling for these Celtic matters, and often, as in the Evil Tribute of
Nomenoe, or in Lord Nann and the Fairy, he is, both in movement and
expression, true and appropriate; but he has a sort of Teutonism and
Latinism in him too, and so he cannot forbear mixing with his Celtic
strain such disparates as:--

'Twas mirk, mirk night, and the water bright  
Troubled and drumlie flowed--

which is evidently Lowland-Scotchy; or as:--

Foregad, but thou'rt an artful hand!

which is English-stagey; or as:--

To Gradlon's daughter, bright of blee,  
Her lover he whispered tenderly -  

bethink thee, sweet Dahut! the key!

which is Anacreontic in the manner of Tom Moore. Yes, it is not a sheer
advantage to have several strings to one's bow! if we had been all Germ
an, we might have had the science of Germany; if we had been all Celtic,
we might have been popular and agreeable; if we had been all Latinised,
we might have governed Ireland as the French govern Alsace, without
getting ourselves detested. But now we have Germanism enough to make us
Philistines, and Normanism enough to make us imperious, and Celtism
enough to make us self-conscious and awkward; but German fidelity to
Nature, and Latin precision and clear reason, and Celtic
quick-wittedness and spirituality, we fall short of. Nay, perhaps, if we
are doomed to perish (Heaven avert the omen!), we shall perish by our
Celtism, by our self-will and want of patience with ideas, our inability
to see the way the world is going; and yet those very Celts, by our
affinity with whom we are perishing, will be hating and upbraiding us
all the time.

This is a somewhat unpleasant view to take of the matter; but if it is
true, its being unpleasant does not make it any less true, and we are
always the better for seeing the truth. What we here see is not the
whole truth, however. So long as this mixed constitution of our nature
possesses us, we pay it tribute and serve it; so soon as we possess it,
it pays us tribute and serves us. So long as we are blindly and
ignorantly rolled about by the forces of our nature, their contradiction
baffles us and lames us; so soon as we have clearly discerned what they
are, and begun to apply to them a law of measure, control, and guidance,
they may be made to work for our good and to carry us forward. Then we
may have the good of our German part, the good of our Latin part, the
good of our Celtic part; and instead of one part clashing with the
other, we may bring it in to continue and perfect the other, when the
other has given us all the good it can yield, and by being pressed
further, could only give us its faulty excess. Then we may use the
German faithfulness to Nature to give us science, and to free us from
insolence and self-will; we may use the Celtic quickness of perception
to give us delicacy, and to free us from hardness and Philistinism; we
may use the Latin decisiveness to give us strenuous clear method, and to
free us from fumbling and idling. Already, in their untrained state,
these elements give signs, in our life and literature, of their being
present in us, and a kind of prophecy of what they could do for us if
they were properly observed, trained, and applied. But this they

have not yet been; we ride one force of our nature to death; we will be
nothing but Anglo-Saxons in the Old World or in the New; and when our
race has built Bold Street, Liverpool, and pronounced it very good, it
hurries across the Atlantic, and builds Nashville, and Jacksonville, and
Milledgeville, and thinks it is fulfilling the designs of Providence in
an incomparable manner. But true Anglo- Saxons, simply and sincerely
rooted in the German nature, we are not and cannot be; all we have
accomplished by our onesidedness is to blur and confuse the natural
basis in ourselves altogether, and to become something eccentric,
unattractive, and inharmonious.

A man of exquisite intelligence and charming character, the late Mr.
Cobden, used to fancy that a better acquaintance with the United States
was the grand panacea for us; and once in a speech he bewailed the
inattention of our seats of learning to them, and seemed to think that
if our ingenuous youth at Oxford were taught a little less about
Ilissus, and a little more about Chicago, we should all be the better
for it. Chicago has its claims upon us, no doubt; but it is evident that
from the point of view to which I have been leading, a stimulation of
our Anglo-Saxonism, such as is intended by Mr. Cobden's proposal, does
not appear the thing most needful for us;seeing our American brothers
themselves have rather, like us, to try and moderate the flame of
Anglo-Saxonism in their own breasts, than to ask us to clap the bellows
to it in ours. So I am inclined to beseech Oxford, instead of expiating
her over-addiction to the Ilissus by lectures on Chicago, to give us an
expounder for a still more remote-looking object than the Ilissus,--the
Celtic languages and literature. And yet why should I call it remote?
if, as I have been labouring to show, in the spiritual frame of us
English ourselves, a Celtic fibre, little as we may have ever thought of
tracing it, lives and works. *Aliens in speech, in religion, in blood*!
said Lord Lyndhurst; the philologists have set him right about the
speech, the physiologists about the blood; and perhaps, taking religion
in the wide but true sense of our whole spiritual activity, those who
have followed what I have been saying here will think that the Celt is
not so wholly alien to us in religion. But, at any rate, let us consider
that of the shrunken and diminished remains of this great primitive
race, all, with one insignificant exception, belongs to the English
empire; only Brittany is not ours; we have Ireland, the Scotch
Highlands, Wales, the Isle of Man, Cornwall. They are a part of
ourselves, we are deeply interested in knowing them, they are deeply
interested in being known by us; and yet in the great and rich
universities of this great and rich country there is no chair of Celtic,
there is no study or teaching of Celtic matters; those who want them
must go abroad for them. It is neither right nor reasonable that this
should be so. Ireland has had in the last half century a band of Celtic
students,--a band with which death, alas! has of late been busy,--from
whence Oxford or Cambridge might have taken an admirable professor of
Celtic; and with the authority of a university chair, a great Celtic
scholar, on a subject little known, and where all would have readily
deferred to him, might have by this time doubled our facilities for
knowing the Celt, by procuring for this country Celtic documents which
were inaccessible here, and preventing the dispersio n of others which
were accessible. It is not much that the English Government does for
science or literature; but if Eugene O'Curry, from a chair of Celtic at
Oxford, had appealed to the Government to get him copies or the
originals of the Celtic treasures in the Burgundian Library at Brussels,
or in the library of St. Isidore's College at Rome, even the English
Government could not well have refused him. The invaluable Irish
manuscripts in the Stowe Library the late Sir Robert Peel proposed, in
1849, to buy for the British Museum; Lord Macaulay, one of the trustees
of the Museum, declared, with the confident shallowness which makes him
so admired by public speakers and leading-article writers, and so
intolerable to all searchers for truth, that he saw nothing in the whole
collection worth purchasing for the Museum, except the correspondence of
Lord Melville on the American war. That is to say, this correspondence
of Lord Melville's was the only thing in the collection about which Lord
Macaulay himself knew or cared. Perhaps an Oxford or Cambridge professor
of Celtic might have been allowed to make his voice heard, on a matter
of Celtic manuscripts, even against Lord Macaulay. The manuscripts were
bought by Lord Ashburnham, who keeps them shut up, and will let no one
consult them (at least up to the date when O'Curry published his
Lectures he did so), 'for fear an actual acquaintance with their
contents should decrease their value as matter of curiosity at some
future transfer or sale.' Who knows? Perhaps an Oxford professor of
Celtic might have touched the flinty heart of Lord Ashburnham.

At this moment, when the narrow Philistinism which has long had things
its own way in England, is showing its natural fruits, and we are
beginning to feel ashamed, and uneasy, and alarmed at it; now, when we
are becoming aware that we have sacrificed to Philistinism culture, and
insight, and dignity, and acceptance, and weight among the nations, and
hold on events that deeply concern us, and control of the future, and
yet that it cannot even give us the fool's paradise it promised us, but
is apt to break down, and to leave us with Mr. Roebuck's and Mr. Lowe's
laudations of our matchless happiness, and the largest circulation in
the world assured to the Daily Telegraph, for our only comfort; at such
a moment it needs some moderation not to be attacking Philistinism by
storm, but to mine it through such gradual means as the slow approaches
of culture, and the introduction of chairs of Celtic. But the hard
unintelligence, which is just now our bane, cannot be conquered by
storm; it must be suppled and reduced by culture, by a growth in the
variety, fulness, and sweetness of our spiritual life; and this end can
only be reached by studying things that are outside of ourselves, and by
studying them disinterestedly. Let us reunite ourselves with our better
mind and with the world through science; and let it be one of our
angelic revenges on the Philistines, who among their other sins are the
guilty authors of Fenianism, to found at Oxford a chair of Celtic, and
to send, through the gentle ministration of science, a message of peace
to Ireland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] Lord Strangford's note on this is:--'The Irish monks whose bells
and books were found in Iceland could not have contributed anything to
the old Norse spirit, for they had perished before the first Norseman
had set foot on the island. The form of the old Norse poetry known to us
as Icelandic, from the accident of its preservation in that island
alone, is surely Pan-Teutonic from old times; the ar and method of its
strictly literary cultivation must have been much influenced by the
contemporary Old-English national poetry, with which the Norsemen were
in constant contact; and its larger, freer, and wilder spirit must have
been owing to their freer and wilder life, to say nothing of their
roused and warring paganism. They could never have known any Celts save
when living in embryo with other Teutons.'

Very likely Lord Strangford is right, but the proposition with which he
begins is at variance with what the text quoted by Zeuss alleges.

\[b\] Rhyme,-- the most striking characteristic of our modern poetry as
distinguished from that of the ancients, and a main source, to our
poetry, of its magic and charm, of what we call its romantic
element,--rhyme itself, all the weight of evidence tends to show, comes
into our poetry from the Celts.

\[c\] Take the following attempt to render the natural magic supposed to
pervade Tieck's poetry:--'In diesen Dichtungen herrscht eine
geheimnissvolle Innigkeit, ein sonderbares Einverstandniss mit der
Natur, besonders mit der Pflanzen--und Steinreich. Der Leser fuhlt sich
da wie in einem verzauberten Walde; er hort die unterirdischen Quellen
melodisch rauschen; wildfremde Wunderblumen schauen ihn an mit ihren
bunten schnsuchtigen Augen; unsichtbare Lippen kussen seine Wangen mit
neckender Zartlichkeit; hohe Pilze, wie goldne Glocken, wachsen klingend
empor am Fusse der Baume;' and so on. Now that stroke of the hohe Pilze,
the great funguses, would have been impossible to the tact and delicacy
of a born lover of nature like the Celt, and could only have come from a
German who has hineinstudirt himself into natural magic. It is a crying
false note, which carries us at once out of the world of nature-magic
and the breath of the woods, into the world of theatre-magic and the
smell of gas and orange-peel.
