[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scl06)  [Next](scl08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part V

To begin with what is more external. If we are so wholly Anglo-Saxon and
Germanic as people say, how comes it that the habits and gait of the
German language are so exceedingly unlike ours? Why while the Times
talks in this fashion: 'At noon a long line of carriages extended from
Pall Mall to the Peers' entrance of the Palace of Westminster,' does the
Cologne Gazette talk in this other fashion: 'Nachdem die Vorbereitungen
zu dem auf dem GurzenichSaale zu Ebren der Abgeordneten Statt finden
sollenden Bankette bereits vollstandig getroffen worden waren, fand
heute vormittag auf polizeiliche Anordnung die Schliessung sammtlicher
Zugange zum Gurzenich Statt'? \[a\] Surely the mental habit of people
who express their thoughts in so very different a manner, the one rapid,
the other slow, the one plain, the other embarrassed, the one trailing,
the other striding, cannot be essentially the same. The English
language, strange compound as it is, with its want of inflections, and
with all the difficulties which this want of inflections brings upon it,
has yet made itself capable of being, in good hands, a
business-instrument as ready, direct, and clear, as French or Latin.
Again: perhaps no nation, after the Greeks and Romans, has so clearly
felt in what true rhetoric, rhetoric of the best kind, consists, and
reached so high a pitch of excellence in this, as the English. Our sense
for rhetoric has in some ways done harm to us in our cultivation of
literature, harm to us, still more, in our cultivation of science; but
in the true sphere of rhetoric, in public speaking, this sense has given
us orators whom I do think we may, without fear of being contradicted
and accused of blind national vanity, assert to have inherited the great
Greek and Roman oratorical tradition more than the orators of any other
country. Strafford, Bolingbroke, the two Pitts, Fox,--to cite no other
names,--I imagine few will dispute that these call up the notion of an
oratory, in kind, in extent, in power, coming nearer than any other body
of modern oratory to the oratory of Greece and Rome. And the affinity of
spirit in our best public life and greatest public men to those of Rome,
has often struck observers, foreign as well as English. Now, not only
have the Germans shown no eminent aptitude for rhetoric such as the
English have shown,--that was not to be expected, since our public life
has done so much to develop an aptitude of this kind, and the public
life of the Germans has done so little,--but they seem in a singular
degree devoid of any aptitude at all for rhetoric. Take a speech from
the throne in Prussia, and compare it with a speech from the throne in
England. Assuredly it is not in speeches from the throne that English
rhetoric or any rhetoric shows its best side;--they are often cavilled
at, often justly cavilled at;--no wonder, for this form of composition
is beset with very trying difficulties. But what is to be remarked is
this;--a speech from the throne falls essentially within the sphere of
rhetoric, it is one's sense of rhetoric which has to fix its tone and
style, so as to keep a certain note always sounding in it; in an English
speech from the throne, whatever its faults, this rhetorical note is
always struck and kept to; in a Prussian speech from the throne, never.
An English speech from the throne is rhetoric; a Prussian speech is half
talk,--heavy talk,--and half effusion. This is one instance, it may be
said; true, but in one instance of this kind the presence or the absence
of an aptitude for rhetoric is decisively shown. Well, then, why am I
not to say that we English get our rhetorical sense from the Norman
element in us,--our turn for this strenuous, direct, high-spirited
talent of oratory, from the influence of the strenuous, direct,
high-spirited Normans? Modes of life, institutions, government, and
other such causes, are sufficient, I shall be told, to account for
English oratory. Modes of life, institutions, government, climate, and
so forth,--let me say it once for all,-- will further or hinder the
development of an aptitude, but they will not by themselves create the
aptitude or explain it. On the other hand, a people's habit and
complexion of nature go far to determine its modes of life,
institutions, and government, and even to prescribe the limits within
which the influences of climate shall tell upon it.

However, it is not my intention, in these remarks, to lay it down for
certain that this or that part of our powers, shortcomings, and
behaviour, is due to a Celtic, German, or Norman element in us. To
establish this I should need much wider limits, and a knowledge, too,
far beyond what I possess; all I purpose is to point out certain
correspondences, not yet, perhaps, sufficiently observed and attended
to, which seem to lead towards certain conclusions. The following up the
inquiry till full proof is reached,--or perhaps, full disproof,--is what
I want to suggest to more competent persons. Premising this, I now go on
to a second matter, somewhat more delicate and inward than that with
which I began. Every one knows how well the Greek and Latin races, with
their direct sense for the visible, palpable world, have succeeded in
the plastic arts. The sheer German races, too, with their honest love of
fact, and their steady pursuit of it,--their fidelity to nature, in
short,--have attained a high degree of success in these arts; few people
will deny that Albert Durer and Rubens, for example, are to be called
masters in painting, and in the high kind of painting. The Celtic races,
on the other hand, have shown a singular inaptitude for the plastic
arts; the abstract, severe character of the Druidical religion, its
dealing with the eye of the mind rather than the eye of the body, its
having no elaborate temples and beautiful idols, all point this way from
the first; its sentiment cannot satisfy itself, cannot even find a
resting-place for itself, in colour and form; it presses on to the
impalpable, the ideal. The forest of trees and the forest of rocks, not
hewn timber and carved stones, suit its aspirations for something not to
be bounded or expressed. With this tendency, the Celtic races have, as I
remarked before, been necessarily almost impotent in the higher branches
of the plastic arts. Ireland, that has produced so many powerful
spirits, has produced no great sculptors or painters. Cross into
England. The inaptitude for the plastic art strikingly diminishes, as
soon as the German, not the Celtic element, preponderates in the race.
And yet in England, too, in the English race, there is something which
seems to prevent our reaching real mastership in the plastic arts, as
the more unmixed German races have reached it. Reynolds and Turner are
painters of genius, who can doubt it? but take a European jury, the only
competent jury in these cases, and see if you can get a verdict giving
them the rank of masters, as this rank is given to Raphael and
Correggio, or to Albert Durer and Rubens. And observe in what points our
English pair succeed, and in what they fall short. They fall short in
architectonice, in the highest power of composition, by which painting
accomplishes the very uttermost which it is given to painting to
accomplish; the highest sort of composition, the highest application of
the art of painting, they either do not attempt, or they fail in it.
Their defect, therefore, is on the side of art, of plastic art. And they
succeed in magic, in beauty, in grace, in expressing almost the
inexpressible: here is the charm of Reynolds's children and Turner's
seas; the impulse to express the inexpressible carries Turner so far,
that at last it carries him away, and even long before he is quite
carried away, even in works that are justly extolled, one can see the
stamp-mark, as the French say, of insanity. The excellence, therefore,
the success, is on the side of spirit. Does not this look as if a Celtic
stream met the main German current in us, and gave it a somewhat
different course from that which it takes naturally? We have Germanism
enough in us, enough patient love for fact and matter, to be led to
attempt the plastic arts, and we make much more way in them than the
pure Celtic races make; but at a certain point our Celtism comes in,
with its love of emotion, sentiment, the inexpressible, and gives our
best painters a bias. And the point at which it comes in is just that
critical point where the flowering of art into its perfection commences;
we have plenty of painters who never reach this point at all, but remain
always mere journeymen, in bondage to matter; but those who do reach it,
instead of going on to the true consummation of the masters in painting,
are a little overbalanced by soul and feeling, work too directly for
these, and so do not get out of their art all that may be got out of it.
The same modification of our Germanism by another force which seems
Celtic, is visible in our religion. Here, too, we may trace a gradation
between Celt, Englishman, and German, the difference which distinguishes
Englishman from German appearing attributable to a Celtic element in us.
Germany is the land of exegesis, England is the land of Puritanism. The
religion of Wales is more emotional andsentimental than English
Puritanism; Romanism has indeed given way to Calvinism among the
Welsh,--the one superstition has supplanted the other,--but the Celtic
sentiment which made the Welsh such devout Catholics, remains, and gives
unction to their Methodism; theirs is not the controversial,
rationalistic, intellectual side of Protestantism, but the devout,
emotional, religious side. Among the Germans, Protestantism has been
carried on into rationalism and science. The English hold a middle place
between the Germans and the Welsh; their religion has the exterior forms
and apparatus of a rationalism, so far their Germanic nature carries
them; but long before they get to science, their feeling, their Celtic
element catches them, and turns their religion all towards piety and
unction. So English Protestantism has the outside appearance of an
intellectual system, and the inside reality of an emotional system: this
gives it its tenacity and force, for what is held with the ardent
attachment of feeling is believed to have at the same time the
scientific proof of reason. The English Puritan, therefore (and
Puritanism is the characteristic form of English Protestantism), stands
between the German Protestant and the Celtic Methodist; his real
affinity indeed, at present, being rather with his Welsh kinsman, if
kinsman he may be called, than with his German.

Sometimes one is left in doubt from whence the check and limit to
Germanism in us proceeds, whether from a Celtic source or from a Norman
source. Of the true steady-going German nature the bane is, as I
remarked, flat commonness; there seems no end to its capacity for
platitude; it has neither the quick perception of the Celt to save it
from platitude, nor the strenuousness of the Norman; it is only raised
gradually out of it by science, but it jogs through almost interminable
platitudes first. The English nature is not raised to science, but
something in us, whether Celtic or Norman, seems to set a bound to our
advance in platitude, to make us either shy of platitude, or impatient
of it. I open an English reading-book for children, and I find these two
characteristic stories in it, one of them of English growth, the other
of German. Take the Englishstory first:-- 'A little boy accompanied his
elder sister while she busied herself with the labours of the farm,
asking questions at every step, and learning the lessons of life without
being aware of it.

'"Why, dear Jane," he said, "do you scatter good grain on the ground;
would it not be better to make good bread of it than to throw it to the
greedy chickens?"

'"In time," replied Jane, "the chickens will grow big, and each of them
will fetch money at the market. One must think on the end to be attained
without counting trouble, and learn to wait."

'Perceiving a colt, which looked eagerly at him, the little boy cried
out: "Jane, why is the colt not in the fields with the labourershelping
to draw the carts?"

'"The colt is young," replied Jane, "and he must lie idle till he gets
the necessary strength; one must not sacrifice the future to the
present."'

The reader will say that is most mean and trivial stuff, the vulgar
English nature in full force; just such food as the Philistine would
naturally provide for his young. He will say he can see the boy fed upon
it growing up to be like his father, to be all for business, to despise
culture, to go through his dull days, and to die without having ever
lived. That may be so; but now take the German story (one of
Krummacher's), and see the difference:--

'There lived at the court of King Herod a rich man who was the king's
chamberlain. He clothed himself in purple and fine linen, and fared like
the king himself.

'Once a friend of his youth, whom he had not seen for many years, came
from a distant land to pay him a visit. Then the chamberlain invited all
his friends and made a feast in honour of the stranger.

'The tables were covered with choice food placed on dishes of gold and
silver, and the finest wines of all kinds. The rich man sat at the head
of the table, glad to do the honours to his friend who was seated at his
right hand. So they ate and drank, and were merry.

'Then the stranger said to the chamberlain of King Herod: "Riches and
splendour like thine are nowhere to be found in my country." And he
praised his greatness, and called him happy above all men on earth.

'Well, the rich man took an apple from a golden vessel. The apple was
large, and red, and pleasant to the eye. Then said be: "Behold, this
apple hath rested on gold, and its form is very beautiful." And he
presented it to the stranger, the friend of his youth. The stranger cut
the apple in two; and behold, in the middle of it there was a worm!

'Then the stranger looked at the chamberlain; and the chamberlain bent
his eyes on the ground and sighed.'

There it ends. Now I say, one sees there an abyss of platitude open, and
the German nature swimming calmly about in it, which seems in some way
or other to have its entry screened off for the English nature. The
English story leads with a direct issue into practical life: a narrow
and dry practical life, certainly, but yet enough to supply a plain
motive for the story; the German story leads simply nowhere except into
bathos. Shall we say that the Norman talent for affairs saves us here,
or the Celtic perceptive instinct? one of them it must be, surely. The
Norman turn seems most germane to the matter here immediately in hand;
on the other hand, the Celtic turn, or some degree of it, some degree of
its quick perceptive instinct, seems necessary to account for the full
difference between the German nature and ours. Even in Germans of genius
or talent the want of quick light tact, of instinctive perception of the
impropriety or impossibility of certain things, is singularly
remarkable. Herr Gervinus's prodigious discovery about Handel being an
Englishman and Shakspeare a German, the incredible mare's-nest Goethe
finds in looking for the origin of Byron's Manfred,--these are things
from which no deliberate care or reflection can save a man; only an
instinct can save him from them, an instinct that they are absurd; who
can imagine Charles Lamb making Herr Gervinus's blunder, or Shakspeare
making Goethe's? but from the sheer German nature this intuitive tact
seems something so alien, that even genius fails to give it. And yet
just what constitutes special power and genius in a man seems often to
be his blending with the basis of his national temperament, some
additional gift or grace not proper to that temperament; Shakspeare's
greatness is thus in his blending an openness and flexibility of spirit,
not English, with the English basis; Addison's, in his blending a
moderation and delicacy, not English, with the English basis; Burke's in
his blending a largeness of view and richness of thought, not English,
with the English basis. In Germany itself, in the same way, the
greatness of their great Frederic lies in his blending a rapidity and
clearness, not German, with the German basis; the greatness of Goethe in
his blending a love of form, nobility, and dignity,--the grand
style,--with the German basis. But the quick, sure, instinctive
perception of the incongruous and absurd not even genius seems to give
in Germany; at least, I can think of only one German of genius, Lessing
(for Heine was a Jew, and the Jewish temperament is quite another thing
from the German), who shows it in an eminent degree.

If we attend closely to the terms by which foreigners seek to hit off
the impression which we and the Germans make upon them, we shall detect
in these terms a difference which makes, I think, in favour of the
notion I am propounding. Nations in hitting off one another's characters
are apt, we all know, to seize the unflattering side rather than the
flattering; the mass of mankind always do this, and indeed they really
see what is novel, and not their own, in a disfiguring light. Thus we
ourselves, for instance, popularly say 'the phlegmatic Dutchman' rather
than 'the sensible Dutchman,' or 'the grimacing Frenchman' rather than
'the polite Frenchman.' Therefore neither we nor the Germans should
exactly accept the description strangers give of us, but it is enough
for my purpose that strangers, in characterising us with a certain shade
of difference, do at any rate make it clear that there appears this
shade of difference, though the character itself, which they give us
both, may be a caricature rather than a faithful picture of us. Now it
is to be noticed that those sharp observers, the French,--who have a
double turn for sharp observation, for they have both the quick
perception of the Celt and the Latin's gift for coming plump upon the
fact,--it is to be noticed, I say, that the French put a curious
distinction in their popular, depreciating, we will hope inadequate, way
of hitting off us and the Germans. While they talk of the '*betise
allemande*,' they talk of the '*gaucherie anglaise*;' while they talk of
the '*Allemand balourd*,' they talk of the '*Anglais empetre*;' while
they call the German '*niais*,' they call the Englishman
'*melancolique*.' The difference between the epithets *balourd* and
*empetre* exactly gives the difference in character I wish to seize;
balourd means heavy and dull, empetre means hampered and embarrassed.
This points to a certain mixture and strife of elements in the
Englishman; to the clashing of a Celtic quickness of perception with a
Germanic instinct for going steadily along close to the ground.

The Celt, as we have seen, has not at all, in spite of his quick
perception, the Latin talent for dealing with the fact, dexterously
managing it and making himself master of it; Latin or Latinised people
have felt contempt for him on this account, have treated him as a poor
creature, just as the German, who arrives at fact in a different way
from the Latins, but who arrives at it, has treated him. The couplet of
Chrestien of Troyes about the Welsh:--

. . . Gallois sont tous, par nature,

Plus fous que betes en pasture--is well known, and expresses the genuine
verdict of the Latin mind on the Celts. But the perceptive instinct of
the Celt feels and anticipates, though he has that in him which cuts him
off from command of the world of fact; he sees what is wanting to him
well enough; his mere eye is not less sharp, nay, it is sharper, than
the Latin's. He is a quick genius, checkmated for want of strenuousness
or else patience. The German has not the Latin's sharp precise glance on
the world of fact, and dexterous behaviour in it; he fumbles with it
much and long, but his honesty and patience give him the rule of it in
the long run,--a surer rule, some of us think, than the Latin gets;
still, his behaviour in it is not quick and dexterous. The Englishman,
in so far as he is German,--and he is mainly German,--proceeds in the
steady-going German fashion; if he were all German he would proceed thus
for ever without self-consciousness or embarrassment; but, in so far as
he is Celtic, he has snatches of quick instinct which often make him
feel he is fumbling, show him visions of an easier, more dexterous
behaviour, disconcert him and fill him with misgiving. No people,
therefore, are so shy, so self-conscious, so embarrassed as the English,
because two natures are mixed in them, and natures which pull them such
different ways. The Germanic part, indeed, triumphs in us, we are a
Germanic people; but not so wholly as to exclude hauntings of Celtism,
which clash with our Germanism, producing, as I believe, our *humour*,
neither German nor Celtic, and so affect us that we strike people as odd
and singular, not to be referred to any known type, and like nothing but
ourselves. 'Nearly every Englishman,' says an excellent and by no means
unfriendly observer, George Sand, 'nearly every Englishman, however
good-looking he may be, has always something singular about him which
easily comes to seem comic;--a sort of typical awkwardness (gaucherie
typique) in his looks or appearance, which hardly ever wears out.' I say
this strangeness is accounted for by the English nature being mixed as
we have seen, while the Latin nature is all of a piece, and so is the
German nature, and the Celtic nature.

It is impossible to go very fast when the matter with which one has to
deal, besides being new and little explored, is also by its nature so
subtle, eluding one's grasp unless one handles it with all possible
delicacy and care. It is in our poetry that the Celtic part in us has
left its trace clearest, and in our poetry I must follow it before I
have done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[a\] The above is really a sentence taken from the Cologne Gazette.
Lord Strangford's comment here is as follows: -'Modern Germanism, in a
general estimate of Germanism, should not be taken, absolutely and
necessarily, as the constant, whereof we are the variant. The Low-Dutch
of Holland, anyhow, are indisputably as genuine Dutch as the High-Dutch
of Germany Proper. But do they write sentences like this one -informe,
ingens, cui lumen ademptum? If not, the question must be asked, not how
we have come to deviate, but how the Germans have come to deviate. Our
modern English prose in plain matters is often all just the same as the
prose of King Alfred and the Chronicle. Ohthere's North Sea Voyage and
Wulfstan's Baltic Voyage is the sort of thing which is sent in every
day, one may say, to the Geographical or Ethnological Society, in the
whole style and turn of phrase and thought.'

The mass of a stock must supply our data for judging the stock..

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](scl08)
