<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj087)  [Next](coj089) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE THRONE OF SOLOMON, KING OF ISRAEL.

LXXXIV\. (1) 'In those days, when Ahasuerus sat (upon the throne).' The
word \#\#\# can only be understood as meaning 'sitting on a throne,' as
it is said, 'When Ahasuerus sat upon the throne of his kingdom;' but
with reference to Solomon, it is said, 'And Solomon sat upon the throne
of the Lord as king over Israel.' It is related that the assembly of
Israel said unto God, 'O Lord of the universe, this wicked man sits in
the sane place where Solomon has been sitting; do not make abominable
the throne of Thy glory.' In the third year of his reign—for he busied
himself with this throne for three years—he sent for workmen to make a
throne like unto that of Solomon, but they were unable to do so.

\(2\) And what was the throne of Solomon? The sages say that Solomon
mounted his throne by six different ways, each way having steps. On each
step there were two lions, one on the right and the other on the left,
who did not remain quiet, but were active. And what did they do? When
Solomon went up on the first step, the lions on the right stretched out
their paws upon which a writing was engraved. He could not place his
foot on the second step until he had read what was written on the lions’
paws. It was, 'Ye shall not respect persons in judgment.'

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Turning now to the
left, he read what the other lions had written on their paws, 'Thou
shalt not accept any bribe.' (3) Thus at every step he had to read some
portion of the law of judgment. All the steps were set with precious
stones and pearls, red, white and green. Kinds of trees and species of
the palm-trees were fixed on both sides of each step, and upon their
branches there nestled all kinds of eagles, peacocks and birds. On the
highest step were two huge pillars of ivory on the heads of the lions,
and two golden hollow vines fragrant with every kind of perfume, which
they exhaled whenever Solomon ascended the throne. The throne itself was
made of ivory, overlaid with the gold of Ophir, and surrounded with
precious stones and pearls. On either side of the throne a golden seat
of honour was placed, one for Gad the seer, and the other for Nathan the
prophet. (4) And seventy other seats of gold for the seventy judges of
the Sanhedrim formed a circle round the central throne. In front of it
was a lamp of gold, with its snuffers and censers and other
appurtenances; and on one side of this lamp were seen in sculptured work
the seven patriarchs of the world, viz., Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and Job, while on the other side were the seven pious men
of the world, viz., Kehath, Amran, Moses, Aaron, Eldad, Medad and Ḥur,
and on the top the form of a priest was seen kindling the light.

\(5\) On the steps approaching the throne were placed as many unclean
animals as clean, all facing each other, on the first step the ox was
placed opposite the lion; on the second, the goat opposite the wolf; on
the third (third missing); on the fourth, the bear opposite the hart; on
the fifth, the eagle opposite the dove; and on the sixth, the hawk
opposite the turtledove. The ascent to the throne was made between these
animals. As soon as Solomon placed his foot on the first step he turned
round, and the lion immediately stretched out its paw on the right and
the eagle its talon on the left. Upon these he leaned, and was spared
the trouble of ascending himself because the same thing was done by the
different animals and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

birds on each until he arrived at the top. (6) Then all the birds of
every species began to chirp and sing, and the peacocks to shriek, and
all the trees emitted their fragrant perfumes. A serpent of gold then
encircled him, and, having seated him upon his throne, crept down
beneath his feet. The eagles, nestling on the vines after wafting
breezes of perfume with their wings, placed the crown upon his head,
and, this done, all the beasts and birds with one accord exclaimed,
'Long may the kingdom of the house of David be established.' (7) After
this a dove of gold opposite the throne brought a scroll of the law and
placed it upon his knees. Then, laying it upon a golden reading-desk
just by the throne, he read it to fulfil what is written, 'And it shall
remain with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life.'
Every step on the throne contained some verse in praise of the law. On
the first was written, 'The law of the Lord is perfect, refreshing the
soul.' On the second, 'The testimony of the Lord is faithful, making the
foolish (simple) wise.' On the third, 'The precepts of the Lord are
just, rejoicing the heart.' On the fourth, 'The commandment of the Lord
He created as an enlightenment to the eyes.' On the fifth, 'The fear of
the Lord is pure, lasting for ever.' On the sixth, 'The judgments of the
Lord are true, and are righteous, all of them.'

\(8\) When the people approached Solomon for judgment, the wheels of his
throne turned, the oxen lowed, the lions roared, the bears howled, the
lambs bleated, the eagles cried, the peacocks shrieked, the cocks
crowed, the hawks screamed, and all the birds chirped, to terrify the
plaintiffs and the witnesses, so that they did not plead wrong cases,
and the witnesses were not testifying falsely. On account of all this,
it is said, 'The like of it will never be made in any kingdom.' When
Ahasuerus was king, he tried for three years to have a throne made like
that of Solomon, but in vain. \[End of the throne of Solomon.\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXV. The Book of the Maccabee](coj089)

</div>
