<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj010)  [Next](coj012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VII\. (1) God created ten canopies for Adam in the Garden of Eden, and
all of them were made of precious stones, of pearls and of gold. Each
bridegroom has as a rule but one canopy, a king has three, but in order
to show great honour to the first man He made ten canopies for him in
the Garden of Eden, as it is said, 'Thou hast been in Eden, the garden
of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, the topaz,
and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the
emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold; the workmanship of thy tabrets and
of thy pipes (was prepared) for thee on the day when thou wast created.'
These represent the ten canopies. The angels were beating their timbrels
and dancing to the pipes, as it is said, 'The workmanship of thy tabrets
and of thy pipes.'

\(2\) On the day when the first man was created God said to the
ministering angels, 'Come, let us descend and show kindness to man and
his helper, for upon kindness the world rests.' He further said,
'Kindness is much more acceptable to Me than the sacrifices of
burnt-offerings which the Israelites are destined in the future to offer
to Me upon the altar,' as it is said, 'For kindness do I desire and not
sacrifices.' The ministering angels walked before Adam like shepherds
who watch the flocks of birds, as it

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

is said, 'For He commanded His angels to watch over thee in all thy
ways.' They were like unto a bridal pair, and God may be compared to a
precentor, for just as the precentor in the midst of the congregation
blesses the bridal pair under the canopy, so did God bless man and his
helpmeet, as it is said, 'And God blessed them, and said unto them, Be
fruitful and multiply.' And they did so, as it is said, 'And Adam knew
Eve his wife; and she conceived and bore him Cain, and said, I have
begotten a man of the Lord.' Why was Cain thus called? Because he was
formed from Adam and his wife and from God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII](coj012)

</div>
