<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj061)  [Next](coj063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LVIII\. (1) Josippon says that the incident of Micah and the concubine
of Gibeah occurred between the time of the death of Joshua and Othniel,
between the times to which the following verses refer, viz.: 'And Judah
captured Azah and its boundary, and Ekron and Askalon'; and the other,
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and He
delivered them into the hands of the Canaanites. Then the children of
Dan built Laish and the mountain.' For the purpose of enabling us to
calculate

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the days of the judges, this portion was placed at the end of the Book
of Judges.

\(2\) After Othniel came Ehud. At that time, in the days of Ehud, the
city Cinnereth in Lybia (\#\#\#) was built, and many ships were built by
Tritolymus (\#\#\#), for carrying wheat, for merchandise. Dionysius
built the city of Niza, in Media; Troy (\#\#\#) was built about the same
time in Dardania. There a dog killed Piritius (\#\#\#), and attempted to
slay Tisius, and Heraclones saved him. In the sixty-ninth year of Ehud
the city Ṣirine (\#\#\#) in Libia was built. (3) Shamgar succeeded him,
and was followed by Deborah and Barak, who fought with Sisera. And the
Lord confounded Sisera and all his charioteers and his whole camp with a
fierce tempest; and He overwhelmed them all with hail, and blinding rain
and lightnings and thunders, so that they could no longer stand, but
fell by the sword.

\(4\) Sisera then fled on foot to the tent of Jael, who went out to meet
him and embraced him. Then, covering him well, he fell into a deep
sleep. And Jael prayed to God, saying, 'I pray Thee, O Lord, strengthen
Thy handmaid against Thy enemy, and by this I shall know that Thou wilt
deliver him into my hand, viz., if I bring him down from his bed on to
the ground, and he does not awake.' She did accordingly. Then, taking a
nail of the tent and a hammer, she knocked the nail into his temple,
according to Deborah's prophecy. And Barak captured Ḥaṣor and slew its
king, and all its inhabitants.

\(5\) Now, when Sisera went out to fight against Israel his mother,
Tamar, with her maidens and princesses, by means of their enchantments
prophesied, saying that Sisera would bring as spoil one or more of the
women of Israel with their coloured garments, for she saw in her charms
that he would lie upon the bed of Jael, the wife of Heber, and be
covered with a coloured garment of needlework. Therefore she said, 'A
damsel, two damsels to every man.'

\(6\) At that time the kings of Argos, who had reigned for

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 544 years, were
destroyed and exterminated, and their kingdom passed into the hands of
Mesenes (\#\#\#). In the thirty-ninth year of Deborah's reign the city
of Meletus was built. Gideon succeeded Barak and Deborah. He asked a
sign of the Lord from the fleece of wool. (7) I find that Gideon asked
for yet another sign, for he said, 'Give me a sign that God has chosen
me to deliver Israel just as He gave to Moses, who delivered the
Israelites from Egypt.' And the angel replied, 'Run and fetch me some
water from that pool and pour it upon this rock. I shall then give thee
a sign.' Having done as he was requested, the angel said, 'Tell me,
shall this water be turned into blood or fire?' And Gideon answered,
'Let part of it be turned into fire and part into blood.' And thus it
was, the blood neither quenching the fire, nor the fire drying up the
blood.

\(8\) At that time, during the reign of Gideon, Mercorius (\#\#\#)
discovered certain islands called Sirenes (\#\#\#); in Ashkenaz they are
called Nikes (Nix) (\#\#\#). The inhabitants were like beautiful women,
their lower parts resembling fishes; and the inhabitants of the forests
of the islands were half men and the other half wild animals and horses.
The wise man Dialus, by means of his cunning (\#\#\#), made images and
idols and birds of gold and brass, and having breathed into them, the
idols spoke and the images prophesied while the birds flew about, for he
was exceedingly clever in this art. The city of Tyre was built 240 years
before the Temple at Jerusalem. (9) After Gideon Abimelech, the son of
his concubine, succeeded him, and at that time the measure of the Kor
(\#\#\#) and the art of playing upon the timbrel were discovered in
Greece. Tola, the son of Phua, succeeded Abimelech. During his reign
Erkules (\#\#\#) conquered Anteos (\#\#\#), in Lybia, in the water, and
destroyed the city of Elios (\#\#) when Priamus reigned in Troy.

\(10\) Yair the Gileadite rose up after him. He made an altar unto Baal,
and all the Israelites turned after it and worshipped Baal, except seven
righteous men, who did not worship it. These were their names, Da‘al,
Abi Yezre‘el,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gutiel, Shalom,
Ashchor, Jonadab, and Shim‘i. These said to lair, 'We remember what
Moses commanded Israel, saying, "Take care lest ye turn aside from
following the Lord to worship Baal."' Yair then commanded his servants
to burn those men with fire, because they spoke against Baal. Then,
taking the men they cast them into the fire, but the fire swerved from
them and burned instead the servants of lair who cast them therein,
together with all his household. And these seven men escaped from the
fire and went on their way, for the men round about them were struck
with blindness so that they could not see them, and the fire reached the
house of Yair, who heard the voice of the Lord, saying, 'I have promoted
thee to be a judge over Israel; but thou hast corrupted the people and
caused them to turn aside from following the Lord and to worship Baal,
and those who remain steadfast to Me thou hast burned with fire. But
they shall live, and thou shalt die by being consumed in the flames
which shall never be extinguished.' Thus the Lord consumed lair and all
his house, and Baal with 10,000 of his followers; and lair was buried in
Qamon.

\(11\) At that time Theseus captured Helena, but Castor and Pollox, the
brothers of Theseus, and his mother, were captured. The city of Carthage
(Qar Laini, \#\#\#) was then built. Nizpa (\#\#\#) invented the Latin
alphabet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIX](coj063)

</div>
