<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj069)  [Next](coj071) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXVI\. (1) Nebuchadnezzar was not very much changed in his being from
other men; but only in his appearance, in his mind, and in his language.
He appeared to men like an ox as far as his navel (or stomach), and from
his navel to his feet like a lion. He ate the herbs at first which other
men eat, to show that he chewed his food like an ox, and became at last
like a lion, in that he killed all the wicked. Many people went out to
see him, but Daniel did not, because, during the time of his change, he
was praying for him, so that the seven years became seven months. For
forty days he roamed about among the wild beasts, and for the next forty
days his heart became like that of any other man, and he wept on account
of his sins. Again, for forty days he wandered about in caves, and for
yet another

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

forty days he roamed among the wild beasts until the seven months were
completed.

\(2\) When, however, the Lord restored him to his former position he no
longer reigned alone, but appointed seven judges, one for each year
until the expiration of the seven years. And during this time, while he
was repenting for his sins, he neither ate meat nor bread, nor drank any
wine, but his food consisted of herbs and seed, according to Daniel's
counsel. When, after the seven years of his punishment, he sat once more
on the throne of his kingdom, he wished to make Daniel an heir among his
sons, but Daniel said, 'Far be it from me to leave the inheritance of my
fathers for that of the uncircumcised.'

\(3\) On the death of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, his son of the same name
succeeded him. He built a temple to Bel in Babylon, and completed the
city of Babylon. He surrounded it with the river, so that the enemy
could not prevail against it. He increased the city and the temple of
Bel tenfold, and added glory and honour, and in fifteen days (4) the
building was complete.

\(4\) The king then, having placed a huge stone upon a mountain, planted
a garden upon it, which was raised to a great height so as to enable his
wife to gaze upon. Media, the land of her birth, for she longed to
behold it. This was the king who besieged Tyre for three years and ten
months. When Nebuchadnezzar, the son of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, died,
Evil Merodach reigned in his stead.

\(5\) Now, in the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin,
King of Judah, on the twenty-seventh day of the twelfth month, Evil
Merodach, King of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, rescued
Jehoiachin, King of Judah,, from prison, and raised his throne above
that of any other king in Babylon, and, changing his prison garments, he
maintained him as long as he lived. He did this because Nebuchadnezzar
the Great did not keep his faith with him, for Evil Merodach was really
his eldest son; but he made Nebuchadnezzar the Younger king, because he
had humbled the wicked. They slandered him to his father, who

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

placed him (Evil Merodach) in prison together with Jehoiachin, where
they remained together until the death of Nebuchadnezzar, his brother,
after whom he reigned.

\(6\) 'I fear my father Nebuchadnezzar,' he said, 'lest he rise from his
grave, for just as he was changed back from an animal to a man, so in
the same manner he may rise up from death to life.' But Jehoiachin
advised him to take the corpse out of the grave, and, cutting it into
300 pieces, to give it to 300 vultures, and he said to him, 'Thy father
will not rise up until these vultures have brought back the flesh of thy
father, which they have eaten.' Evil Merodach had three sons, whose
names were Regosar (\#\#\#), Lebuzer-Dukh (\#\#\#), and Nabar (\#\#\#),
who was Belshazzar, with whom the Chaldean kingdom came to an end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXVII](coj071)

</div>
