<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj085)  [Next](coj087) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXXXII\. (1) R. Isaak Napḥa said Haman worked cunningly against Israel,
for it is written, 'And when these days

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

were fulfilled, the king made a feast unto all the people.' 'The people'
here referred to is Israel. Haman said to Ahasuerus, 'The God of these
people hates lewdness, for it is written in the Torah, "Thou shalt not
commit adultery."' He, therefore, brought together lewd women, and
making the banquet for then, decreed that they should comply with any
man's wish, so as not to give the accused the excuse of saying that they
had been forced to do such a thing by a decree of the king. As soon,
however, as Mordecai perceived this, he said to the people, 'Do not go
to this banquet, that you may not be led into temptation.' But the Jews
disregarded Mordecai's advice, and went.

\(2\) R. Levi said that 18,560 men went to this banquet, and ate and
drank until they were intoxicated with the wine. Our sages say that
while they were at the table of this wicked man, Satan appeared before
God, and accused Israel in these words, 'O Lord of the universe, how
long wilt Thou cleave to this nation, who turn their hearts from Thee,
who forsake Thee, and separate themselves from Thee? Moreover, they do
not turn to Thee in repentance, although the verse has been fulfilled in
which it is written, "I shall scatter you among the heathen." Therefore,
if it is Thy will, let them perish from the world.' But God asked, 'What
will become of My law?' And he replied, 'Let it remain for the higher
beings.' Then said the Holy One, blessed be He, 'My mind is satisfied to
destroy Israel.' (3) At that moment He wished to blot Israel out of the
world, as it is said, 'I shall cease to remember man.' 'What is this
nation to Me,' said the Lord, 'for whom My sorrow increases every day?'
And God said to Satan, 'Go, and bring Me a scroll, that I may write
thereon their destruction.' When Satan went out to fetch the scroll, he
came face to face with the Law, which came forth to meet him in widow's
garments groaning and weeping, and at the voice of her weeping the
ministering angels cried, saying, 'If the Israelites are to be
destroyed, what is the use of us?' And they wept aloud, as it is said,
'The Arēlīm cried abroad, and

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

the angels of peace wept bitterly.' As soon as the sun, moon, stars, and
planets heard it they clothed themselves with sackcloth, and lifted up
their voice in lamentation, as it is said, 'The heavens and the earth
clothed themselves in blackness, and girded themselves with sackcloth;'
as it is said, 'I will clothe the heavens with blackness, and make
sackcloth their garment.' Then they all exclaimed, 'O Lord of the
universe, shall Israel be destroyed, who go from door to door wishing to
study the law, observe the Sabbath, circumcision, and the commandments,
and for whose sakes we were created? as it is said, "If not for My
covenant, the day and the night and the ordinances of heaven and earth
would not have been founded," and now shall they perish from the world?'

\(4\) At that moment Elijah went to beseech the righteous men of yore,
the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and said to them, 'O
patriarchs, do ye riot know that the heavens and the earth and all the
heavenly host weep in the day, and cry in the night, and that the whole
world is now like a travailing woman, while ye remain silent?' 'But why
is this?' said they. 'Because Israel has been handed over to the
slaughterer like sheep, to be blotted out from the face of the earth,
and their name is to perish, as it is said, "Come, and let us destroy
them."' Then said Moses to Elijah, 'Is there a righteous man in this
generation?' And he replied, 'Yes, there is one, and his name is
Mordecai, the son of Jair.' 'Then go, and tell him to supplicate
continually for mercy, and I shall do likewise.' 'But,' said Elijah,
'Moses, O faithful shepherd, against thy flock the decree has already
been written down, and now they desire to put the seal on it.'

\(5\) 'Notice,' then said Moses to Elijah, 'whether it has been sealed
with clay, for then our prayers may still be heard; but if it is sealed
with blood, then what has been decreed will happen.' After this
conversation Elijah, of blessed memory, forthwith went to Mordecai, as
it is said, 'And Mordecai knew all that had happened,' and when he heard
this, he rent his clothes, as it is said, 'And

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mordecai rent his
clothes.' Then said Mordecai before God, O Lord of the universe, Thou
hast sworn to our forefathers to make their seed as numerous as the
stars of the heavens, and now we are accounted for as sheep to be
slaughtered. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants.'

\(6\) Then, gathering all the children of the school together, he
afflicted them by depriving them of bread and water, and, clothing them
in sackcloth, he placed them on ashes, so that they cried day and night,
while the wicked Haman went to his house rejoicing, as it is written,
'And on that day Haman went home rejoicing, and with a merry heart, and
calling his friends, said, "Thus and thus has Queen Esther done." And he
told them of his greatness, adding, "But all this is not enough for me."
And Zeresh, his wife, said to him to erect gallows for Mordecai, and it
pleased him, and he erected a gallows. Cutting down a cedar from his
garden, 50 cubits high and 15 cubits wide, he brought it out, and fixed
it near his door, all the while singing praises and songs, and thinking
in his heart that at the time of the reading of the 'Shema‘' he would
hang Mordecai thereon. On the same day that he fixed it, it fell upon
him; but Gabriel replaced it in its position, saying to him, 'To thee
belongs this beautiful tree, and for thee was it established from the
creation.'

\(7\) Haman then went out to seek Mordecai, and found him sitting at the
head of the children, while they sat upon ashes girded with sackcloth,
lamenting and crying. Having beaten them with chains of iron, he
appointed keepers over them, saying, 'First shall these be slain, and
afterwards I will hang Mordecai the Jew.' Their mothers then brought
them bread and water, saying to them, 'Eat and drink, my children,
before you die'; but they refused, and, swearing by the life of
Mordecai, they placed their hands upon their books, and said, 'We shall
not eat anything at all, but shall die in our fast.' (8) After rolling
up his scroll, each one of them placed it at his heart, and when the
hours of the night passed by their lamentation was heard on high,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

and the supplications of the patriarchs. The Holy One said, 'I hear the
voices of kids and goats;' at which Moses replied, 'O Lord God of the
universe, Father of the fatherless, and Judge of the widows, these are
not kids and goats, but the young of Thy people of the house of Israel,
who sit fasting now for three days and three nights, bound in chains of
iron; but to-morrow they are to be slaughtered like kids and goats,
while the heart of the enemy rejoiceth.' The mercy of God was then moved
for them, so that He broke the seals, rent the decree, and frustrated
the counsel of Haman and his plans, causing the salvation of Israel and
Mordecai to spring forth, thus fulfilling what is written, 'I shall cut
off the horns of the wicked; but the horns of the righteous shall be
raised on high.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXIII](coj087)

</div>
