<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj012)  [Next](coj014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I will now add here the description of the formation of a child by these
three agencies, as it is contained in the book called \#\#\# (Yeṣirath
ha-velad), which is as follows:

### THE FORMATION OF THE CHILD.

IX\. (1) I will now proceed to explain the formation of the fœtus which
God created when man approaches his wife. God indicates it to the angel
appointed over conception, whose name is Lailah. God says, 'Know that
this night a woman will conceive. Take this sperm, place it in thy hand,
and break it on the threshing-floor into three hundred and sixty-five
particles.' He does so. He then takes the sperm in his hand, brings it
to God, and says, 'O Lord of the world, I have done as Thou hast
commanded me, and now decree what is to become of it.' God then decrees
that it will be either strong or weak, male or female, rich or poor,
beautiful or ugly, long or short, wicked or righteous. (2) God then
makes a sign to the angel appointed over spirits, and says, 'Bring me a
certain spirit which is hidden in the Garden of Eden, whose name is
So-and-so, and whose form is So-and-so.' This applies to all the spirits
which are destined to be created, for from the very moment when the
world was created all (these spirits) were prepared for men, as it is
said, 'What has

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

already been has been called by name.' The angel brings the (said)
spirit, which, when it comes before God, bows down and prostrates itself
before Him. (3) At that moment God says to the spirit, 'Enter thou this
sperm.' The spirit then opens its mouth, and says, 'O Lord of the
universe, I am satisfied with the world in which I have lived from the
day on which Thou didst create me; if it please Thee, do not suffer me
to enter this impure being, for I am holy and pure.' God replies, 'The
world which I will cause thee to enter is better than the world in which
thou hast lived; and when I created thee, I created thee only for this
purpose.' (4) God then causes it to enter this new being against its
will. The angel then returns and causes it to enter the womb of its
mother. Two angels are prepared to watch the embryo (during pregnancy).
A light shines upon the head of the child, by which it sees from one end
of the world to the other. (5) In the morning the angel takes it,
carries it into the Garden of Eden and shows it the righteous men who
sit there in glory with crowns on their heads. The angel then says to
the soul, 'My child, dost thou know who these are?' 'No,' it replies.
The angel then says, 'These people whom thou seest here were formed like
thee in the womb of their mother. They went forth into the world and
observed God's statutes, therefore they became worthy of this bliss.
Know also that thou wilt at the end of thy days depart from the world.
and if thou wilt be thought worthy to hearken unto the Law and the
Commandments then thou wilt be likewise worthy of sitting with these in
the place where I showed thee.'

\(6\) In the evening he carries it into Gehinnom, and shows it the
sinners, whom the wicked angels beat with fiery staves. They cry 'Woe,
woe!' but no mercy is shown them. The angel then says to the soul, 'Dost
thou know, my child, who these are that burn?' 'No,' it replies. The
angel answers, 'These were of the same mean origin as thou art. They
went forth to the world and did not observe the commandments and
judgments of God. Therefore they have come to this place of punishment.
Know also, child,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

that thou must ultimately quit this world.' (7) The angel walks about
with it from morning until evening, and shows it every place which it is
destined to tread, and the place where it will be buried. After this he
shows it the world of the good and the world of the wicked, and in the
evening he places it back again in the womb of its mother. God then
encloses it within folded doors, as it is said, 'And He shut in the sea
with doors, until it burst forth from the womb and became free.' It is
further said, 'I will lay My words in thy mouth, and I will protect thee
in the shadow of My hand.' God then said, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and
no further;' and He sustains the child in the womb of its mother for
nine months.

\(8\) At the end of that time the same angel comes and says to it, 'Come
forth, for the time has come for thee to go forth into the world.' It
replies, 'Have I not already told God that I am satisfied to remain in
the place where I was accustomed to dwell? And He replied, "The place I
will cause thee to enter is better than that world from which thou hast
come." Now that it pleases me to remain here, why dost thou wish to
remove me hence?' The angel replies, 'Thou must know that thou wast
formed in the womb of thy mother against thy will, and now know that
against thy will thou wilt be born, and wilt come forth into the world.'
He then immediately strikes it, extinguishes the light, and brings it
forth against its will. It then forgets whatever it had seen. As soon as
it comes forth unto the world, it cries.

\(9\) And why does it cry? Because of the world it has left behind. For
at that moment seven new worlds are awaiting it. In the first world it
is like unto a king after whose welfare all people ask; all desire to
see it and embrace it, and kiss it, because it is in the first year. In
the second world it is like unto a swine which wallows in mire; a child
does the same until it reaches two years. In the third world it is like
unto a kid that skips and gambols about on the meadows. Thus, a child
skips about here and there until it is five years of age. In the fourth
world it is like unto a horse which strides along haughtily.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the same way
does a child walk along proud of his youth until he is eighteen years
old. In the fifth world he is like unto an ass upon whose shoulders
burdens are placed. In the same manner burdens are heaped upon man's
shoulders; he is given a wife by whom he begets children. He must wander
to and fro in order to obtain food for them until he is about forty
years old. In the sixth stage he is like unto a dog, insolent and
wandering about in all places for food: stealing and robbing in one
place and enjoying it in another. In the seventh stage he is like unto
an ape, whose appearance is changed in every respect. All the household
curse him and desire his death. Even the young children make fun of him,
and even the smallest bird wakes him from his sleep. (10) Finally, the
time arrives for him to quit this world. When that time arrives the same
angel comes beside him and says to him, What is thy name?' To which he
replies 'So-and-so, and Why dost thou come to me to-day?' 'To take thee
away from this world.' When he hears this he weeps, and his voice
reaches from one end of the world to the other, but no creature hears
his voice except the cock. 'Have I not already told thee,' he says, 'not
to bring me forth from the world in which I have lived?' But the angel
replies, 'Have I not already told thee that against thy will thou wast
created, against thy will thou wast born, against thy will thou livest,
and against thy will thou shalt die, also against thy will thou art
bound to render account and reckoning before Him who said, and the world
was made?'

\(11\) Behold, these are the four Divine hosts which God showed to
Elijah the prophet, as it is said, 'And He said, Go out and stand upon
the mountain before God.' God then said to Elijah, 'Behold, these are
the four worlds through which man must pass. The great and strong wind
is this world. After the wind comes the earthquake, *i.e.*, after this
world comes death, which causes the whole body of man to quake. After
the earthquake comes the fire, *i.e.*, after death there follows the
judgment of Gehinnom,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

which is fire, and after the judgment of Gehinnom there follows a voice,
as it is said, 'A still, soft voice,' which is the voice of the last
judgment. After this follows the judgment of the spirits that flit about
in the air, and no one is left except God, as it is said, 'God alone
shall be exalted on that day.' All this is included in the words of holy
tradition spoken by David, king of Israel, who said, 'I was made in
secret, I was formed in the nethermost parts of the earth.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](coj014)

</div>
