<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj073)  [Next](coj075) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LXX\. (1) Soon after this, however, the princes of the army, as well as
the other chiefs, governors and dignitaries of the kingdom envied
Daniel, and, meeting in counsel, they sought for some pretext by which
they might overthrow Daniel. So they resolved to make a decree and a
covenant that every man, old or young, belonging to the rulers or the
princes, who shall during the next thirty days entreat any god, or ask a
request from any being, except from the king alone, shall be given as
food to lions, nor shall he be rescued by the hand of the king, or
redeemed by his great wealth to annul the decree. Daniel was ignorant of
their machinations, for they cunningly kept their secret from him,
saying, 'If we do not trap him in a religious matter we shall not be
able to overthrow him.' But they did not know that, as Daniel was
faithful to his God, so would his God prove faithful to him.

\(2\) The men, having then written down what they had resolved to do,
they each one of them signed it and sealed it with his seal, in order to
give it greater authority. They then waited upon the king with their
writing, who took it and read it innocently without suspecting that it
was a secret plot cunningly devised against Daniel. Therefore he
confirmed the decree by sealing it with the king's seal, and giving it
to his scribes to guard for the appointed time. (3) One day the men went
to Daniel's house to spy, and, finding a girl playing about opposite the
entrance of his house, they asked, 'Where is Daniel, and what is he
doing?' And she replied, 'Behold, he is in

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the upper chamber of his house, praying near the window which looks
towards the holy temple at Jerusalem, and uttering praises and words of
thanksgiving to his God.' Believing her, they went to the upper chamber,
and found him on his knees with his hands spread towards heaven, for
Daniel supplicated to God three times during the day.

\(4\) When these men came into Daniel's chamber he was not frightened,
nor did he tremble at the noise of their voice, and he finished his
prayer, when they all immediately seized him and brought him to the
king. But when the king saw Daniel in the hands of the princes he
trembled very greatly, and was astounded, for he then knew that it was
against Daniel they had made and established such a decree. Then said
the king to the princes, 'What have ye done to Daniel, and what have ye
to do with him?' (5) And they replied, 'Have we not written down and
sealed the decree in accordance with the law of Media and Persia, which
cannot be changed or frustrated, that whoever prostrates himself to any
being for the whole of this month other than to the king shall be
consigned as food for the lions? Behold, Daniel was found in his house
praying to his God, and thus this decree of the King of Media and Persia
was violated, which cannot be. Now, since Daniel has mocked us in trying
to set our laws at naught, give him into our hands, and we shall cast
him into the den of lions, that no other person may attempt such a thing
again in opposition to the laws of Media and Persia.' And the king
answered the princes, saying, 'Ye have devised this plan against Daniel
to attack him for your envy. Now, cease pursuing him, for he is a Jew,
and his God is revered, glorious and mighty, who may visit you with His
anger, and destroy you.' But the princes seized Daniel with their hands,
ready to destroy him by casting him into the den of lions. The king,
therefore, exerted all his strength to rescue him, but not one of them
helped the king to save Daniel, for they were all eager for his
downfall, and refused, therefore, to release him. But the king would not
listen to the princes,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and they strove with each other, the princes and the king, until sunset.

\(6\) When, however, they saw that the king was with him, they said with
One accord, 'O king, know and mark well, if thou wilt not deliver him
into our hands, we shall know that thou annullest the laws of Media and
Persia.' As soon as the king saw that they were all of them bent on
conspiring against him on account of Daniel, he let him go, delivering
him into their power, and saying to them, 'Tell me, if God delivers him
from the mouth of the lions, how will you hide your reproach and your
shame, for ye shall surely be cast to the lions as food.' And they all
replied, 'So it shall be.' The king, having striven with the princes
until it was late, said to Daniel, 'Behold, the princes have determined
to cast thee into the den of lions, but the Lord God of the heavens, who
hath given thee His holy Spirit, shall close their mouths and prevent
them injuring thee; but I am innocent before thy God, for I sought to
rescue thee, but could not.' Then, drawing Daniel forth, they cast him
into the den in which ten lions were enclosed. Their daily fare
consisted of ten sheep and ten human bodies. But they starved them,
depriving them of their food, giving them nothing to eat, so that they
should hasten to devour Daniel. When Daniel had, however, descended to
the den of lions they showed him a kind face, licked him, wagged their
tails, and were as rejoiced to meet him as dogs are to see their master
arrive home from the field. The princes rolled a great stone over the
mouth of the pit, which the king sealed with his ring as well as with
that of the princes, and they each went their way.

\(7\) Daniel, in the meantime, praised the name of his God all the night
until the next morning with the voice of song and thanksgiving, while
the lions crouched round about him, eager to hearken unto his song. But
the king went to his house grieved and bitterly sad, eating no food, and
drinking neither wine nor water. He forbad the musical instruments to be
played before him, and did not

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

remove his garments, for he was grieved at heart for Daniel; his sleep
also left him, for he was saddened at the princes’ plot against Daniel.
Then, turning over on his side and sighing, he said, 'Would that it were
morning, to see what has become of Daniel.'

\(8\) On that same day, and at the same time as Daniel was cast into the
den, behold the prophet Habakkuk, in the land of Judah, returned that
evening from harvesting, and prepared a large dish to feed the reapers.
While he was carrying his burden in his hand to supply the reapers with
food, the word of the Lord came to him, saying, 'Go thou with this food
to My servant Daniel, in the land of the Chaldeans, to the den of lions,
where he is cast.' 'But, O Lord God, who will lead me there,' said he,
'at this time, since the distance is so great for me?' And forthwith an
angel of God lifted him by the lock of his hair, together with his food,
and placed him in the midst of Daniel's den, where he put down the food.
The angel then brought him forth thence, and restored him to his native
place, whence he was taken before the reapers had had their meal. And
Daniel uttered thanksgiving and praises to his God, in whose salvation
he trusted, for whoever supplicates to his God communes with Him as well
as one who studies His law, and he need not despair of His kindness.

\(9\) On the following morning at daybreak the king arose and hastily
went to the den, and when he heard Daniel's voice singing and the beauty
of his praises, he was not able to speak to him, for his voice was
stifled through his sobbing. But, strengthening himself, he called out,
'Daniel, Daniel, has God withheld thee from the mouth of the lions, and
art thou not torn to pieces?' And Daniel replied, 'Indeed, God hath
withheld me from the mouth of the lions, and hath closed their mouths,
and prevented them from injuring me. They, on the contrary, rejoiced to
meet me, just as my own household would rejoice, for thus my God, in
whom I trust, has commanded, and yesterday food was even given to me
through Habakkuk, through the spirit of my God; but, my lord the king, I
have

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

not sinned against thee, nor will any iniquity be found in me.'

\(10\) The king then sending for the princes, Daniel's enemies, they
came to him as he was standing by the den. 'Know,' said he, 'and behold
the seals of your rings; are they as ye sealed them, and has there been
any mischief?' And examining the seals, they said, 'They are untouched
and just as we have sealed them.' Then, commanding the stone to be
rolled away from the mouth of the pit, Daniel they brought forth, sound
and perfect, without any blemish or hurt. The bystanders, being struck
with wonder at the miracles of the God of Daniel, with a loud voice
shouted, 'The God of Daniel is greater than all other gods.' The king
then ordered his servants to lay hold of those princes, Daniel's
enemies, together with their wives and children, and to cast them into
the den of lions, and before they reached the floor of the den, the
lions, who had not eaten any food since yesterday, roared at them, and,
tearing them, crushed their bones and ground them to dust. They then
continued roaring from their den so that the noise could be heard far
off, and all the people trembled, and said, 'The lions have escaped from
their den.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXI](coj075)

</div>
