<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj051)  [Next](coj053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XLVIII\. (1) The Lord rose in His strength and smote Pharaoh and his
people with many great and terrible plagues, and turned all their rivers
to blood, so that whenever an Egyptian came to the river to draw water,
as soon as he looked into his pitcher, he found it turned to blood.
Whether for drinking or for kneading the dough, or for boiling, it
always looked like blood.

\(2\) After this all their waters brought forth frogs, so that whenever
an Egyptian drank of them, his stomach became full of frogs, which
croaked about in his entrails just as they did in the river. Whether
they kneaded or whether they boiled, the water was filled with frogs.
Even when they lay down upon their beds, their very perspiration was
turned into frogs. (3) He then smote their dust so that it became lice
two cubits high; on their very bodies they lay a handbreadth, as well on
the king and queen as on the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

people. Following this, the Lord sent against them the wild beasts of
the field to destroy them; serpents, vipers and scorpions to injure
them; mice, weasels, lizards, and noxious reptiles; flies, hornets, and
other insects to fly into their eyes and ears; fleas, ants, and every
species of winged insect to torture them; they filled the innermost
recesses of their houses. When the Egyptians tried to hide themselves in
order to shut out and to escape the wild beasts, the Lord ordered the
sea-monster (octopus? \#\#\#) to ascend to Egypt. It has arms ten cubits
in length, according to the cubit of man. Rising to the roof, it
uncovered the roof and exposed the rafters; and it then slid its arm
inside the house; it wrenched off the bolt and lock, and thus forced
open the houses of the Egyptians. In this manner the hordes of wild
beasts got into the palace of Pharaoh and his servants, and they worried
them greatly.

\(4\) And God sent a pestilence among the horses, asses, camels, cattle
and sheep. When the Egyptian rose early in the morning and went out to
his pasture, he found his animals lying about dead, there remaining
alive but one in ten. (5) The Lord next sent a plague of fever among the
Egyptians, which afterwards broke out into severe boils, which covered
them from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head. They broke, and
their flesh was running with streams of matter, until they wasted away
and rotted, and (6) the hail devastated all their vines and trees so
that not even the bark or the leaves were left: all their produce was
dried up, and a burning fiery flame played in the midst of it. Even the
men and animals found abroad were slain by the flame, and all the
libraries (houses of books) were overthrown. (7) Various kinds of locust
devoured everything left by the hail; what one species left, the other
destroyed. The Egyptians, however, were glad to hunt them and salt them
for food. The Lord then raised a very strong wind, which carried them
all, including the salted ones, into the Red Sea, so that not a solitary
one remained in the whole of Egypt. (8) Darkness then covered the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

earth for three days, so that one could not see his own hand before his
eyes. During this period of darkness many Hebrews who had rebelled
against their Creator, rebelled also against Moses and Aaron, saying:
'We shall not go forth lest we die in the desolate wilderness by
famine.' God smote them by a plague, and they were buried during these
three days, lest the Egyptians should see them and rejoice at their
downfall. (9) All the firstborn of the Egyptians were then slain from
man to animal, even the likeness of their firstborn engraved on the
walls of their houses was effaced and thrown to the ground. The bones of
their firstborn that were buried in their houses the dogs of Egypt
dragged away, and, breaking them to pieces, devoured them before the
very eyes of the people, so that their descendants cried out in anguish.
The people of Egypt then hastened to accompany the servants of God, whom
they sent away with much riches and many gifts, according to the oath
which God sware at the Covenant between the pieces.

\(10\) Moses went to Shiḥor (the Nile), and drawing up the coffin of
Joseph, took it away with him. The heads of the tribes of Israel also
assisted in bringing up each one the coffins of his forefathers. Many of
the heathen joined them in their departure from Egypt and in their
journey of three days in the wilderness. (11) On the third day, however,
they said to one another, 'Did not Moses and Aaron tell Pharaoh that
they wished to go a journey of three days in the wilderness in order to
sacrifice to the Lord their God? now let us rise early to-morrow morning
and see if they return to Egypt to our lord; we shall thereby know that
they are to be believed, but if not, we shall go to war against them and
bring them back by main force.' On the fourth day they accordingly rose
early, and found Moses and Aaron eating and drinking, and celebrating a
festival to their God. The rabble said to them, 'Why do you not return
to your master?' Moses replied: 'Because the Lord has warned us, saying,
"Ye shall no more return to Egypt, but ye shall go to a

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

land flowing with milk and honey, as I have sworn to your fathers."'

\(12\) As soon as the rabble saw that they refused to return, they went
to war against the Israelites; but the Israelites prevailed against
them, causing great slaughter. The remainder fled to Egypt to inform
Pharaoh that the people had fled. And the heart of Pharaoh and of his
servants was forthwith turned against them, so that they pursued after
them to bring them back to their burdens; for the Egyptians repented
after they had sent them away. Pursuing them hastily, they at length
overtook them while they were encamping by the Red Sea. There the Lord
wrought many miracles for the Hebrews through Moses, His chosen servant,
who stretched his staff upon the sea, when the waters were immediately
divided into twelve rents (for the twelve tribes), through which they
all passed over dryshod, just as one passes along the highway. After
them came all the Egyptians. But they were all drowned except Pharaoh,
King of Egypt, who thereupon offered a thanksgiving offering to the
living God, and believed that He was the living God. God then commanded
Michael, Gabriel, and Uriel, the heavenly princes, to bring him up from
the sea. So they brought him to the land of Nineveh, where he remained
for 500 years.

\(13\) The Israelites then journeyed into the wilderness, and Amaleq,
the son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau, went to war against them. With him
there came an innumerable army of wizards and enchanters. But the Lord
delivered them into the hand of Moses His servant and Joshua the son of
Nun, the Ephrathite, who put them to the edge of the sword. Reuel the
Midianite, Moses’ father-in-law, then came out into the wilderness to
Moses, where he was encamping by the mountain of God with Zipporah and
his sons, and dwelt with them among the Israelites. Moses next fought
against Sihon and Og, and captured their land. He then fought against
Midian and slew Evi, Reqem, Ṣur, Ḥur and Reb‘a, the five kings of
Midian. (14) He put Bala‘am the enchanter and his two sons to the edge
of the sword.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When Bala‘am the
enchanter saw Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, and Pineḥas his son,
captains of the host of Israel, following him for the purpose of slaying
him, by means of witchcraft he flew in the air, just as an eagle is seen
to fly heavenward. But, uttering the ineffable, revered name of God,
they brought him down to the earth, and, capturing him, slew him with
the rest of the princes of Midian. The Canaanites who dwelt in the
mountains also descended with the Amaleqites to fight against Israel,
but the Lord delivered them into the hand of Moses and the Israelites,
who smote them utterly. (15) Moses was eighty years old when he stood
before Pharaoh, King of Egypt. Through him the Lord redeemed Israel from
Egypt. He reigned over them in the wilderness forty years, during which
time the Lord maintained them by His mercy with the bread of the mighty
and the fowl of the heaven, and from the flinty rock He brought forth
fountains of water for them. The cloud of the Lord gently guided them by
day like children, and a pillar of fire by night, and during the whole
time of their travels in the wilderness neither their garments nor their
shoes wore out, and no goodness lacked them there. (16) After travelling
through the wilderness of Sin, they arrived at Mount Sinai on the third
day of the third month after their departure from Egypt. The word of the
Lord then came to Moses the Levite, saying, 'Come up to the mountain,
and I will give thee the tablets of stone, the Law and the Commandments
which I have written to teach the Israelites.' Moses accordingly told
the people to sanctify themselves for three days, and on the third day,
that is, on the sixth day of the third month, he ascended the mount. The
Lord then gave the Israelites through Moses the 613 precepts refined as
silver and tried as gold, accompanied by the sound of the trumpet, by
thunders and lightnings. They next erected a tabernacle, with its
vessels, for ministering to God, and the ark for the two tablets and for
the scroll of the Law. They also prepared burnt-offerings, sacrifices,
incense, frankincense, oil for the consecration and for anointing
therewith the tabernacle

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

with its vessels and the priests of God, viz., Aaron and his sons, who
ministered before God and offered sacrifices and incense for the
congregation. They also made for them garments of honour, and appointed
the sons of Levi to guard the tabernacle of the Lord, to minister to
their fellow-priests, and to sing hymns during the sacrifice. They also
offered frankincense within to avert the anger and punishment of the
Lord.

\(17\) In the fortieth year of their wanderings, Miriam the prophetess
died, on the tenth day of the first month, and was buried in the
wilderness of Ṣin, which is Qadesh. In the same year, on the first day
of the fifth month, Aaron the priest died, and was buried on Mount Hor,
and Eleazar and Ithamar were appointed to minister in the place of their
father. The priesthood has remained in that family as an inheritance
throughout all generations. (18) In that same year on the seventh day of
the twelfth month—*i.e.*, Adar—Moses, the servant of the Lord, died, 120
years old, and was buried in the valley at the nethermost part of the
Mount of Ebarim, and Joshua the son of Nun, the Ephrathite, was
appointed leader of the people. The rest of the words of Moses relating
to his power, his military deeds, his entreaties and prayers on behalf
of his people, are they not written in the 'Sefer Hayashar,' which is
the Law of our God? Joshua the son of Nun rose up after him. He led the
Israelites across the Jordan and divided the land by lots according to
the word of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIX. The Death of Aaron, of Blessed Memory](coj053)

</div>
