<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj021)  [Next](coj023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PARADISE.

XVIII\. (1) R. Joshua, son of Levi, tells, 'Paradise has two gates of
carbuncle, and sixty myriads of ministering angels keep watch over them.
Each of these angels shines with the lustre of the heavens. When the
just man approaches them they divest him of the clothes in which he had
been buried, and clothe him with eight cloths, woven out of clouds of
glory, and place upon his head two crowns, one of precious stones and
pearls, and the other of gold, and they place eight myrtles in his hand
and praise him, and say to him, "Go and eat thy bread with joy." And
they lead him to a place full of rivers (waters) surrounded by 800
species of roses and myrtles. Each one has a canopy according to his
merits, as it is said, "For over all the glory shall be spread a
canopy."

\(2\) 'And through it flow four rivers, one of oil, the other of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

balsam, the third of wine, and the fourth of honey. Every canopy is
overgrown by a vine of gold, and thirty pearls hang down from it, each
of them shining like the morning star. (3) In every canopy there is a
table of precious stones and pearls, and sixty angels stand at the head
of every just man, saying unto him, "Go and eat with joy of the honey,
for thou hast worked assiduously in the law," of which it is said, "And
it is sweeter than honey," "and drink of the wine preserved from the six
days of Creation, for thou hast worked in the law which is compared with
the wine," as it is said, "I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine."
The least fair of them is as beautiful as Joseph and Johanan, and as the
grains of the pomegranate lit up by the rays of the sun. There is no
night, as it is said, "And the light of the righteous is as the shining
light."

\(4\) 'And they undergo four transformations according to the four
watches of the day. In the first watch the just is changed into a child,
and he enters the compartment of children and tastes the joys of
childhood. In the second watch he is changed into a youth, and there he
enjoys the delights of youth. In the third watch he becomes a
middle-aged man and rejoices accordingly. In the fourth watch he is
changed into an old man: he enters the compartment of the old and enjoys
the pleasures of mature age.

\(5\) 'In Paradise there are eighty myriads of trees in every corner;
the meanest among them choicer than a garden of spices. In every corner
there are sixty myriads of angels singing with sweet voices, and the
tree of life stands in the middle and overshadoweth the whole of
Paradise; and it has 500 tastes, each different from the others, and the
perfumes thereof vary likewise. (6) Over it hang seven clouds of glory,
and the winds blow from all the four corners and waft its many odours
from one end of the world to the other. Underneath sit the scholars and
explain the law. These have each two canopies, one of stars and the
other of sun and moon, and clouds of glory separate one from the other.
Within this is the Eden containing 310 worlds,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

as it is said, "That I may cause those that love Me to inherit
Substance" (Prov. viii. 21) \[the numerical Value of the Hebrew word
(\#\#\#) *Substance* is equivalent to 310\] .

\(7\) 'Here are the seven compartments of the just. In the first are the
martyrs, as, for instance, R. ‘Aqiba and his companions. In the second,
those who were drowned. In the third, R. Johanan ben Zakkai and his
disciples. The fourth group consists of those who were covered by the
cloud of glory. The fifth group is that of the penitents, for the place
occupied by a penitent not even a perfectly just man can occupy. The
sixth group is that of children who have not yet tasted sin in their
lives. The seventh group is that of the poor, who, notwithstanding their
poverty, studied the law and the Talmud, and had followed a moral life.
Of these speaks the verse, “For all that put their trust in Thee
rejoice, and they shout for ever for joy.’

\(8\) 'And God Almighty sitteth in their midst, and expounds to them the
law, as it is said, "Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with Me." And God hath not yet fully unveiled the
glory which awaiteth the pious in the world to come, as it is said, "The
eye hath not seen, O God, beside Thee, that which Thou workest for him
that waiteth for Him."'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX](coj023)

</div>
