<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj083)  [Next](coj085) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BEATING OF THE GRAVE.

LXXX\. (1) And Esther fled to the Lord, for she feared the evil which
was growing; and, stripping herself of her royal garments and the
ornaments of her majesty, she clothed herself in sackcloth, and
dishevelling the hair of her head, she put dust and ashes upon it. Then,
afflicting

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

her soul with fasting, she fell upon her face in prayer, saying, 'O Lord
God of Israel, who art the King of kings, who art to be feared, who
createdst the world, and who rulest over us, help Thine handmaid in her
desolation, for she has no saviour except Thee. Behold, I dwell in the
king's palace alone, without father or mother. Like an afflicted orphan
begging charity from house to house, so do I beg for Thy mercy, from one
window to the other in the palace of King Ahasuerus, and have done so
from the time I was brought here until this present day. (2) O Lord, if
it is pleasing to Thee, take my soul from my own hand; and if not, then
deliver, I beseech Thee, the flock of Thy pasture from those lions who
have risen up against them; for my father taught me that Thou didst
redeem our forefathers from Egypt, and didst slay all the firstborn of
the Egyptians. Thou didst bring Thy people forth thence with a strong
hand and an outstretched arm, and didst cause them to pass over the sea
like a horse on dry land. Thou didst give them food from heaven, water
from the cleft of the rock, and meat in plenty. Thou didst smite great
and mighty kings before them, and caused them to inherit the goodly
land. But when our ancestors sinned against Thy great name, then didst
Thou deliver them into captivity; and here we are in exile to this day.
My father further told me that, through Moses Thy servant, Thou didst
say, "When also they shall be in the land of their enemies, I will never
forsake them."

\(3\) 'Now, O Lord, Father of the fatherless, stand at the right hand of
this orphan, who trusts in Thee, and grant me mercy when I am in the
presence of King Ahasuerus, for I fear him as a kid fears the lion. Make
lowly all his counsellors, that he may be humbled and subdued before the
grace and beauty Thou hast given me. O my God, cause his heart to hate
our enemies and to love Thy servants, for the heart of kings is in Thy
hand. O Thou mighty, revered, and exalted God, deliver me from the fear
and trembling which have taken hold of me, that I may go into his
presence in Thy name, and come out in peace.'

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

\(4\) On the third day Esther accordingly clothed herself in royal
garments, and came before the king, who was sitting upon the throne,
accompanied by her two handmaidens. Upon one of them she placed her
right hand, and leaned upon her, according to the royal custom, while
the other maiden followed behind her to hold up her train, that the gold
and precious stones should not touch the ground. Before him were seated
all the potentates of the kingdom, who said one to the other, 'This
woman is sure to be killed, since she has entered here without an
appointed time.' One said, 'I will then take her royal garments ';
another, 'I shall take the ornaments on her feet'; and another, 'I will
take the ornaments on her hands.' When Esther heard these remarks, she
kept her face serene, and concealed the grief of her soul.

\(5\) The king, then raising his eyes to her, was much enraged that she
had transgressed the law by coming into his presence without being
called. When Esther noticed the king's anger and fury, she trembled,
and, feeling faint, placed her head upon the maid at her right; but our
Lord saw the oppression of His people, and had pity upon Israel and upon
the trouble of the orphan who trusted in Hint, and He made her find
favour in the eyes of the king, for the Lord added beauty to her beauty
and majesty to her majesty, and the king, rising in haste from his
throne, ran towards Esther, and embraced and kissed her, and, taking her
in his arms, said to her, 'What is this fear, O Queen Esther? for this
decree of ours does not apply to thee, since thou art the queen, my
friend and companion;' and, taking up the golden sceptre, he placed it
into her hand, and added, 'Why dost thou not speak to me?' And Esther
replied, 'When I saw thee, O lord, my soul trembled before thine honour,
and on account of the greatness of thy glory.'

\(6\) She then leaned her head once more upon her handmaid, for she was
faint from fasting and from trouble. The king, however, was now very
much alarmed at this, and wept before his wife, while all his ministers
entreated her to speak to the king, in order to appease

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

his soul. And the Lord brought about that great salvation through Queen
Esther and Mordecai. Haman and his sons were hanged upon the gallows,
and all those who devised evil against Israel were slain at the edge of
the sword, and Mordecai from that day forth was honoured in the king's
palace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXI](coj085)

</div>
