<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj059)  [Next](coj061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LVI\. (1) When the ten plagues with which the Egyptians were smitten
commenced, Ṣiqrops fled from Egypt to the city of Aqtēs, in Greece,
which he built as the Metropolis. There he established the throne of the
kingdom of the So‘anites, and became the first king of the Atinisim
(Athenians)—*i.e.*, the Ṣo‘anites. After him there reigned seventeen
kings and nineteen princes, until the reign of Cambyses, the son of
Cyrus, King of Persia. (2) At the end of the Book of Joshua it is
written, 'So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set
them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.' Joseph ben Gorion asserts
in his book that when the heathen made a covenant, after shedding the
blood of the calf and sprinkling it upon the ground, they used to say,
'Thus shall the blood of him who breaks this covenant which we have made
be shed.' Joshua then issued a decree to the Israelites that they should
pour water upon the ground instead of blood, to fulfil the command,
'Thou shalt not do according to their deeds.'

\(3\) In those days, in the time of Joshua, there lived a certain man
Eriqtonios, who was the first to construct

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

a chariot in Greece. And Cadmus, King of Egypt, went from Thebes
(\#\#\#) and came to Tyre and Sidon, and there reigned. In the land of
Greece there also reigned Cadmus Europes Taḥpanḥes, and he called the
name of the royal city Taḥpanḥes.

\(4\) Now, Danaus had fifty sons, and they took to them the fifty
daughters of Egisates, their brother. But one day one of the brothers
arose, and, killing all the others, reigned in their stead. (5) At that
time, in the days of Othniel, Cadmus reigned in Thebes, and the city of
Biṭanya (\#\#\#) was built by Taḥpanḥes. He first introduced the letters
of the Greek writing. The city of Epira (\#\#\#), now called Corinthus,
was also then built by Sisipo. Minos, the son of Eoripi (\#\#\#),
reigned then in Crete

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LVII](coj061)

</div>
