<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coj056)  [Next](coj058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, by M. Gaster \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LIII\. (1) The sages say that while the Israelites were travelling in
the wilderness they were surrounded by seven clouds of glory, one in
front of them, one behind them, two on each side, and one above them to
protect them from the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

sun and the cold. Another cloud went before them, which levelled the
high places and raised the lower places that they might not stumble, as
it is said, 'And Thy cloud stood above them, and in a pillar of cloud
Thou wentest before them.' This was the one in front of them, and the
seventh was that which was placed at the head of the standards, and the
light of the Divine Presence was refulgent in it. But how did it shine
there? (2) The Rabbis say that there were four standards, of which the
standard of Judah was in the east, and similar in shape to a lion, as it
is said, Judah is a lion's whelp.' On the top of the banner was the form
of a lion, out of which hooks of gold protruded, which ended in a
sword-like pike, and on this there rested one arm of the seventh cloud,
on which the three letters representing the three forefathers were
engraved, viz., Alef, Yod, Yod. 'Alef' for Abraham, 'Yod' for Isaac, and
'Yod' for Jacob (\#\#\# being the mnemonic sign). These letters were
illuminated by the Shechinah. (3) In the south the banner of Reuben was
placed. It had the appearance of a man similar to mandrakes, on account
of the passage, 'And he found mandrakes.' On the top of the banner hooks
of gold, which ended in a sword-like pike, and upon them rested one arm
of the cloud, on which the three letters representing the three
ancestors were engraved—'Beth' for Abraham, 'Ṣade' for Isaac, and
'‘Ayin' for Jacob (\#\#\# being the mnemonic sign). These letters also
shone from the splendour of the Shechinah.

\(4\) In the west the banner of Ephraim was encamped, being in
appearance like a fish, on account of the expression, 'And they shall
increase like the fish abundantly.' On the top of the banner were placed
hooks of gold ending in a sword-like pike, on which rested one arm of
the cloud, with the three letters representing the three forefathers
engraved upon it, viz., 'Resh' for Abraham, 'Heth' for Isaac, and 'Qof'
for Jacob (the mnemonic sign being \#\#\#). Likewise these letters shone
through the splendour of the Shechinah. (5) Lastly, in the north was
encamped the banner of Dan, in the form of a serpent, on account of the

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

expression, 'Dan shall be like a serpent by the way.' On the top of the
banner were placed hooks of gold ending in a sword-like pike, above
which one arm of the cloud rested, with three letters representing the
three ancestors engraved thereon, viz., 'Mem' for Abraham, 'Qof' for
Isaac, and 'Beth' for Jacob (the mnemonic letters being \#\#\#), which
shone through the splendour of the Shechinah.

\(6\) Now, there was one letter remaining, viz., the He of Abraham,
which God added to Abram from His own name, which is spelt Yod Hē
(\#\#\#). With this God created the world, as it is said, 'For with
"Yah" the Lord created the worlds.' God placed the pillar of cloud above
the ark, which was surrounded by all the banners, as it is said, 'They
encamped round about the tent of the congregation.' On this cloud now
those sacred letters Yad, Hē, were fixed, and during the seven days of
each week it went the round of all the camps of Israel, giving light as
the sun by day and as the moon by night. They were thus able to
distinguish between day and night. (7) When God wished them to remove
their camps, the cloud on which the letters Yod, He were engraved moved
upwards from the ark of the covenant. The four clouds on which were
respectively engraved the letters \#\#\#, \#\#\# and \#\#\# followed
after them, and as soon as the priests noticed these clouds following in
the wake of the pillar of cloud, with the letters \#\#\# on it, they
blew their trumpets, and the four winds of the earth blew myrrh and
frankincense, as it is said, 'Who is this coming up from the wilderness
like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense?'

\(8\) These trumpets were used first for assembling the people together,
then as the signal to continue their journeying for war, and also for
the Sabbaths and festivals. Every trumpet was hollow and emitted a loud
sound. It was one cubit in length and broad at the mouth, and a thin
reed was placed in its mouth to receive the breath, and thus to
discourse music in the hearing of the people. When they were used to
assemble the people, and to bring the princes together, the sons of
Aaron blew on one trumpet one long

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

even sound (teqi‘ah \#\#\#), and not a tremolo (\#\#\#). A Teqi‘ah, or
one long even sound, on two trumpets meant the assembling of the whole
congregation, but the same on only one trumpet was the signal for the
assembling of the princes. If a tribe required its prince, they blew a
Teqi‘ah on one trumpet, but not a Teru‘ah or tremolo. In the same manner
the assembling of all the congregation was sounded.

\(9\) As a signal for continuing their journey they used two trumpets
and sounded the Teru‘ah. At the first sound the three camps eastward,
under the banner of Judah, moved onwards; at the second the three camps
in the south, under the banner of Reuben; at the third, the three camps
in the west, under the banner of Ephraim; and at the fourth sound of the
Teru‘ah, the three camps in the north, under the banner of Dan, started
on their journey. For all these the Teru‘ah sound was blown. In war,
however, and on a day of rejoicing, or a festival, or a new moon, the
sons of Aaron blew the two sounds Teqi‘ah and Teru‘ah. (10) These four
banners correspond with the four elements of which the world is
composed, and the twelve tribes correspond with the twelve stones of the
ephod, as it is said, 'And the stones shall be called after the names of
the children of Israel.' The banner of Judah in the east corresponds to
one of the four elements, viz., fire, and of the constellations, to
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, which consist of fire, and to the first row
of the stones of the ephod, viz., the sardius, topaz and carbuncle.

\(11\) The standard of Reuben in the south corresponded to earth, the
second of the four elements; to Taurus, Virgo and Capricornus of the
constellations which are of the dust; and to the second row of the
stones of the ephod, viz., the emerald, sapphire, and diamond. The
banner of Ephraim in the west corresponded to water, the third of the
four elements; to Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius of the constellations,
which consist of water; and to the third row of the stones of the ephod,
viz., the jacinth, agate, and amethyst.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

\(12\) The standard of Dan in the north corresponded to air, the fourth
of the four elements; to Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces of the
constellations, which were created of air; and to the fourth row of the
stones of the ephod, viz., the beryl, onyx, and the jasper. (13) Judah's
constellation is Leo and his stone the sardius; Isaachar's is Aries and
his stone the topaz; Zebulun's Sagittarius and his stone the carbuncle,
*i.e.*, altogether nine corresponding to fire. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_5) Reuben's constellation is Taurus, and his
stone the emerald; Simeon's Virgo and his stone the sapphire; Gad's
Capricornus and his stone the diamond, *i.e.*, altogether nine <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_5) corresponding to dust. Ephraim's
constellation is Gemini and his stone the jacinth; Menasseh's Libra and
his stone the agate; Benjamin's Aquarius and his stone the amethyst,
which are together nine corresponding to air. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_5) Dan's constellation is Cancer and his stone
the beryl; Asher's Scorpio and his stone the onyx; Naphtali's Pisces and
his stone the jasper, which are altogether nine corresponding to
water.\`

\(14\) Each man stood by his standard, together with the ensign of his
father's house, thus: Reuben, mandrakes; Simeon, the city of Shechem;
Judah, the lion's whelp; Issachar, a strong ass; Zebulun, a ship;
Ephraim, an ox; Menasseh, a buffalo (or Rëem); Benjamin, a wolf; Dan, a
serpent; Naphtali, a hind; Gad, a troop (according to the passage, 'a
troop will overtake him'); Asher, an olive, on account of the passage,
'He dipped his foot in oil.' Thus, a sign was given to every banner,
according to the deeds and according to the name of the tribe.

\(15\) And these are the four camps of the standards. 'Every man by his
standard, according to the house of their fathers, shall encamp round
about the tent of the congregation.' Between the tabernacle and the
camps of the standards there was a very wide space. Three tribes formed
under one banner, that is, in three separate camps according to their
order, and each camp was like a large city. The camps of Judah,
Issachar, and Zebulun, were

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

placed in the east; Reuben, Simeon and Gad in the south; Ephraim,
Benjamin and Menasseh in the west; and Dan, Asher and Naphtali in the
north. The Levites encamped between the tabernacle and the camps, on the
four sides of the tabernacle, at a distance from the camps, but near the
tabernacle, and kept guard in the tabernacle of the Lord. Moses and
Aaron and his sons encamped in the east of the tabernacle, opposite
Judah's standard. The sons of Kehath encamped in the south, opposite
Reuben's banner; the children of Gershon in the west, opposite Ephraim's
banner, and the children of Merari in the north, opposite Dan's banner.
The tent of the congregation stood in the centre, surrounded on all
sides by the Levites, while the four standards of the Israelites
surrounded the Levites, and the clouds of glory surrounded the
Israelites. That is the meaning of the verse, 'The angel of the Lord
encamps round about those who fear Him.' The four standards, Moses,
Aaron and the tabernacle, which are altogether seven, correspond to the
seven planets, viz., Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars, and the twelve tribes to the twelve constellations.

\(16\) R. Ele‘azar asked R. Simeon, 'When the Israelites went out of
Egypt, did they take weavers with them?' 'No,' replied R. Simeon. 'How,
then, did they clothe themselves during the whole of the forty years?'
‘The ministering angels clothed them, as it is said, "And I shall clothe
thee in fine network." 'But did not the children grow to men?' said he.
'Learn the reply from the purple snail whose shell grows simultaneously
with it.' Thus the Israelites fared, nor did they become dirty, for the
clouds were cleansing them. Further, they did not emit a malodorous
smell from the perspiration of their bodies, although they did not
change their clothes.

\(17\) The well caused to grow various kinds of spices and
sweet-smelling herbs, upon which they lay, as it is said, 'He will cause
me to lie down in the well-watered pastures,' the perfume of which
travelled from one end of the world to the other. The well of Miriam was
placed at the entrance of

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the court near Moses’ tent, and indicated to all (the camps) where they
were to encamp. It indicated it in this manner: When the curtains of the
court were set up, the twelve pillars by the well sang the 'Shirah,' as
it is said, 'They dug the well with songs.' And the waters of the well
swelled into rivers, one of which surrounded the camp of the Shechinah.
From that river there issued four other rivers into the four corners of
the court, each one of which flowed through the four corners, such as
south-east, etc., to the camp of the Israelites. After passing the camp
of the Levites, these rivers flowed together into one channel,
encompassing first the whole camp of the Levites; and flowing between
each family, and surrounding the camp of the Shechinah, there were seen
many small channels. Then this great river encompassed the whole camp of
the Israelites from without, forming into smaller rivers running between
each tribe. These rivers marked the boundary of each camp, so that one
did not encroach upon his neighbour. But do not think that they obtained
nothing from the waters, because they produced all kinds of dainties
similar to those of the world to come, as it is written, 'Thou art a
fountain of gardens.' And all kinds of spices grew for them, as it is
said, 'Thy shoots are a garden of pomegranates . . . . with spikenard
and saffron,' etc.

\(18\) At the end of each camp on the east, west, north and south, there
stretched an area of 4,000 cubits. Moses and Aaron and his sons were
encamped in the east; the children of Kehath in the south; the children
of Gershon in the west; and the children of Merari in the north. Each
one of them occupied 100 cubits within the 4,000. In addition to this
there were those 4,000 cubits on each side. Thus the Levites occupied
one-eighth of the whole area of the tribes. But where did the animals
pasture? The whole encampment extended over an area of 12 square miles,
comprising the camp of the Shechinah, that of the Levites, and that of
the camp of the Israelites. In the corners on each side their cattle
pastured, *i.e.*, opposite (or facing) their own encampment. The rivers

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

surrounded them from within and without, forming channels for them all
round, so that the people had permission to walk on the Sabbath from one
camp to the other. The cloud being spread over them, divided them from
their cattle, as it is said, 'And the cloud of the Lord rested over them
by day.' From the splendour of the blue used in the tabernacle the
rivers appeared blue as the blue of the morning and the light of the
moon and the sun was reflected in them. When the nations beheld them
from afar praising God, they said, 'Who are these people looking at us
from the wilderness?' and fear and dread fell upon them all, as it is
said, 'Fear and dread shall fall upon them.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[153:\*](coj057.htm#fr_8) I. e., if we include
the names of the tribes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIV. The Smiting of the Firstborn](coj058)

</div>
