[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebm03)  [Next](ebm05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries*, by Thomas Taylor, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span id="img_01101"></span> ![Prometheus.](img/01101.png.md)  
Prometheus.

#### INTRODUCTION TO THE THIRD EDITION.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> offering to the public a new edition
of Mr. Thomas Taylor’s admirable treatise upon the Eleusinian and
Bacchic Mysteries, it is proper to insert a few words of explanation.
These observances once represented the spiritual life of Greece, and
were considered for two thousand years and more the appointed means for
regeneration through an interior union with the Divine Essence. However
absurd, or even offensive they may seem to us, we should therefore
hesitate long before we venture to lay desecrating hands on what others
have esteemed holy. We can learn a valuable lesson in this regard from
the Grecian and Roman writers, who had learned to treat the popular
religious rites with mirth, but always considered the Eleusinian
Mysteries with the deepest reverence.

It is ignorance which leads to profanation. Men ridicule what they do
not properly understand. Alcibiades was drunk when he ventured to touch
what his

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

countrymen deemed sacred. The undercurrent of this world is set toward
one goal; and inside of human credulity—call it human weakness, if you
please—is a power almost infinite, a holy faith capable of apprehending
the supremest truths of all Existence. The veriest dreams of life,
pertaining as they do to “the minor mystery of death,” have in them more
than external fact can reach or explain; and Myth, however much she is
proved to be a child of Earth, is also received among men as the child
of Heaven. The Cinder-Wench of the ashes will become the Cinderella of
the Palace, and be wedded to the King’s Son.

The instant that we attempt to analyze, the sensible, palpable facts
upon which so many try to build disappear beneath the surface, like a
foundation laid upon quicksand. “In the deepest reflections,” says a
distinguished writer, “all that we call external is only the material
basis upon which our dreams are built; and the sleep that surrounds life
swallows up life,—all but a dim wreck of matter, floating this way and
that, and forever evanishing from sight. Complete the analysis, and we
lose even the shadow of the external Present, and only the Past and the
Future are left us as our sure inheritance. This is the first
initiation,—the vailing \[*muesis*\] of the eyes to the external. But as
*epoptæ*, by the synthesis of this Past and Future in a living nature,
we obtain a higher, an ideal Present, comprehending within itself all
that can be real for us within us or without. This is the second

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

initiation in which is unvailed to us the Present as a new birth from
our own life. Thus the great problem of Idealism is symbolically solved
in the Eleusinia.” <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md)

These were the most celebrated of all the sacred orgies, and were
called, by way of eminence, *The Mysteries*. Although exhibiting
apparently the features of an Eastern origin, they were evidently copied
from the rites of Isis in Egypt, an idea of which, more or less correct,
may be found in *The Metamorphoses* of Apuleius and *The Epicurean* by
Thomas Moore. Every act, rite, and person engaged in them was
symbolical; and the individual revealing them was put to death without
mercy. So also was any uninitiated person who happened to be present.
Persons of all ages and both sexes were initiated; and neglect in this
respect, as in the case of Socrates, was regarded as impious and
atheistical. It was required of all candidates that they should be first
admitted at the *Mikra* or Lesser Mysteries of Agræ, by a process of
fasting called *purification*, after which they were styled *mystæ*, or
initiates. A year later, they might enter the higher degree. In this
they learned the *aporrheta*, or secret meaning of the rites, and were
thenceforth denominated *ephori*, or *epoptæ*. To some of the interior
mysteries, however, only a very select number obtained admission. From
these were taken all the ministers of holy rites. The Hierophant who
presided was bound to celibacy, and required to devote his entire life
to his sacred office.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He had three
assistants,—the torch-bearer, the *kerux* or crier, and the minister at
the altar. There were also a *basileus* or king, who was an archon of
Athens, four curators, elected by suffrage, and ten to offer sacrifices.

The sacred Orgies were celebrated on every fifth year; and began on the
15th of the month Boëdromian or September. The first day was styled the
*agurmos* or assembly, because the worshipers then convened. The second
was the day of purification, called also *aladé mystai*, from the
proclamation: “To the sea, initiated ones!” The third day was the day of
sacrifices; for which purpose were offered a mullet and barley from a
field in Eleusis. The officiating persons were forbidden to taste of
either; the offering was for *Achtheia* (the sorrowing one, Demeter)
alone. On the fourth day was a solemn procession. The *kalathos* or
sacred basket was borne, followed by women, *cistæ* or chests in which
were sesamum, carded wool, salt, pomegranates, poppies,—also thyrsi, a
serpent, boughs of ivy, cakes, etc. The fifth day was denominated the
day of torches. In the evening were torchlight processions and much
tumult.

The sixth was a great occasion. The statue of Iacchus, the son of Zeus
and Demeter, was brought from Athens, by the *Iacchogoroi*, all crowned
with myrtle. In the way was heard only an uproar of singing and the
beating of brazen kettles, as the votaries danced and ran along. The
image was borne “through the sacred Gate, along the sacred way, halting
by the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span id="img_01601"></span> ![Procession of Iacchos and
Phallus.](img/01601.png.md)  
Procession of Iacchos and Phallus.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

sacred fig-tree (all sacred, mark you, from Eleusinian associations),
where the procession rests, and then moves on to the bridge over the
Cephissus, where again it rests, and where the expression of the wildest
grief gives place to the trifling farce,—even as Demeter, in the midst
of her grief, smiled at the levity of Iambé in the palace of Celeus.
Through the ‘mystical entrance’ we enter Eleusis. On the seventh day
games are celebrated; and to the victor is given a measure of barley,—as
it were a gift direct from the hand of the goddess. The eighth is sacred
to Æsculapius, the Divine Physician, who heals all diseases; and in the
evening is performed the initiatory ritual.

“Let us enter the mystic temple and be initiated,—though it must be
supposed that, a year ago, we were initiated into the Lesser Mysteries
at Agræ. We must have been *mystæ* (vailed), before we can become
*epoptæ* (seers); in plain English, we must have shut our eyes to all
else before we can behold the mysteries. Crowned with myrtle, we enter
with the other initiates into the vestibule of the temple,—blind as yet,
but the Hierophant within will soon open our eyes.

“But first,—for here we must do nothing rashly,—first we must wash in
this holy water; for it is with pure hands and a pure heart that we are
bidden to enter the most sacred enclosure \[μυστικος σηκος, *mustikos
sekos*\]. Then, led into the presence of the Hierophant, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

he reads to us, from a book of stone \[πετρωμα, *petroma*\], things
which we must not divulge on pain of death. Let it suffice that they fit
the place and the occasion; and though you might laugh at them, if they
were spoken outside, still you seem very far from that mood now, as you
hear the words of the old man (for old he he always was), and look upon
the revealed symbols. And very far, indeed, are you from ridicule, when
Demeter seals, by her own peculiar utterance and signals, by vivid
coruscations of light, and cloud piled upon cloud, all that we have seen
and heard from her sacred priest; and then, finally, the light of a
serene wonder fills the temple, and we see the pure fields of Elysium,
and hear the chorus of the Blessed;—then, not merely by external seeming
or philosophic interpretation, but in real fact, does the Hierophant
become the Creator \[δημιουργος, *demiourgos*\] and revealer of all
things; the Sun is but his torch-bearer, the Moon his attendant at the
altar, and Hermes his mystic herald <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)
\[κηρυξ, *kerux*\]. But the final word has been uttered ‘*Conx Om pax*.’
The rite is consummated, and we are *epoptæ* forever!”

Those who are curious to know the myth on which

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

the “mystical drama” of the Eleusinia is founded will find it in any
Classical Dictionary, as well as in these pages. It is only pertinent
here to give some idea of the meaning. That it was regarded as profound
is evident from the peculiar rites, and the obligations imposed on every
initiated person. It was a reproach not to observe them. Socrates was
accused of atheism, or disrespect to the gods, for having never been
initiated. <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md) Any person accidentally
guilty of homicide, or of any crime, or convicted of witchcraft, was
excluded. The secret doctrines, it is supposed, were the same as are
expressed in the celebrated *Hymn* of Cleanthes. The philosopher
Isocrates thus bears testimony: “She \[Demeter\] gave us two gifts that
are the most excellent; fruits, that we may not live like beasts; and
that initiation—those who have part in which have sweeter hope, both as
regards the close of life and for all eternity.” In like manner, Pindar
also declares: “Happy is he who has beheld them, and descends into the
Underworld: he knows the end, he knows the origin of life.”

The Bacchic Orgies were said to have been instituted,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

or more probably reformed by Orpheus, a mythical personage, supposed to
have flourished in Thrace. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md) The Orphic
associations dedicated themselves to the worship of Bacchus, in which
they hoped to find the gratification of an ardent longing after the
worthy and elevating influences of a religious life. The worshipers did
not indulge in unrestrained pleasure and frantic enthusiasm, but rather
aimed at an ascetic purity of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="img_02201"></span> ![Etruscan Eleusinian
Ceremonies.](img/02201.png.md)  
Etruscan Eleusinian Ceremonies.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

life and manners. The worship of Dionysus was the center of their ideas,
and the starting-point of all their speculations upon the world and
human nature. They believed that human souls were confined in the body
as in a prison, a condition which was denominated *genesis* or
generation; from which Dionysus would liberate them. Their sufferings,
the stages by which they passed to a higher form of existence, their
*katharsis* or purification, and their enlightenment constituted the
themes of the Orphic writers. All this was represented in the legend
which constituted the groundwork of the mystical rites.

Dionysus-Zagreus was the son of Zeus, whom he had begotten in the form
of a dragon or serpent, upon the person of Kore or Persephoneia,
considered by some to have been identical with Ceres or Demeter, and by
others to have been her daughter. The former idea is more probably the
more correct. Ceres or Demeter was called Koré at Cnidos. She is called
Phersephatta in a fragment by Psellus, and is also styled a Fury. The
divine child, an *avatar* or incarnation of Zeus, was denominated
Zagreus, or Chakra (Sanscrit) as being destined to universal dominion.
But at the instigation of Hera <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md) the
Titans conspired to murder him.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Accordingly, one
day while he was contemplating a mirror, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6.md) they set upon him, disguised under a
coating of plaster, and tore him into seven parts. Athena, however,
rescued from them his heart, which was swallowed by Zeus, and so
returned into the paternal substance, to be generated anew. He was thus
destined to be again born, to succeed to universal rule, establish the
reign of happiness, and release all souls from the dominion of death.

The hypothesis of Mr. Taylor is the same as was maintained by the
philosopher Porphyry, that the Mysteries constitute an illustration of
the Platonic

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

philosophy. At first sight, this may be hard to believe; but we must
know that no pageant could hold place so long, without an under-meaning.
Indeed, Herodotus asserts that “the rites called Orphic and Bacchic are
in reality Egyptian and Pythagorean.” <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7.md)
The influence of the doctrines of Pythagoras upon the Platonic system is
generally acknowledged. It is only important in that case to understand
the great philosopher correctly; and we have a key to the doctrines and
symbolism of the Mysteries.

The first initiations of the Eleusinia were called *Teletæ* or
terminations, as denoting that the imperfect and rudimentary period of
generated life was ended and purged off; and the candidate was
denominated a *mysta*, a vailed or liberated person. The Greater
Mysteries completed the work; the candidate was more fully instructed
and disciplined, becoming an *epopta* or seer. He was now regarded as
having received the arcane principles of life. This was also the end
sought by philosophy. The soul was believed to be of composite nature,
linked on the one side to the eternal world, emanating from God, and so
partaking of Divinity. On the other hand, it was also allied to the
phenomenal or external world, and so liable to be subjected to passion,
lust, and the bondage of evils. This condition is denominated
*generation*; and is supposed to be a kind of death to the higher form
of life. Evil is inherent in this condition; and the soul dwells

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

in the body as in a prison or a grave. In this state, and previous to
the discipline of education and the mystical initiation, the rational or
intellectual element, which Paul denominates the spiritual, is asleep.
The earth-life is a dream rather than a reality. Yet it has longings for
a higher and nobler form of life, and its affinities are on high. “All
men yearn after God,” says Homer. The object of Plato is to present to
us the fact that there are in the soul certain *ideas* or principles,
innate and connatural, which are not derived from without, but are
anterior to all experience, and are developed and brought to view, but
not produced by experience. These ideas are the most vital of all
truths, and the purpose of instruction and discipline is to make the
individual conscious of them and willing to be led and inspired by them.
The soul is purified or separated from evils by knowledge, truth,
expiations, sufferings, and prayers. Our life is a discipline and
preparation for another state of being; and resemblance to God is the
highest motive of action. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Proclus does not hesitate to identify the theological doctrines with the
mystical dogmas of the Orphic system. He says: “What Orpheus delivered
in hidden allegories, Pythagoras learned when he was initiated into the
Orphic Mysteries; and Plato next received a perfect knowledge of them
from the Orphean and Pythagorean writings.”

Mr. Taylor’s peculiar style has been the subject of repeated criticism;
and his translations are not accepted by classical scholars. Yet they
have met with favor at the hands of men capable of profound and
recondite thinking; and it must be conceded that he was endowed with a
superior qualification,—that of an intuitive perception of the interior
meaning of the subjects which he considered. Others may have known more
Greek, but he knew more Plato. He devoted his time and means for the
elucidation and dissemination of the doctrines of the divine
philosopher; and has rendered into English not only his writings, but
also the works of other authors, who affected the teachings of the great
master, that have escaped destruction at the hand of Moslem and
Christian bigots. For this labor we cannot be too grateful.

The present treatise has all the peculiarities of style which
characterize the translations. The principal difficulties of these we
have endeavored to obviate—a labor which will, we trust, be not
unacceptable to readers. The book has been for some time out of print;
and no later writer has endeavored to replace it. There are

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

many who still cherish a regard, almost amounting to veneration, for the
author; and we hope that this reproduction of his admirable explanation
of the nature and object of the Mysteries will prove to them a welcome
undertaking. There is an increasing interest in philosophical, mystical,
and other antique literature, which will, we believe, render our labor
of some value to a class of readers whose sympathy, good-will, and
fellowship we would gladly possess and cherish. If we have added to
their enjoyment, we shall be doubly gratified.

A. W.

<span id="img_02801"></span> ![Venus and Proserpina in
Hades.](img/02801.png.md)  
Venus and Proserpina in Hades.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span id="img_02901"></span> ![Rape of Proserpina.](img/02901.png.md)  
Rape of Proserpina.

#### ADVERTISEMENT TO THE AUTHOR’S EDITION.

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> there is nothing more celebrated than
the Mysteries of the ancients, so there is perhaps nothing which has
hitherto been less solidly known. Of the truth of this observation, the
liberal reader will, I persuade myself, be fully convinced, from an
attentive perusal of the following sheets; in which the secret meaning
of the Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries is unfolded, from authority the
most respectable, and from a philosophy of all others the most venerable
and august. The authority, indeed, is principally derived from
manuscript writings, which are, of course, in the possession of but a
few; but its respectability is no more lessened by its concealment, than
the value of a diamond when secluded from the light. And as to the
philosophy, by whose assistance these Mysteries are developed, it is
coeval with the universe itself; and, however its continuity may be
broken by opposing systems, it will make its appearance at different
periods of time, as long as the sun himself shall continue to illuminate
the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

world. It has, indeed, and may hereafter, be violently assaulted by
delusive opinions; but the opposition will be just as imbecile as that
of the waves of the sea against a temple built on a rock, which
majestically pours them back,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Broken and Vanquish’d, foaming to the main.</span>

</div>

<span id="img_03001"></span> ![Pallas, Venus, and
Diana.](img/03001.png.md)  
Pallas, Venus, and Diana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[13:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_0.md) *Atlantic Monthly*, vol.
iv. September, 1859.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[17:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_1.md) In the Oriental countries
the designation פתר *Peter* (an interpreter), appears to have been the
title of this personage; and <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> the petroma
consisted, notably enough, of two tablets of stone. There is in these
facts some reminder of the peculiar circumstances of the Mosaic Law
which was so preserved; and also of the claim of the Pope to be the
successor of Peter, the hierophant or interpreter of the Christian
religion.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[18:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_2.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Porphyry</span>.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[19:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_3.md) *Ancient Symbol-Worship*,
page 12, note. “Socrates was not initiated, yet after drinking the
hemlock, he addressed Crito: ‘We owe a cock to Æsculapius.’ This was the
peculiar offering made by initiates (now called *kerknophori*) on the
eve of the last day, and he thus symbolically asserted that he was about
to receive the great apocalypse.”

See, also, “*Progress of Religious Ideas*,” by <span
class="smallcaps">Lydia Maria Child</span>, vol. ii. p. 308; and
“*Discourses on the Worship of Priapus*,” by <span
class="smallcaps">Richard Payne Knight</span>.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[20:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_4.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Euripides</span>: *Rhaesus*. “Orpheus showed forth the
rites of the hidden Mysteries.”

<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>: *Protagoras*. “The art of a
sophist or sage is ancient, but the men who proposed it in ancient
times, fearing the odium attached to it, sought to conceal it, and
vailed it over, some under the garb of poetry, as Homer, Hesiod, and
Simonides: and others under that of the Mysteries and prophetic manias,
such as Orpheus, Musæus, and their followers.”

Herodotus takes a different view—ii. 49. “Melampus, the son of
Amytheon,” he says, “introduced into Greece the name of Dionysus
(Bacchus), the ceremonial of his worship, and the procession of the
phallus. He did not, however, so completely apprehend the whole doctrine
as to be able to communicate it entirely: but various sages, since his
time, have carried out his teaching to greater perfection. Still it is
certain that Melampus introduced the phallus, and that the Greeks learnt
from him the ceremonies which they now practice. I therefore maintain
that Melampus, who was a sage, and had acquired the art of divination,
having become acquainted with the worship of Dionysus through knowledge
derived from Egypt, introduced it into Greece, with a few slight
changes, at the same time that he brought in various other practices.
For I can by no means allow that it is by mere coincidence that the
Bacchic ceremonies in Greece are so nearly the same as the Egyptian.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[23:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_5.md) Hera, generally regarded
as the Greek title of Juno, is not the definite name of any goddess, but
was used by ancient writers as a designation only. It signifies *domina*
or lady, and appears to be of Sanscrit origin. It is applied to Ceres or
Demeter, and other divinities.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[24:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_6.md) The mirror was a part of
the symbolism of the Thesmophoria, and was used in the search for Atmu,
the Hidden One, evidently the same as Tammuz, Adonis, and Atys. See
*Exodus* xxxviii. 8; 1 *Samuel* ii. 22; and *Ezekiel* viii. 14. But
despite the assertion of Herodotus and others that the Bacchic Mysteries
were in reality Egyptian, there exists strong probability that they came
originally from India, and were Sivaic or Buddhistical.
Coré-Persephoneia was but the goddess Parasu-pani or Bhavani, the
patroness of the Thugs, called also Gorée; and Zagreus is from *Chakra*,
a country extending from ocean to ocean. If this is a Turanian or Tartar
Story, we can easily recognize the “Horns” as the crescent worn by
lama-priests: and translating god-names as merely sacerdotal
designations, assume the whole legend to be based on a tale of Lama
Succession and transmigration. The Titans would then be the Daityas of
India, who were opposed to the faith of the northern tribes; and the
title Dionysus but signify the god or chief-priest of Nysa, or Mount
Meru. The whole story of Orpheus, the institutor or rather the reformer
of the Bacchic rites, has a Hindu ring all through.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[25:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_7.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Herodotus</span>: ii. 81.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[26:\*](ebm04.htm#fr_8.md) Many of the early
Christian writers were deeply imbued with the Eclectic or Platonic
doctrines. The very forms of speech were almost identical. One of the
four Gospels, bearing the title “*according to John*,” was the evident
product of a Platonist, and hardly seems in a considerable degree Jewish
or historical. The epistles ascribed to Paul evince a great familiarity
with the Eclectic philosophy and the peculiar symbolism of the
Mysteries, as well as with the Mithraic notions that had penetrated and
permeated the religious ideas of the western countries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section I., Eleusinian Mysteries](ebm05.md)
