[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jm05)  [Next](jm07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419967/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# CHAPTER II

### THE MERKABAH (CHARIOT) MYSTICISM

THE first chapter of Ezekiel has played a most fruitful part in the
mystical speculations of the Jews. The lore of the heavenly
Throne-chariot in some one or other of its multitudinous implications is
everywhere to be met with. Whence Ezekiel derived these baffling
conceptions of the Deity, and what historical or theological truths he
meant to portray by means of them, are themes with which the scholars of
the Old Testament have ever busied themselves. But the Jewish mystic
sought no rationalistic explanation of them. He took them as they were,
in all their mystery, in all their strange and inexplicable fantasy, in
all their weird aloofness from the things and ideas of the everyday
life. He sought no explanation of them because he was assured that they
stood for something which did not need explaining. He *felt*
instinctively that the Merkabah typified the human longing for the sight
of the Divine Presence and companionship with it. To attain this

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

end was, to him, the acme of all spiritual life.

Ezekiel's image of Yahve riding upon the chariot of the 'living
creatures,' accompanied by sights and voices, movements and upheavals in
earth and heaven, lying outside the range of the deepest ecstatic
experiences of all other Old Testament personages, was for the Jewish
mystic a real opening, an unveiling, of the innermost and impenetrable
secrets locked up in the interrelation of the human and the divine. It
was interpreted as a sort of Divine self-opening, self-condescension to
man. The door is flung wide open so that man, at the direct invitation
of God, can come to the secret for which he longs and seeks. This idea
is a supreme factor in the mystic life of all religions. The soul is
urged on to seek union with God, only because it feels that God has
first gone out, on His own initiative and uninvited, to seek union with
it. The human movement from within is but a response to a larger Divine
movement from without. The call has come; the answer must come.

The Chariot (Merkabah) was thus a kind of 'mystic way' leading up to the
final goal of the soul. Or, more precisely, it was the mystic
'instrument,' the vehicle by which one was carried direct into the
'halls' of the unseen. It was the aim of the mystic to be

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

a 'Merkabah-rider,' so that he might be enabled, while still in the
trammels of the flesh, to mount up to his spiritual Eldorado. Whether,
as has been suggested, the uncanny imagery of the Merkabah lore is to be
sought, for its origin, in the teachings of Mithraism, or, as has also
been suggested, in certain branches of Mohammedan mysticism, one can see
quite clearly how its governing idea is based on a conception general to
all the mystics, *viz*. that the quest for the ultimate Reality is a
kind of pilgrimage, and the seeker is a traveller towards his home in
God.

It was remarked, on a previous page, that the mystic neither asked, nor
waited, for any rationalistic explanation of the Merkabah mysteries. He
felt that they summarised for him the highest pinnacle of being towards
the realisation of which he must bend his energies without stint. But
yet, from certain stray and scattered Rabbinic remarks, one takes leave
to infer that there existed in the early Christian centuries a small
sect of Jewish mystics--the elect of the elect--to whom certain measures
of instruction were given in these recondite themes. There was an
esoteric science of the Merkabah. What its content was we can only dimly
guess--from the Rabbinic sources. It appears to have been a confused
angelology, one famous angel Metatron playing a conspicuous part.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Much more is to be
found in the early Enoch-literature as well as--from quite other points
of view--in the mediæval Kabbalah. Let us give some illustrative sayings
from the Rabbinic literature.

In the Mishna, *Ḥaggigah*, ii. 1, it is said: "It is forbidden to
explain the first chapters of Genesis to *two* persons, but it is only
to be explained to *one* by himself. It is forbidden to explain the
Merkabah even to *one* by himself unless he be a sage and of an original
turn of mind." In a passage in *T.B. Ḥaggigah*, 13a, the words are
added: "but it is permitted to divulge to him \[*i.e.* to one in the
case of the first chapters of *Genesis*\] the first words of the
chapters." In the same passage another Rabbi (Ze‘era) of the 3rd century
A.D. remarks, with a greater stringency: "We may not divulge even the
first words of the chapters \[neither of Genesis nor Ezekiel\] unless it
be to a 'chief of the Beth Din' <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) or to
one whose heart is tempered by age or responsibility."

Yet another teacher of the same century declares in the same connection:
"We may not divulge the secrets of the Torah to any but to him to whom
the verse in *Isaiah*, iii. 3, applies, *viz*. the captain of fifty and
the honourable man, and the counsellor and the cunning artificer and the
eloquent orator."

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (The Rabbis
understood these terms to mean distinction in a knowledge and practice
of the Torah.)

This insistence upon a high level of moral and religious fitness as the
indispensable prelude to a knowledge of the Merkabah has its counterpart
in the mysticism of all religions. The organic life, the self, conscious
and unconscious, must be moulded and developed in certain ways; there
must be an education, moral, physical, emotional; a psychological
adjustment, by stages, of the mental states which go to the make-up of
the full mystic consciousness. As Evelyn Underhill (*Mysticism*, p. 107)
says: "Mysticism shows itself not merely as an attitude of mind and
heart, but as a form of organic life. . . . It is a remaking of the
whole character on high levels in the interests of the transcendental
life."

That the Rabbis were fully alive to the importance of this
self-discipline is seen by a remark of theirs in *T.B. Ḥaggigah*, 13a,
as follows: "A certain youth was once explaining the Ḥashmal (*Ezekiel*,
i. 27, translated 'amber' in the A.V.) when fire came forth and consumed
him." When the question is asked, Why was this? the answer is: "His time
had not yet come" (*lāv* *māti zimnēh*). This cannot but mean that his
youthful age had not given him the opportunities for the mature
self-culture necessary

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

to the mystic apprehension. The Ḥashmal, by the way, was interpreted by
the Rabbis as: (*a*) a shortened form of the full phrase *ḥāyot ěsh
mē-māl-lē-loth*, *i.e.* 'the living creatures of fire, speaking'; or
(*b*) a shortened form of *‘ittim ḥāshoth ve-‘ittim mě-mălle-lōth*,
*i.e.* 'they who at times were silent and at times speaking.' In the
literature of the mediæval Kabbalah, the Ḥashmal belongs to the
'Yetsiratic' world (*i.e.* the abode of the angels, presided over by
Metatron who was changed into fire; and the spirits of men are there
too). <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) According to a modern Bible
commentator (the celebrated Russian Hebraist, M. L. Malbim, 1809-1879)
the word signifies "the Ḥayot \[*i.e.* 'living creatures' of *Ezekiel*,
i.\] which are the abode \[or camp\] of the Shechinah \[*i.e.* Divine
Presence\] where there is the 'still small voice.' It is they \[*i.e.*
the Ḥayot\] who receive the Divine effluence from above and disseminate
it to the Ḥayot who are the movers of the 'wheels' \[of Ezekiel's
Chariot\]."

Many more passages of a like kind might be quoted in support of the view
that the attainment of a knowledge of the Merkabah was a hard quest
beset with ever so many impediments; that it pre-supposed, on the one
hand, an exceptional measure of self-development, and, on the other, an
extraordinary

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

amount of self-repression and self-renouncement.

But the mention of *fire* in the preceding paragraph leads us to the
consideration of an aspect of the Merkabah which brings the latter very
much into line with the description of mystical phenomena in literature
generally. Every one knows how the image of fire dominates so much of
the mysticism of Dante. The mediæval Christian mystics--Ruysbroeck,
Catherine of Genoa, Jacob Boehme, and others--appeal constantly to the
same figure for the expression of their deepest thoughts on the
relations between man and the Godhead. The choice of the metaphor
probably rests on the fact that 'fire' can be adapted to symbolise
either or both of the following truths: (*a*) the brightness,
illumination which comes when the goal has been reached, when the quest
for the ultimate reality has at last been satisfied; (*b*) the
all-penetrating, all-encompassing, self-diffusing force of fire is such
a telling picture of the mystic union of the soul and God. The two are
interpenetrated, fused into one state of being. The soul is red-hot with
God, who at the same time, like fire, holds the soul in his grip, dwells
in it.

Examples are the following: In the *Midrash Rabba* on *Canticles*, i.
12, it is said: "Ben ‘Azzai \[a famous Rabbi of the 2nd century A.D.\]
was once sitting expounding the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Torah. *Fire
surrounded him*. They went and told R. ‘Akiba, saying, 'Oh! Rabbi! Ben
‘Azzai is sitting expounding the Torah, and *fire is lighting him up on
all sides*.' Upon this, R. ‘Akiba went to Ben ‘Azzai and said unto him,
'I hear that thou wert sitting expounding the Torah, with the *fire
playing round about thee*.' 'Yes, that is so,' replied he. 'Wert thou
then,' retorted ‘Akiba, 'engaged in unravelling the secret chambers of
the Merkabah?' 'No,' replied he." It is not germane here to go into what
the sage said he really was engaged in doing. The quotation sufficiently
shows how in the 2nd century A.D. the imagery of fire was traditionally
associated with esoteric culture.

Here is another instance, in *T.B. Succah*, 28a. Hillel the Elder (30
B.C.-10 A.D.) had eighty disciples. Thirty of them were worthy enough
for the Shechinah to rest upon them. Thirty of them were worthy enough
for the sun to stand still at their bidding. The other twenty were of
average character. The greatest among them all was Jonathan son of Uziel
(1st century A.D.); the smallest among them all was Joḥanan son of
Zaccai (end of 1st century A.D.). The latter, smallest though he was,
was acquainted with every conceivable branch of both exoteric and
esoteric lore. He knew 'the talk of the ministering angels and the talk
of the demons and the talk of the palm-trees

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*děkālim*).' He
knew also the lore of the Merkabah. Such being the measure of the
knowledge possessed by 'the smallest,' how great must have been the
measure of the knowledge possessed by 'the greatest,' *viz*. Jonathan
son of Uziel! When the latter was sitting and studying the Torah
(presumably the esoteric lore of the angels and the Merkabah) every bird
that flew above him was burnt by fire. These latter words are the
description of the ecstatic state, the moments of exaltation, the
indescribable peace and splendour which the soul of the mystic
experiences when, disentangling itself from the darkness of illusion, it
reaches the Light of Reality, the condition so aptly phrased by the
Psalmist who said: "For with thee is the fountain of life; in thy light
shall we see light" (*Psalm*, xxxvi. 9). The bird flying in the
environment of this unrestrained light, must inevitably be consumed by
the fire of it.

The monument which Jonathan son of Uziel has left us in perpetuation of
his mystical tendencies, is his usage of the term Memra ('Word') to
denote certain phases of Divine activity, in the Aramaic Paraphrase to
the Prophets which ancient Jewish tradition assigned to his authorship,
but which modern research has shown to be but the foundation on which
the extant Aramaic Paraphrase to the Prophets rests.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Another illustration of the mystic vision of light consequent on the
rapture created by an initiation into the Merkabah
[mysteries](errata.htm#0.md) is related in *T.B. Ḥaggigah*, 14b, as
follows:

"R. Joḥanan son of Zaccai was once riding on an ass, and R. Eliezer son
of Arach was on an ass behind him. The latter Rabbi said to the former,
'O master! teach me a chapter of the Merkabah mysteries.' 'No!' replied
the master, 'Have I not already informed thee that the Merkabah may not
be taught to any one man by himself unless he be a sage and of an
original turn of mind?

'Very well, then!' replied Eliezer son of Arach. 'Wilt thou give me
leave to tell thee a thing which thou hast taught me? 'Yes!' replied
Joḥanan son of Zaccai. 'Say it!' Forthwith the master dismounted from
his ass, wrapped himself up in a garment, and sat upon a stone beneath
an olive tree. 'Why, O master, hast thou dismounted from thy ass?' asked
the disciple. 'Is it possible,' replied he, 'that I will ride upon my
ass at the moment when thou art expounding the mysteries of the
Merkabah, and the Shechinah is with us, and the ministering angels are
accompanying us?' Forthwith R. Eliezer son of Arach opened his discourse
on the mysteries of the Merkabah, and no sooner had he begun, *than fire
came down from heaven* and encompassed

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

all the trees of the field, which, with one accord, burst into song.
What song? It was 'Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons and all
deeps; fruitful trees and all cedars, praise ye the Lord' (*Psalm*,
cxlviii. 7, 9). Upon this, an angel cried out from the fire, saying,
'Truly these, even these, are the secrets of the Merkabah.' R. Joḥanan
son of Zaccai then arose and kissed his disciple upon the forehead,
saying, 'Blessed be the Lord, God of Israel, who hath given unto Abraham
our father a son who is able to understand, and search, and discourse
upon, the mysteries of the Merkabah.' . . .

"When these things were told to R. Joshua \[another disciple of
Joḥanan\], the latter said one day when walking with R. José the Priest
\[another disciple of Joḥanan\], 'Let us likewise discourse about the
Merkabah!' R. Joshua opened the discourse. It was a day in the height of
summer. The heavens became a knot of thick clouds, and something like a
rainbow was seen in the clouds, and the ministering angels came in
companies to listen as men do to hear wedding music. R. José the Priest
went and told his master of it, who exclaimed, 'Happy are ye, happy is
she that bare you! Blessed are thy eyes that beheld these things! Indeed
I saw myself with you in a dream, seated upon Mount Sinai, and I heard a

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

heavenly voice exclaiming, Ascend hither! Ascend hither! large
banqueting-halls and fine couches are in readiness for you. You and your
disciples, and your disciples' disciples, are destined to be in the
third set' \[*i.e.* the third of the three classes of angels who, as the
Rabbis taught, stand continually before the Shechinah, singing psalms.
and anthems\]."

There are several points which need making clear in this remarkable
passage. The objection to discuss the Merkabah while sitting on the
animal's back, and the fact of sitting upon a stone under an olive tree,
point to the necessary physical and tempera-mental self-discipline which
is the *sine quâ non* of the mystic's equipment in all ages and among
all nations. He must not be set high on the ass, lest his heart be
lifted up too. He must be cleansed of every vestige of pride, lowly and
of contrite spirit. It has been mentioned in the previous chapter how
meekness was one of the unfailing qualities of the *Zen‘uim*. The proud
man, said the Rabbis, "crowds out the feet of the Shechinah." "Whosoever
is haughty will finally fall into Gehinnom." Pride, to the Rabbis, was
the most terrible pitfall in the path of the religious life. Its
opposite, humility, was the starting-point of all the virtues. If such
was the premium placed upon meekness in so far as it concerned the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

life of the ordinary Jew, how enormous must have been its importance for
the life of the mystic--for him who aimed at knowing Eternal Truth?
Everything that savours of evil, of imperfection, of sin, must vanish.
The primary means of this self-purification is the culture of humility.

The remark that 'the Shechinah is with us and the ministering angels are
accompanying us' emphasises two salient features of Rabbinic mysticism.
Firstly, the Shechinah is the transcendent-immanent God of Israel;
Israel's environment was saturated with the Shechinah whose unfailing
companionship the Jew enjoyed in all the lands of his dispersion. "Even
at the time when they are unclean does the Shechinah dwell with them,"
runs a passage in *T.B. Yoma*, 57a. How unique, how surpassingly vivid
must have been the consciousness of this accompanying Shechinah-Presence
to the Merkabah initiates, to those who had raised themselves so high
above the level of the ordinary crowd by the pursuit of an ideal
standard of self-perfection! Secondly, the 'ministering angels' play a
large part in all the Merkabah lore, as is seen from the following
Rabbinic comments.

*Ezekiel*, i. 15, says, "Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold
one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces."
R. Eliezer said, "There is one angel

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

who stands upon earth but whose head reaches to the 'living creatures' .
. . his name is Sandalphon. He is higher than his neighbour <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) to the extent of a five-hundred years'
journey. He stands behind the Merkabah wreathing coronets for his
Master" (*T.B. Ḥaggigah*, 13b).

Another passage reads: "Day by day ministering angels are created from
the stream of fire. They sing a pæan \[to God\] and then pass away, as
it is said, 'They are new every morning; great is thy faithfulness'
(*Lamentations*, iii. 23). . . . From each word that comes forth from
the mouth of the Holy One (blessed be He) there is created one angel, as
it is said, 'By the word of the Lord were the heavens made and all the
host of them by the breath of his mouth'" (*Psalm*, xxxiii. 6).

The Rabbis obviously understood the phrase 'the host of them' to refer,
not as we suppose, to the paraphernalia of the heavens, *i.e.* the
stars, planets, etc., but to the angelic worlds. The idea of the Word of
God becoming transformed into an angel, and hence accomplishing certain
tangible tasks among men, here on earth, bears strong resemblances to
the Logos of Philo as well as to the Prologue of the Fourth Gospel.

The phrase to 'listen as men do to hear wedding music' (or literally
'the music of bride and bridegroom') is a reminiscence of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

the large mass of Rabbinic mysticism clustering round the love overtures
of bride and bridegroom in the Book of Canticles. The book, on the
Rabbinic interpretation, teaches the great truth of a 'spiritual
marriage' between the human and the Divine, a betrothal between God and
Israel. "In ten places in the Old Testament," says *Canticles Rabba*,
iv. 10, "are the Israelites designated as a 'bride,' six here \[*i.e.*
in the Book of Canticles\] and four in the Prophets . . . and in ten
corresponding passages is God represented as arrayed in garments \[which
display the dignity of manhood in the ideal bridegroom\]."

To the minds of the Rabbis, the super-abundant imagery of human love and
marriage which distinguishes Canticles from all other books of the Old
Testament, was the truest symbol of the way in which human Israel and
his Divine Father were drawn near to one another. The intimate and
secret experiences of the soul of the Jew, the raptures of its
intercourse with God in senses which no outsider could understand, were
best reflected in the language of that august and indefinable passion
which men call love.

The remark 'ascend hither! ascend hither! large banqueting halls and
fine couches are in readiness for you,' etc., points to another
prominent phase of Rabbinic mysticism. It was strongly believed that the
pious could, by means of a life led on the highest plane,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

free themselves from the trammels that bind the soul to the body and
enter, living, into the heavenly paradise. The idea was obviously a
development of a branch of Old Testament theology. But the latter gets
no further than the conception that heaven may be reached without dying,
the persons translated thither having finished their earthly career. The
experiences of Enoch (*Genesis*, v. 24) and of Elijah (2 *Kings*, ii.
11) are illustrations. A development of the doctrine is the thought that
certain favoured saints of history are, after death and when in heaven,
given instruction concerning the doings of men and the general course of
events here below. The Apocalyptic literature (see especially
*Apocalypse of Baruch*, by Dr. Charles) deals somewhat largely in this
idea; and there are traces of it in the Rabbinical literature. But these
saints, however true the teachings and revelations vouchsafed to them
may eventually have turned out to be, are *dead* as far as the world is
concerned.

A further development is seen in the theory that certain pious men may
temporarily ascend into the unseen, and, having seen and learnt the
deepest mysteries, may return to earth again. These were the mystics
who, by training themselves to a life of untarnished holiness, were able
to fit themselves for entering a state of ecstasy, to behold visions and
hear voices which brought them into

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

direct contact with the Divine Life. They were the students of the
Merkabah who, as a result of their peculiar physical and mental make-up,
were capable of reaching the goal of their quest. "There were four men,"
says the Talmud (*Ḥaggigah*, 14b), "who entered Paradise." They were R.
‘Akiba (50--130 A.D.), Ben ‘Azzai (2nd century A.D.), Ben Zoma (2nd
century A.D.), and Elisha b. Abuyah (end of 1st century and beginning of
2nd century A.D.). Although this passage is one of the puzzles of the
Talmud, and is variously interpreted, we may quite feasibly lay it down
that the reference here is to one of those waking visits to the
invisible world which fall within the experiences of all mystics in all
ages.

Fragments of what was a large mystic literature of the later Rabbinical
epoch (*i.e.* from about the 7th to the 11th century, usually known as
the Gaonic epoch) have descended to us. Of these, one branch is the
*Hekalot* (*i.e.* 'halls'), which are supposed to have originated with
the mystics of the fore-mentioned period who called themselves *Yōrědē*
*Merkabah* (*i.e.* Riders in the Chariot). As Dr. Louis Ginzberg says
(see art 'Ascension' in *Jewish Encyc*. vol. ii.), "these mystics were
able, by various manipulations, to enter into a state of autohypnosis,
in which they declared they saw heaven open before them, and beheld its
mysteries. It was believed that he only could undertake this

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Merkabah-ride, who
was in possession of all religious knowledge, observed all the
commandments and precepts and was almost superhuman in the purity of his
life. This, however, was regarded usually as a matter of theory; and
less perfect men also attempted, by fasting and prayer, to free their
senses from the impressions of the outer world and succeeded in entering
into a state of ecstasy in which they recounted their heavenly visions."

Much of this belief survives in modern Jewish mysticism, whose chief
representatives known as Ḥasidim are to be found in Russia, Poland,
Galicia, and Hungary.

Although it was stated above that the large volume of this phase of
mystic literature originated in the period from the 7th to the 11th
century, modern research has clearly proved that its roots go back to a
very much earlier date. In fact, it is very doubtful whether its origin
is to be looked for at all in the bosom of early Judaism. Mithra-worship
is now taken by scholars to account for much of it. But it is hazardous
to venture any final opinion. It must never be forgotten that the first
chapter of Ezekiel worked wonders on the old Hebrew imagination.
Commentaries on almost every word in the chapter were composed
whole-sale. In all likelihood, the mysticism of the Merkabah-riders is a
syncretism. Mithraic

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

conceptions in vogue were foisted on to the original Jewish
interpretations; and, in combination with Neo-Platonism, there was
evolved this branch of Jewish mysticism which, though by no means
abundant in the Talmud and the Midrashim, occupies a considerable place
in the ideas of the mediæval Kabbalah, as well as in the tenets of the
modern Ḥasidim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[36:1](jm06.htm#fr_1.md) Literally 'House of
Judgment,' the technical name for a Jewish Court of Law.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[38:1](jm06.htm#fr_2.md) There were four such
'worlds' in the mediæval Kabbalah. They will be alluded to further on.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[46:1](jm06.htm#fr_3.md) Sandalphon = Greek
συνάδελφος = co-brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Philo: Metatron: Wisdom](jm07.md)
