[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jm06)  [Next](jm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419967/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### CHAPTER III

### PHILO: METATRON: WISDOM

SOMETHING must now be said about the mystical elements in the
Hellenistic, as distinguished from the Palestinian, branch of early
Judaism. The Palestinian (which includes the Babylonian) is, by a long
way, the more voluminous; and its significance for the development of
the later Judaism totally eclipses that of Jewish Hellenism which really
wielded its influence over Christianity rather than over Judaism. Still
there are a few outstanding features in Jewish Hellenism which are
germane to our subject. Moreover, modern research has shown that there
was a certain degree of intercourse, in the opening centuries of the
Christian era, between Jewish scholars of Palestine and Babylonia on the
one hand, and Jewish scholars of Alexandria on the other, Alexandria
being the great centre of the Hellenistic culture then predominant. This
must have resulted in an interchange and interaction of ideas and
doctrines which found their way into the literatures of both branches.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

A noteworthy example of this fusion of ideas is the famous Philo Judæus
of Alexandria. Platonic, Stoic and Rabbinic strata make up the
philosophy of Philo. They are intermingled not always harmoniously. But
what tells hard upon the student of Philo's presentation of Hebrew
thought is the difficulty of knowing whether certain parallel ideas in
his writings and the writings of the Palestinian Rabbis originated with
him or with the Rabbis. It has, however, been shown, with a fair
approach to conclusiveness, that where there is a resemblance in
*Halachic* interpretation, Philo is the borrower; whereas the *Haggadic*
parallels emanate from the Rabbis.

To attempt an examination of Philo's mysticism as a whole lies quite
outside the scope of this book. All that can be dealt with--and this
very fragmentarily and in-adequately--are certain points in the
mysticism of his Logos idea which, by reason of their affinity with the
Haggadah, are important to an understanding of Jewish mysticism. How to
bridge the chasm between God and the world, how at the first creation of
man it was possible for God who is the all-holy and all-perfect, to come
into contact with imperfect man, is an oft-recurring subject of
speculation in the Talmud and Midrashim. The cosmogony of Genesis comes
in for an exceptionally

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

elaborate treatment. In this connection it is only to be expected that
angelology should figure largely. Theologians are quite wrong when they
say that post-Biblical Judaism removed the Deity further and further
away from the world, and then tried to bring Him nearer again by the
medium of the angel. The truth is that God was in many senses brought
very near, and the angel was but an aspect of this 'nearness.' God was
immanent as well as transcendent, and the angel was a sort of emanation
of the Divine, an off-shoot of Deity, holding intimate converse with the
affairs of the world. It was on these lines that the Rabbis solved their
problem of reconciling the idea of a pure God with an impure world. God
did not really come into contact with the world, but His angels did--and
His angels are really part and parcel of His own being, emanations of
His own substance. This was, of course, far from being a logical
solution, but the Rabbis, like many other religious thinkers of those
early centuries, were not masters of logic.

Philo's ideas run in what seems a similar groove. All matter is to him
evil; hence God must be placed outside the world. But though this was
his philosophy, his religion--Judaism--taught him otherwise. Obliged to
find some way out of the difficulty, he hit upon the idea of the Logoi,
*i.e.* divine

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

agencies, which, while being in some senses inherent in God, are, in
other ways and at various times, exterior to Him. It would be incorrect
to say that he derived this theology from the Rabbinic sources. Platonic
and Stoic teachings are largely responsible for them. But Philo
endeavoured to bring them into line with Rabbinic modes of Biblical
interpretation. He felt that he ought to give them a Jewish dress--with
the result that much of what he says about Divine powers, agencies,
attributes operating in the world, independently of the Deity and yet as
part and parcel of Him, bears a close resemblance to much of Rabbinic
angelology and Rabbinic teaching about the Divine attributes. Thus, to
give some examples.

The Rabbis (in *Genesis Rabba*, viii. 3, 4, and in many other places)
are at pains to justify the usage of the grammatical plural in the
words: "And God said, Let us make man" (*Gen*. i. 26). Various opinions
are thrown out. But the finally accepted view is that "at the time when
God was about to create the first man, He took counsel with the
ministering angels." What this interpretation aims at, is to relieve the
Deity of the blame for the evil in man, and to place it upon some other
shoulders. But what it really does is to show that the earth is the
scene and centre of Divine agencies.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Angels are
emanations of the Divine working here below. Man is in a *double* sense
*made* by them. It was they who had a hand in his creation. It is they
who fill his environment, and make him realise that he is ever in the
grip of a Presence from which there is no escaping. The Talmud and
Midrashim overflow with the descriptions of vast hierarchies of
spiritual intelligences--angels--who guide the will of man and the
course of nature, surrounding man on all sides and at all moments,
shielding him and lifting him up to higher planes of thought and
feeling. They protect the pious and help them in their transactions.
Every angelic host consists of a thousand times a thousand. The angels
give instruction in certain matters. Every man has a special guardian
angel. All this literature of angelology can have no possible meaning at
all unless it is interpreted to mean that God is present and active in
the world, a Power behind phenomena, a directing Mind, a controlling
Will, an Immanent God.

Philo's doctrine is similar. Thus he says: "For God, not condescending
to come down to the external senses, sends His own words (*logoi*) or
angels for the sake of giving assistance to those who love virtue. But
they attend like physicians to the diseases of the soul, and apply
themselves to heal them, offering sacred recommendations like sacred

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

laws, and inviting men to practise the duties inculcated by them, and,
like the trainers of wrestlers, implanting in their pupils strength and
power and irresistible vigour. Very properly, therefore, when he
\[*i.e.* Jacob\] has arrived at the external sense, he is represented no
longer as meeting God, but only the Divine word, just as his grandfather
Abraham, the model of wisdom did" (*On Dreams*, i. 12).

In another passage in the fore-mentioned section, he speaks of "the
immortal words (*logoi*) which it is customary to call angels" (*ibid*.
i. 19). Again, take the following:

"But these men pray to be nourished by the word (*logos*) of God. But
Jacob, raising his head above the word, says that he is nourished by God
Himself, and his words are as follows: The God in whom my father Abraham
and Isaac were well pleased; the God who has nourished me from my youth
upwards to this day; the angel who has delivered me from all my evils,
bless these children. This now, being a symbol of a perfect disposition,
thinks God Himself his nourisher, and not the word; and he speaks of the
angel, which is the word, as the physician of his evils, in this
speaking most naturally. For the good things which he has previously
mentioned are pleasing to him, inasmuch as the living and true God has
given them to him face to face, but the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

secondary good things have been given to him by the angels and by the
word of God. On this account I think it is that God gives men pure good
health which is not preceded by any disease in the body, by Himself
alone, but that health which is an escape from disease, He gives through
the medium of skill and medical science, attributing it to science, and
to him who can apply it skilfully, though in truth it is God Himself who
heals both by these means, and without these means. And the same is the
case with regard to the soul. The good things, namely, food, He gives to
men by His power alone; but those which contain in them a deliverance
from evil, he gives by means of His angels and His word" (*Allegories of
the Sacred Laws*, iii. 62).

The intermingling of Greek and Hebraic elements in these passages is
curious. But the two sets are easily distinguishable. Two things are
clear from these quotations. Firstly, the angel is a kind of
representative of the Deity among mortals. It is a sort of God in
action. God is very near man and not transcendent. Secondly, the angel
and the Logos (Word) or Logoi (Words) have very much the same nature and
fulfil very much the same function. The Rabbinic mysticism clustering
round angels as well as the Rabbinic doctrine of the Shechinah--which
will be dealt with later--have likewise many points in common. Angels
encompass

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the worthy Israelite; the Shechinah likewise accompanies Israel, nay,
even dwells in the midst of impure Israelites, as a famous passage in
the Talmud says. But there are aspects of Philo's angelology which are
strange to Rabbinic modes of thought. One of the most interesting of
these is his designation of angels as 'incorporeal intelligences' and as
'immortal souls' (*On Dreams*, i. 20). The Rabbis obviously thought of
angels as material beings. They even at times materialised the
Shechinah, as will be mentioned in the following chapter. The sight of
an angel was a physical phenomenon. Philo's exegesis took quite a
different turn.

Thus, in a lengthy comment on *Genesis*, xxviii. 12 ("And he dreamed a
dream and behold a ladder was planted firmly on the ground, the head of
which reached to heaven, and the angels of God were ascending and
descending upon it") he goes on to say: "This air is the abode of
incorporeal souls, since it seemed good to the Creator of the universe
to fill all parts of the world with living creatures. . . . For the
Creator of the universe formed the air so that it should be the habit of
those bodies which are immovable, and the nature of those which are
moved in an invisible manner, and the soul of such as are able to exert
an impetus and visible sense of their own. . . . Therefore, let no one
deprive the most excellent nature

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of living creatures of the most excellent of those elements which
surround the earth; that is to say, of the air. For not only is it not
alone deserted by all things besides, but rather like a populous city,
it is full of imperishable and immortal citizens, souls equal in number
to the stars. Now, of these souls some descend upon the earth with a
view to being bound up in mortal bodies. . . . But some soar upwards. .
. . But others, condemning the body of great folly and trifling, have
pronounced it a prison and a grave, and, flying from it as from a house
of correction or a tomb, have raised themselves aloft on light wings
towards the æther, and have devoted their whole lives to sublime
speculations. There are others again, the purest and most excellent of
all, which have received greater and more divine intellects, never by
any chance desiring any earthly thing whatever, but being, as it were,
lieutenants of the Ruler of the universe, as though they were the eyes
and ears of the great king, beholding and listening to everything. Now
philosophers in general are wont to call these demons, but the sacred
scriptures call them angels, using a name more in accord with nature.
For indeed they do report (διαγγέλλουσι) the injunctions of the father
to his children and the necessities of the children to the father" (*On
Dreams*, i. 22).

From this passage the following deductions

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

seem to be obvious: Firstly, one large department of the Philonic
angelology is utterly strange to Talmudic and Midrashic exegesis. An
angel as an 'incorporeal soul' is more akin to the Aristotelian doctrine
of 'intelligences,' the intermediate beings between the Prime Cause and
existing things. The general level of the Rabbinic conception of the
angel is well characterised by the following passage:

"When Samael saw that no sin was found amongst them \[the Jews\] on the
Day of Atonement, he exclaimed before God, 'O Thou Sovereign of the
Universe, Thou hast one nation on earth resembling the ministering
angels in heaven. Just as the latter are bare-footed, so are the
Israelites bare-footed on the Day of Atonement. Just as the angels
neither eat nor drink, so do the Israelites not eat or drink on the Day
of Atonement. Just as the angels do not skip about, so do the Israelites
stand, unmoved, upon their feet the whole Day of Atonement. Just as
peace reigns in the midst of the angels, so does peace reign in the
midst of Israel on the Day of Atonement. Just as the angels are free
from all sin, so are the Israelites free from sin on the Day of
Atonement.' God hearkens to the advocacy of Israel from the mouth of
their arch-accuser, and He grants His atonement for the altar, for the
sanctuary, and for the priests and for all the people of the
congregation."

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

This quotation is from the *Pirké-de-Rabbi-Eliezer*, a curious Midrashic
work belonging to the 9th century A.D. It seems to summarise all the
best points in the angelic lore of the Jews in the preceding nine
centuries. The *naïveté* of the whole Rabbinic outlook is here very
apparent and is ever so far removed from Philo's 'incorporeal soul.' In
fact Philo's systematic division of angels into higher and lower grades
is foreign to the Rabbinic speculations which are largely without any
system whatsoever. Foreign also is his view of angels as 'souls
descending upon the earth with a view to being bound up in mortal
bodies.' The angel, in Rabbinic thought, is never *inside* any one.

But, in the second place, it is obvious to the student of *mediaeval* as
distinct from the *Talmudic* and *Midrashic* mysticism that there is an
affinity between the Philonic treatment of angels and the treatment of
the subject by such famous Jewish theologians as Sa‘adia b. Joseph
(892-942), Judah Ha-Levi (1085-1140), Solomon Ibn Gabirol (1021-1058),
Abraham b. David (1100-1180), and Moses Maimonides (1135-1204). They,
too, like Philo, were influenced by Greek thought they were either
Aristotelians, Platonists, or Neo-Platonists; so that what amount of
influence came to them *directly* from the works of Philo is a matter
that calls for deep research. To

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the first-named theologian--Sa‘adiah--there is, like to Philo, something
immaterial, something ethereal, unearthly, about the angel. While being
*external* to man, it is, in a sense, *internal* too, Sa‘adiah being of
opinion that they were visions seen during prophetic ecstasy rather than
outward realities. See his philosophical work *Emunot we-De‘ot* ('Faith
and Knowledge'), ii. 8, iv. 6.

That Ibn Gabirol should develop a more mystical line of thought than
this, is not surprising seeing he is dependent, in many of his essential
teachings, upon the *Enneads* of Plotinus. The words of Judah Ha-Levi
are worth quoting here. He says (*Cusari*, iv. 3):

"As for the angels, some are created for the time being, out of the
subtle elements of matter \[as air or fire\]. Some are eternal angels
\[*i.e.* existing from everlasting to everlasting\], and perhaps they
are the spiritual intelligences of which the philosophers speak. We must
neither accept nor reject their words \[*i.e.* the words of these
philosophers\]. It is doubtful whether the angels seen by Isaiah,
Ezekiel, and Daniel were of the class of those created for the time
being or of the class of spiritual essences which are eternal. 'The
glory of God' is a thin subtle body (*goof dâk*) produced by the will of
God, and which forms

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

itself in the prophet's imagination in the way that the Divine will
directs. This is according to the first \[*i.e.* simpler explanation\].
But according to a second \[*i.e.* more complex\] explanation, the
'glory of God' denotes the whole class of angels together with the
spiritual instruments (*kēlīm* *hāruḥniim*), *viz*. the Throne, the
Chariot (*Merkabah*), the Firmament, the Ophanim and the Spheres
(*Gālgālim*), and others besides which belong to the things which are
eternal. All this is implied in the term 'glory of God.'

Further on, in the same paragraph, Judah Ha-Levi brackets together as
having one meaning, the phrases 'Glory of God,' 'Kingdom of God,' and
'Shechinah of God.' Maimonides speaks on the subject thus (*Guide of the
Perplexed*, ii. 6):

"The angels are not corporeal; this is what Aristotle also said; only
there is a difference of name; he calls them 'separate intelligences'
(*sichlim nifrādīm*), whereas we designate them angels. Moreover, when
he says that these 'separate intelligences' are also intermediaries
between the Creator and existing things, and that through their means
the spheres are moved--the motion of the spheres being the prime cause
of all being--this also is written in all books, because you will not
find that God does any deed except by means of an angel. . . . The
movement of

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Balaam's ass was
done by means of an angel . . . even the elements are called angels. . .
. The term angel is applied to a messenger of men, as, *e.g.*, in the
phrase 'and Jacob sent messengers' (*mălākīm*), in *Genesis*, xxxii. 3.
It is applied to a prophet, as, *e.g.*, in the phrase 'and an angel of
the Lord went up from Gilgal to Bochim,' in *Judges*, ii. 1. It is the
term used of the 'separate intelligences' which are seen by the prophets
in the prophetic vision. It is the designation also of the vital powers
as we shall explain."

Maimonides takes a Rabbinic apothegm such as "God does nothing without
previously consulting his heavenly \[or upper\] host," or "God and his
Court of Justice have taken counsel together over every limb in the
human body, and have put each in its rightful place," and is at pains to
show how these statements must not be taken literally to mean that the
Deity asks advice or seeks help, but that what they convey is that the
term 'angel' stands for the powers embodied in all earthly phenomena,
the world-forces which are outflowings of God and represent the aspect
of the Divine activity in the universe. Paradoxically enough, Maimonides
is rationalist and mystic at one and the same time. While striving to
strip the Hebrew scriptures of the supernatural and the miraculous, he
exhibits his strong belief in a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

world impregnated with traces and symptoms of a Divine Life.

But let it not be thought that Philo's Logos and Logoi and his
angelology are nothing but symbols of abstract thinking on the ways in
which the Deity participates in the affairs of men and of the world. It
has been mentioned a little above, that the Rabbis often materialised
the Shechinah and gave strongly definite personality to their 'angels.'
There is one respect in which Philo followed a similar line of
exposition. He too gave personality to his Logos--personality as
understood in Philo's time, and very different from our modern ideas of
personality. Not alone does he speak of the Logos as the being who
guided the patriarchs, as the angel who appeared to Hagar, as the cloud
at the Red Sea, as the Divine form who changed the name of Jacob to
Israel, but he also describes him as "a suppliant to the immortal God on
behalf of the mortal race which is exposed to affliction and misery; and
is also the ambassador sent by the Ruler of all to the subject race"
(*Who is Heir to the Divine Things*, xlii.). He is "an attendant on the
one Supreme Being" (*ibid*. xlviii.). He is a paraclete. "For it was
indispensable that the man who was consecrated to the Father of the
world, should have, as a paraclete, his son, the being most perfect in
virtue, to procure forgiveness

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of sins, and a supply of unlimited blessings" (*Life of Moses*, iii.
14).

The resemblances between these teachings and much of the mysticism of
Paul, as well as of the author of the Fourth Gospel, are unmistakable;
and whether they show borrowing or are explicable as belonging to the
modes of thinking current in that age, is a moot point. But what
strongly concerns our presentation of this subject, is the fact that
this branch of Philonic theology is mirrored in the early Jewish, as
well as in the early Christian, teaching about God. But with this
considerable difference--that whereas some of the cardinal doctrines of
Christianity are embedded in these ideas, their significance for Judaism
was, at no epoch, vital. They belong to the *literature*, not to the
*faith*, of the Jew. They were ever for the few rather than for the
many.

It is to the figure of Metatron that we must turn for the counterpart in
Rabbinic mysticism to the personified Logos of Philo. "Behold I send an
angel before thee, to keep thee in the way and to bring thee into the
place which I have prepared. Beware of him and obey his voice, provoke
him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions; *for my name is in
him*" (*Exodus*, xxiii. 20, 21). This angel in whom God's name exists
is, said the Rabbis, Metatron. And why so? Because, said they, the
numerical value of

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the Hebrew letters composing the name Metatron (314) corresponds with
those comprising the word Shaddai (= Almighty, one of the Divine
appellations).

This is a typical illustration of the Rabbinic mysticism clustering
round (i.) arithmetical numbers, and (ii.) the Divine Name. 'My name is
in him,' *i.e.* the name 'Almighty' is comprehended in the name
'Metatron.' And the Divine Name is not merely a grammatical part of
speech. It is a kind of essence of the Deity Himself. Hence, the essence
of the Deity exists in Metatron. He is God's lieutenant. He represents
the active phase of Deity as manifested in the universe.

The command to 'beware of him and obey his voice,' failing which 'he
will not pardon your transgressions,' forcibly brings out the
intercessory powers of Metatron. In the Midrash *Tanḥuma* (on portion
*Wa’-ethḥanan*) it is graphically related how Moses, when he knew that
he must die, implored all the different parts of creation--the sea, the
dry land, the mountains and the hills--to pray that he might live. But
they all refuse. He finally betakes himself to Metatron and says to him:
"Seek mercy for me that I may not die." But Metatron replies: "O Moses,
my master, why troublest thou thyself thus? I have heard behind the veil
that thy prayer for life will not be heard." Metatron confesses that his
intercession would

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

be vain, but yet--and here is a great point--the Midrashic passage in
question states that immediately after "the anger of the Holy Spirit
grew cool." Metatron did not succeed in securing a prolongation of life
for Moses, but he managed to turn away Divine wrath from him.

The title 'Prince of the Presence' (*Sār* *Hā-Pānim*) as well as 'Prince
of the World' (*Sar Ha-‘Ōlam*) is often applied to Metatron. A striking
passage again depicting Metatron, not alone as pleader for Israel, but
as taking upon himself the sorrow for Israel's sins, is as follows
(*Introduction to Lamentations Rabba*, xxiv.):

"No sooner was the Temple burnt than the Holy One (blessed be He) said:
Now will I withdraw my Shechinah from it and I will go up to my former
habitation, as it is said (*Hosea*, v. 15), 'I will go and return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offence and seek my face.' At that
hour the Holy One (blessed be He) wept, saying: Woe is me! What have I
done! I caused my Shechinah to abide below for the sake of Israel, but
now that Israel has sinned I have returned to my original
dwelling-place. Far be it from me that I should be a derision to the
nations and a mocking to all creatures! Forthwith *Metatron fell upon
his face*, exclaiming: O Sovereign of the Universe, let me weep, but
weep thou not! "

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

The title 'Prince of the Presence' or 'Prince of the World' denotes
Metatron's active interference with the happenings of the universe.
*T.B. Yebamoth*, 16b, has the following extraordinary saying:

"No one but the 'Prince of the World' could have uttered verse 25 of
*Psalm*, xxxvii, 'I have been young and now am old; yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.' Who else could have
said this? Could God have said it? Does old age apply to God? Could
David have said it? Was he advanced in years \[when he composed this
*Psalm*\]? No one else but the 'Prince of the World' could have said
it."

Two important ideas are enshrined here. Firstly, Metatron's existence is
made to date from the Creation. A kind of pre-existence is accorded
him--and the doctrine of pre-existence, or rather pre-existences, is a
ubiquitous element in the old Rabbinic treatment of cosmogony. "Seven
things preceded the Creation of the world, *viz*.: (*a*) the Torah,
(*b*) the Divine Throne, (*c*) the Temple, (*d*) the Name of the
Messiah, (*e*) Paradise, (*f*) Hell, (*g*) Repentance." Whether Metatron
ought to be an eighth, or is to be identified with one among these
seven, is a point for further research.

Secondly, Metatron speaks words of worldly wisdom garnered from an
intimate experience

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of contact with the multitudinous facts and phases of earthly existence.
He knows men as no one else could know them. He resembles, in this
respect, the strongly-personified 'Wisdom' of the Jewish-Alexandrian
literature. Like it, he is given a sort of prime part in the cosmic
process.

The Aramaic commentary (Targum) on *Genesis*, v. 24 ("And Enoch walked
with God; and he was not, for God took him") renders the name 'Enoch' by
'Metatron.' And just as Enoch in the Apocrypha (*Book of Jubilees*, iv.
23; 2 *Enoch*, liii. 2) appears as the heavenly scribe, so Metatron is
often described in the Talmud and Midrash (see *TḄ Ḥaggigah*, 15a).

The idea fundamental to both these branches of literature is probably
the same; *viz*. that Metatron is a link uniting the human with the
Divine, the bridge over which the knowledge of what is passing here
below is brought to the realms above, and over which, in return, the
Divine concern for men and the world passes down to the scenes of earth.
A truly poetic rendering of this Divine concern is given in the Talmud
(*Abodah Zarah*, 3b), where God is described as giving instruction a
certain number of hours every day, to prematurely-deceased children.
"Who instructed them in the period previous to their death?" So the
question runs. And the answer is "Metatron! "

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On this
understanding, Metatron is the helper to the Deity; he, as it were,
takes up the Divine work at points where its omnipotence cannot, if one
may so speak, reach; not even the smallest, meanest child need be
forgotten, forsaken of God, so long as Metatron is its guide and
instructor.

Metatron has been identified with the Zoroastrian Mithra. It certainly
possesses features resembling Philo's Logos. It has also much in common
with the theology of the early Gnostics. In all probability it is the
result of a fusion of all these systems of thought. The same can be
predicted of more than one other branch of Rabbinic angelology.
Noteworthy, however, is the fact that though the Jews could get so far
as to bring themselves to look at Metatron in the light of a heavenly
co-worker with God, a kind of semi-divinity having an access to the
Deity in a measure utterly unique, yet so extraordinarily uncompromising
were their notions of the *Divine Unity* that, as far as the religion of
their daily life was concerned, God alone was God, and Metatron was
ignored. His name figures somewhat in certain departments of the Jewish
liturgy. He plays a *rôle* in mediæval Jewish mysticism. But the
stringent, inelastic emphasis on the idea of safeguarding the Divine
Unity--an emphasis rarely appreciated

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

by the non-Jew--could brook no recognition of Metatron in the sphere of
the Jew's most intimate religious concerns.

One other dominating characteristic of the Jewish-Hellenistic mysticism
is to be found in the functions assigned to the idea of Wisdom. The
grand preliminary to this branch of doctrine is to be found in the Old
Testament (*Proverbs*, viii. 22-31):

The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of
old.  
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
was.  
When there were no depths, I was brought forth;  
When there were no fountains abounding with water.  
Before the mountains were settled, before the hills, was I brought
forth:  
While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest
part of the dust of the world.  
When he prepared the heavens, I was there:  
When he set a compass upon the face of the depth:  
When he established the clouds above:  
When he strengthened the foundations of the deep:  
When he gave to the sea his decree  
That the waters should not pass his commandment:  
When he appointed the foundations of the earth:  
Then I was by him, as one brought up with him:  
And I was daily his delight,  
Rejoicing always before him;  
Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth,  
And my delights were with the sons of men.

Wisdom is the quality through which God acts in the world, and by the
instrumentality of which the Deity is known to

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

man. It is, in the passage just quoted, personified and objectified. It
dwells among the sons of men and finds its special delight in
intercourse with them. It resembles the Divine Pneuma or Spirit of the
Stoic philosophy which, too, is given a prime part in the cosmic
process.

The Rabbis, it is interesting to notice, made much of the phrase 'as one
brought up with him.' The phrase is represented in the original Hebrew
by one word '*Amun*.' By slight alterations in the vowelling they
extracted three meanings from it: *viz*. (i.) pedagogue, (ii.) pupil,
(iii.) workman. Thus (i.) Wisdom (which they identified with the Torah
or Law) was the school-master, tutor in the Divine household, giving
guidance to his Divine Master in his plans for the creation of the
universe. (ii.) Wisdom was the pupil or child of the Divine (according
to Rabbinic teaching a pupil stood to his master in the position of
child to a father), hidden away by reason of its preciousness in the lap
of the Father, until the time when it became a gift to a newly-launched
universe. (iii.) Wisdom was God's workman, or servant, in the work and
administration of the universe.

And yet, in spite of all this obvious and strong personification, Wisdom
is but "a quality belonging to God, one of His attributes by which He
makes Himself known and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

felt in the world of men and in the human heart, one of the elements in
the Divine nature which is most in sympathy with the innate tendency in
man to go on striving ever upward and onward." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

It is, after all, only God's Wisdom, no matter how near an approach to
personality there may be in the various descriptions of the term. It is
a potency wholly in God, and yet at one and the same time wholly out of
God. It is an embodiment, a revealer of one aspect of Divine Spirit. As
has already been remarked, the Jew always vindicated the *Unity of God*
no matter into what dubious fields his theological speculations
otherwise led him.

The apocryphal *Wisdom of Solomon* shows forth similar mystical
elements. "For wisdom is more mobile than any motion; yea, she pervadeth
and penetrateth all things by reason of her pureness" (vii. 24). This is
the Stoic conception of the immanent Pneuma. Again:

For she is a breath of the power of God,  
And a clear effluence of the glory of the Almighty.  
.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .  
For she is an effulgence from everlasting light,  
And an unspotted mirror of the working of God.

(vii. 25, 26.)

This seems to be rather the language of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Platonism. So is
the following pronouncement on the soul's pre-existence:

For I was a witty child  
And had a good spirit,  
Yea, rather, being good, I came into a body undefiled.

(viii. 19, 20.)

Platonic, too, is the notion of earth and matter pressing down the soul:

For the corruptible body presseth down the soul,  
And the earthly tabernacle weigheth down  
The mind that museth upon many things.

(ix. 15.)

Wisdom is man's anchorage in time of trouble. It is the immanent
protector and redeemer of mankind. The whole of chapter x. is given over
to this theme. In xviii. 14-16, Wisdom becomes a personality. It is
identified with the 'Word' which dominates the Prologue of the Fourth
Gospel, and which in very similar senses appears in the Rabbinic
mysticism as 'Dibbur,' 'Mā-amār' or 'Memra.'

For while peaceful silence enwrapped all things,  
And night in her own swiftness was in mid-course,  
Thine all-powerful Word leaped from heaven out of the Royal Throne,  
A stern warrior into the midst of the doomed land,  
Bearing as a sharp sword thine unfeigned commandment;  
And standing, it filled all things with death;  
And while it touched the heaven, it trode upon the earth.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

The Word in this extraordinary pronouncement holds the idea of the
Divine *Energy* (as distinguished from the Divine *Love*) which is
operative in all things and which "links the Transcendent Godhead with
His creative spirit, creature with Creator, and man with man" (Evelyn
Underhill, *The Mystic Way*, p. 223). Truly enough, the passage breathes
what seems an unedifying spirit of revenge and bloodthirstiness, but it
is explicable as an echo of the Old Testament idea of the God of
righteousness who hates wickedness and slays the wicked. Divine Justice
energises in the world, it is embedded in the scheme of the cosmos, it
brooks no evil, it recognises nothing but uprightness and truth. This
idea of an antagonism between an immanent God and sin is, as will be
seen in our next chapter, a feature of the Rabbinic conception of the
Shechinah. In *Exodus Rabba*, xxviii. and xxix., the Divine Voice at the
revelation on Sinai deals out death to the idolaters. Similarly, the
Targum (Aramaic paraphrase on the Old Testament) renders the Hebrew for
"And my soul shall abhor you" (*Leviticus*, xxvi. 30), by "And my
Memra <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) shall remove you afar." The
Memra here is the avenger of the wayward Israelites. The

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jewish-Hellenistic
'Wisdom,' the 'Word' of the Fourth Gospel, the 'Memra' of Targumic
literature, the 'Shechinah' of the Talmud and Midrashim--all
point--though in somewhat different ways and degrees--to the great fact
that the world of matter and of spirit is the scene of the immanent
manifestation of Divine Wisdom, Divine Power, Divine Love, Divine
Justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[75:1](jm07.htm#fr_4) For a fuller treatment of
this point see the author's work, *The Immanence of God in Rabbinical
Literature*, pp. 198-201 (Macmillan & Co., 1912).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[77:1](jm07.htm#fr_5) 'Memra' is the Aramaic for
'word.' For the full theological significance of the 'Memra' see the
author's *Immanence of God in Rabbinical Literature*, pp. 146-173.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Kingdom of Heaven: Fellowship: Shechinah](jm08)
