[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jm08)  [Next](jm10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419967/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

# CHAPTER V

### THE BOOK 'YETSIRAH'

THE date and origin of this extraordinary book--the oldest philosophical
work in the Hebrew language--are shrouded in obscurity. There is as yet
no critical edition of it, although there are several translations of
it, both of the whole and of parts, into Latin, German, and French; and
the numerous commentaries written on it in Arabic and Hebrew (and the
subsequent translations of these into Latin, German, etc.) show, not
only the high position which it held in the estimation of Jewish
thinkers from the 10th century onward, but also the great influence
which it wielded on the general development of Jewish mystical
speculation.

The difficulties of fixing its date and origin are illustrated by the
fact that whereas the voice of mediæval Jewish scholarship assigned its
authorship to the patriarch Abraham (on the grounds of some supposed
internal evidence), individual writers here and there credited the book
to Rabbi ‘Akiba

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (50-130
A.D.)--‘Akiba having been an adept in the mystic lore of numbers; and
the Book *Yetsirah* is pervaded with the mystical significances of
numbers. Others, again, without touching the question of authorship,
give it an origin in the late Talmudic epoch--about the 6th century A.D.
This theory is the likeliest of all, because the 6th century marks the
beginning of what is known in Jewish history as the Gaonic epoch, when
several Rabbinic-mystical works, second in importance only to the Book
*Yetsirah*, were composed.

The latest theory is that of Reitzenstein (*Poimandres*, pp. 14, 56,
261, 291) who, arguing from the resemblances between the doctrines of
letters and numbers in this book and the miraculous cosmic powers
wielded by numbers and letters in the thaumaturgical books current among
the Gnostics of the 2nd century B.C., concludes that it is a Hebrew
production of the 2nd century B.C. The fatal objection to Reitzenstein's
theory, however, seems to lie in the fact that his argument holds good
of only one aspect of the work, *viz*. the philological part. The other
part--the philosophical--although vitally connected with the
philological and deduced from it--contains elements of thought and modes
of expression which are many centuries later than the pre-Christian
Gnosticism. But Reitzenstein's theory cuts

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

very deeply and cannot be disposed of in a few words.

The clue to the particular nature of the Book *Yetsirah* lies in its two
constituent elements which we have a moment ago contrasted. It is a
mystical philosophy drawn from the sounds, shapes, relative positions,
and numerical values of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The nucleus
of much of this teaching is to be found in the Talmud, but the Rabbis
were certainly not the originators of it. Just as Philo excelled in the
art of clothing Grecian philosophy in a Hebraic dress, so did the Rabbis
show a considerable capacity for 'naturalising' many an alien product.
In the case of the mysticism under consideration they drew from older
available sources--Egyptian, Babylonian, Mandæan--and adapted the idea
to the framework of their own essential lore.

Thus in *T.B. Berachoth*, 55a, there occurs the remark, "Bezaleel \[the
architect of the Tabernacle in the desert\] knew how to join together
(*lě-tsa-rěf*) the letters by means of which the heavens and earth were
created." This is because he was "filled with the spirit of God, with
wisdom and understanding" (*Exodus*, xxxi. 3), and this wisdom is the
same as that of *Proverbs*, iii. 19: "The Lord by wisdom founded the
earth." This belief in the magic power of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the letters of the alphabet can be traced to Zoroastrianism and
ultimately to Chaldea--as Lenormant has shown in his *Chaldean Magic*.
It was by means of the combination of letters comprising the Holy Name
of God that the disciples of Judah the Prince (c. 135-220 A.D.), who
were keen on cosmogony, used to create a three-year-old calf on the eve
of every Sabbath and used to eat it on the Sabbath. So says a passage in
*T.B. Sanhedrin*, 65b. There is a strong flavour of old Semitic
witchcraft here. It is an *exotic* notion introduced for the purpose of
intensifying an essentially Jewish belief--the belief in the
wonder-working powers bestowed by the Sabbath on those who scrupulously
uphold it. The practice of magic and witchcraft was sternly repro-bated
by the Old Testament, and the Rabbis were equally severe in its
condemnation.

One quotation from the book will suffice to give us a glimpse into the
supernatural importance of the forms, sounds, and relative positions of
the letters in the Hebrew alphabet. It says: "Twenty-two letters: He
drew them, hewed them, combined them, weighed them, interchanged them,
and through them produced the whole creation and everything that is
destined to come into being" (ii. 2). Each of the actions here
mentioned, *viz*. 'drawing,' 'hewing,' 'combining,' 'weighing,'
'interchanging,' is described

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

with a fulness which is as bizarre as it is bewildering; and although
the interest is mainly a philological one, it is an indispensable part
of the book's philosophy.

As it would be impossible to give the reader any tangible notion of
these involved stretches of philological reasoning, without introducing
a considerable amount of Hebrew words and Hebrew grammatical
terminology, the subject can only be dealt with fragmentarily. The
letters of the Hebrew alphabet are pressed into the service of a
doctrine which is an element of ancient Semitic theosophy, and which
passed thence into Greek philosophy. It is the doctrine of the three
primordial substances--water, fire, and air. These three substances
underlie all creation, and are the fountain-head of all existence. The
three Hebrew letters playing the principal part in connection with these
three primal substances are Aleph (א), Mem (מ), and Shin (ש). Why just
these letters? For two reasons.

Firstly, these three letters represent three cardinal divisions into
which the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet naturally fall. The
divisions are: (*a*) mutes unaccompanied by any sound in producing them
(as can be seen by any one who tries the pronunciation of the sound of
Mem--it is merely a compression of the lips); (*b*) sibilants, best
represented by Shin; (*c*) aspirates, the class

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

to which Aleph belongs--this class being, in the naïve imagination of
these theosophists, intermediate to the mutes and the sibilants and, as
it were, holding the balance between them. Hence these three letters are
called 'mothers' (*ěm* = mother) because all the other letters are, as
it were, born from them. The mediæval Kabbalah, as will be mentioned
later on, likewise speaks of 'father' and 'mother' in somewhat similar
connections.

Secondly, these three representative 'parent' letters--the mute, the
sibilant, the aspirate--symbolise the three basic elements of all
existing things, the three primordial substances. Thus water (the first
letter of which word in Hebrew is Mem) is symbolised by the mute Mem.
Why? Because the chief product of water is fish; and fish are the
representatives of the mute creation. Fire (in Hebrew *esh*, most
prominent in pronunciation is *sh*) is symbolised by the sibilant Shin.
Why? Because the characteristic of fire is its hissing sound; and the
equivalent in Hebrew for 'sibilant' is a word which means 'hissing.' Air
(the first letter of which word in Hebrew is Aleph) is symbolised by the
aspirate Aleph, which has an airy, vacant pronunciation. Just as Aleph
holds the balance between the mute letters and the sibilants, so air is,
in the natural world, intermediate to the water which always tends in a
downward direction,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and fire which by its nature always ascends. Of course it needs no hard
reasoning here to see how an alien system of very early thought has been
mechanically and arbitrarily foisted on to the Hebrew alphabet.

But, as was before mentioned, all the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew
alphabet play a dominant *rôle* in the book's philosophy. Thus we read
(ii. 2):

"By means of the twenty-two letters, by giving them a form and a shape,
by mixing them and combining them in different ways, God made the soul
of all that which has been created and of all that which will be. It is
upon these same letters that the Holy One (blessed be He) has founded B
is high and holy Name."

This remark probably indicates that the existence of these letters and
the impress which they leave in every particle of creation are the
unfailing source of our knowledge of that supreme Intelligence which,
while being immanent in the universe, is its guide and controller and
holds all the different parts together. In short, the harmony of the
cosmos is due to the Divine wisdom underlying the manipulations of the
twenty-two letters.

These twenty-two letters are split up into three divisions. These are:
(i.) The three which have just been considered, the three 'mothers' or
'parent' letters (Aleph, Mem, Shin) which symbolise the elements, air,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

fire, and water, which together make up the cosmos. The year (or time),
which is part of the cosmos, also consists of three parts--three
seasons, *viz*. summer, which corresponds to the element fire; winter,
which corresponds to the element water; spring and autumn, which form a
season intermediate to the other two, correspond to. the element air,
which also is intermediate to the fire and the water. Again, the human
body is likewise a trinity, composed of head, chest, and stomach, and
likewise corresponds to the three elements. And the world is a trinity
too. Fire is the substance of the heavens, water (condensed) is the
basis of earth, air is the dividing medium necessary for preserving the
peace between the two.

(ii.) The seven double letters typify the 'contraries' in the cosmos,
the forces which serve two mutually opposed ends. Thus, there are seven
planets which exercise at times a good and at times a bad influence upon
men and things. There are seven days in the week; but there are also
seven nights. And so on. It is all arbitrary and highly dubious. The
seven 'double' letters are Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Caph, Pěh, Resh, Tau.
They are 'double' because they express two different sounds according as
they possess *dagesh* or not. The letter Resh is not usually classed
among these by Hebrew grammarians. By deducting these seven and the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

three 'parent' letters, we get the remaining twelve 'simple' letters.

(iii.) The twelve 'simple' letters are emblematic of the twelve signs of
the zodiac, the twelve months of the year, the twelve organs in the
human body which perform their work independently of the outside world
and are subject to the twelve signs of the zodiac. A strong Gnostic
colouring pervades the whole.

Thus the cosmos--embraced ideally in the twenty-two letters--is an
expression of the Divine Intelligence. Man, the world, time--these three
constitute the cosmos, and out-side them there is but one great
existence, the Infinite.

This brings us to two doctrines of Jewish mysticism which appear for the
first time in the Book *Yetsirah*, and which were developed subsequently
on diverse lines. These are: (*a*) the doctrine of emanation; (*b*) the
Ten Sefirot.

In the general literature of mysticism, the doctrine (or rather
doctrines) of emanation is usually associated for the first time with
the great name of Plotinus (born at Lycopolis, in Egypt, about 205
A.D.). This remark raises a twofold reflection which is of the highest
interest. Firstly, it shows how one particularly influential aspect of
mysticism, *viz*. emanation, is a feature common to the theologies of
both the early Church and the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

early Synagogue--sundered as these two were from one another by so many
other irreconcilable points of disagreement. Secondly, it shows how both
Jewish and Christian mysticism are alike indebted to one and the same
set of sources, *viz*. Gnosticism and its development--the Alexandrian
Neoplatonism. The latter is the pith and core of the emanation doctrines
of Plotinus. It is equally the root of the emanation doctrines of the
Book *Yetsirah*, the *Zohar*, and, in fact, all branches of the mediæval
Kabbalah.

Emanation implies that all existing things are successive outflowings or
outgoings of God. God contains within Himself all. He is perfect,
incomprehensible, indivisible, de-pendent on nothing, in need of
nothing. Everything in the cosmos, all finite creatures animate and
inanimate, flow out, radiate, in a successive series, from God, the
Perfect One. The *motif* of this teaching is that of explaining the
difficulties involved in the inevitable assumption of all religion,
*viz*. that there is a bond of relationship between God and His
creation. How can there be any connecting link between a Being who is
self-sufficient, unchangeable, infinite, perfect, and matter which is
finite, changeable, imperfect, etc.? This is the difficulty. All
doctrines of emanation answer it in more or less the same way, by saying
that God is not really external to any one or anything.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Everything is
originally comprehended in Him, "with no contrasts of here or there, no
oppositions of this and that, no separation into change and variation"
(Rufus Jones, *Studies in Mystical Religion*, p. 73). On this
understanding there is no necessity for hunting after 'the missing link'
between the Divine and the human. The multiplicity that one beholds in
the cosmos, the whole panorama of thought, action, goodness, badness,
the soul, the mind--all things that go to make up the pageant of man's
life in the universe, are emanations, radiations from the one Unity,
manifestations of the God from whom all things flow and to whom they
must all finally return because they are ultimately one with the One,
just as the flame is one with the candle from which it issues.

In the Book *Yetsirah*, the teaching about emanation is intertwined with
the doctrine of the Ten Sefirot. The object of this inter-twining is
that of giving a more decidedly *Jewish* colouring to the Neoplatonic
conceptions of emanations. The Jewish mystics, however far they may have
wandered into other fields for their views about God, always felt that
the *Hebrew Bible and God as preached by the Hebrew Bible* must be the
core of their message. There, thought they, lies the final Truth. Final
Truth, taught they, is but a commentary on the Hebrew Bible.

Where did the idea of the Sefirot originate?

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In all probability
it originated with the Rabbis of the Talmud in the first three centuries
of the Christian era. Thus, a passage in *T.B. Ḥaggigah*, 12a, speaks of
the "Ten agencies through which God created the world, *viz*. wisdom,
insight, cognition, strength, power, inexorableness, justice, right,
love, mercy."

There are, as will be shown more fully in a later chapter, some obvious
resemblances between these ten creative potentialities of the Talmud,
and the Ten Sefirot of our Book and of the mediæval Kabbalah (though the
resemblances between those of the Talmud and of the Kabbalah are
considerably stronger than the resemblances between those of the Talmud
and our Book *Yetsirah*). To these facts must be added also the
personification of Wisdom as well as of Torah by the early Rabbis, and
their doctrine about the creation of the world by two *Middot*
(Attributes), *viz*. the Attribute of Mercy and the Attribute of
Justice.

Let us turn to the description of the Ten Sefirot as given by the Book
*Yetsirah* (i. 9):

"There are Ten Sefirot--ten, not nine; ten, not eleven. Act in order to
understand them in thy wisdom and thy intelligence; so that thy
investigations exercise themselves continually upon them; also thy
speculations, thy knowledge, thy thought, thy imagination; make things
to rest upon their principle

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and re-establish the Creator upon his foundation."

Again (i. 8):

"The Ten Sefirot are like the fingers of the hand, ten in number, five
corresponding to five. But in the middle of them is the knot of the
Unity."

There is a tantalising vagueness about these descriptions, and, as
modern scholars always hasten to point out, the Sefirot of the Book
*Yetsirah* differ from those of the *Zohar* and the mediæval Kabbalah
generally in one cardinal respect, *viz*. that whereas in the two latter
systems the Sefirot have the fullest possible mystical connotation, in
the *Yetsirah* Book they cluster mainly round the mysticism of numbers.
Numbers and letters (of the Hebrew alphabet, as we have seen) give the
main impetus to the peculiar teaching. Divine action in its relation to
the universe is conceived in the form of abstract numbers. But yet the
following quotation from the book shows a clear foreshadowing of a real
mystical system such as is seen in the *Zohar*.

"The first of the Sefirot, *one*, is the spirit (*Ruaḥ*) of the living
God (blessed be His Name, blessed be the Name of Him who inhabits
eternity!). The spirit, the voice, and the word, these are the Holy
Spirit."

The second of the Sefirot, *two*, is the air which comes from the
spirit. On it are hewn

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and engraven the twenty-two letters which form altogether but one
breath.

The third of the Sefirot, *three*, is the water which comes from the air
\[*i.e.* condensed vapour\]. It is in the water that He has dug the
darknesses and the chaos, that He has formed the earth and the clay,
which was spread out afterwards in the form of a carpet, hewn out like a
wall and covered as though by a roof.

The fourth of the Sefirot, *four*, is the fire which comes from the
water, and with which He has made the throne of His glory, the heavenly
Ophanim (Wheels), the Seraphim, and the ministering angels. With the
three together He has built his dwelling, as it is written, "He maketh
the winds his messengers, his ministers a flaming fire" (*Psalm*, civ.
4).

The remaining six Sefirot are the six dimensions of space--the four
cardinal points of the compass, in addition to height and depth.

The difficulties here are many, and some are insuperable. Are the
Sefirot really a piece of Jewish mysticism (as was suggested before) or
are they nothing more than echoes of the Gnostic systems of
number-manipulations?

What is the relation between the cosmic powers of the twenty-two letters
of the Hebrew alphabet and the cosmic powers of the Sefirot?

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

What bearing has the doctrine of the three primal elements upon the
first four Sefirot which seem to contain very much the same thought?

In the answer to the first of these queries lies the clue to the nature
of the book. The Book *Yetsirah* is syncretic, and while the emphasised
significance of the number 'ten,' as well as the importance of the idea
of the world as the scene of Divine Agencies (or *Middot*), is in its
native origin Jewish, the teaching about the creative powers of letters
and numbers is only Jewish by adoption, and whether the word 'Sefirot'
is originally Jewish or alien is a moot point; the notion of the three
primal substances is clearly an exotic foisted on to the book to give it
the appearance of the philosophic completeness which the age demanded.
Viewing the book, therefore, as a mosaic rather than a concrete and
continuous whole, it is futile to ask questions about the consistency of
its parts. What, however, we can do, and ought to do, is to try to see
how the author pieced his mosaic together so as to give to his readers
what, in his opinion, was a presentation of the doctrine of emanation as
interpreted by the spirit of Judaism.

It will be noticed that the three primal substances, air, fire, water,
are identical with the second, third, and fourth of the Sefirot, but
whereas each of these is produced from

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the preceding one, the three primal substances seem to be all
independent of one another as regards production. And again, the second,
third, and fourth of the Sefirot all emanate originally from the first,
*viz*. the *Ruaḥ*--the Spirit of the living God. No such notion attaches
to the three primal substances. The object in all this seems to be that
of giving an essentially Jewish colouring to cosmogony. Everything was
brought forth by the Spirit of God. As the Psalmist says: "By the word
of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth" (xxxiii. 6). It is a counterblast to the
Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of matter which to the Jewish
mediæval mind was rank blasphemy. To say that everything emanates
originally from the Spirit of God is tantamount to the assertion that
the prototypes of matter are all of them aspects or modifications of the
Divine Spirit. This, again, is to put a more Jewish complexion on the
doctrine of emanation, which, when carried out to its logical conclusion
in the philosophy of Neoplatonism, leads to pantheism--another pitfall
which our author apparently wanted to avoid.

That such a construction is a tenable one is seen from the book's
remark, "The last of the Sefirot unites itself to its first just like a
flame is joined to the candle, for God is one and there is no second"
(i. 5). The

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

offence of recognising 'two Divine powers' (*shêté-rě-shooyôt*) was
always a terrible one to the Jewish mind. Again, all the numbers from
two to ten are derived from the unit, one. Even so does all the
multiplicity and variety of forms, types, etc., in the cosmos find its
highest consummation, its ultimate home and goal, in the Unity, *viz*.
God. Here, again, we see how an alien system of number-mysticism is
drafted into the fold of an essentially Jewish type of mysticism, *viz*.
that clustering round the cardinal notion of the Unity of God. This
theme, after being elaborated by the Talmudic Rabbis of the opening
centuries of Christianity, was again taken up by the mediæval Jewish
theologians, and reached the zenith of its mystical development in the
pages of the *Zohar* and the mediæval Kabbalah generally.

But what is the relation between the cosmic powers of the twenty-two
letters of the Hebrew alphabet and the cosmic parts played by the Ten
Sefirot? The answer would seem to lie in the peculiar description which
the book itself, in one place, gives to the Sefirot. The latter are, it
says, 'Ten Sefirot without anything' (*bêlēē* *mā*). In other words
'abstracts.' They are the categories of the universe, the forms or
moulds into which all created things were originally cast. They are
*form*, as distinguished from matter. Whereas the Sefirot are
responsible

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

for the first production of form, so the twenty-two letters are the
prime cause of matter. All existence and development are due to the
creative powers of the letters, but they are inconceivable apart from
the *form* with which the Sefirot has invested them.

The Book *Yetsirah* lands us into the heart of Jewish mysticism and
prepares the way for the ramified literature of the *Zohar*. It does
this by teaching that God and the world are a unity rather than a
dualism. The Sefirot and the twenty-two letters of the alphabet, or, in
other words, the forms and essences which make up the visible universe,
are all an unfolding of the Divine, all emanations from the Spirit. God
is at one and the same time both the matter and form of the universe.
But He is something more. He is not identical with the universe. He is
greater than it, transcends it. Nothing exists or can exist outside Him.
Though immanent, He is also and at the same time transcendent. This
insistence upon the Divine transcendence runs like a golden thread
throughout all branches of Jewish mysticism, thus enabling it, both as a
system of thought and as a phase of practical religion, to do justice at
once to the 'legal' and spiritual elements which are inextricably
intertwined in Judaism.

But if the Book *Yetsirah* gave the impulse to the great books of
mediæval Jewish

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

mysticism, it was eclipsed by them in one great particular. The naïve
conception of the mysterious powers of letters and numbers was
superseded by the introduction of theological and moral ideas. The
object of discussion became not so much the relationship between the
Creator and His cosmos as the relationship between God and that inner
surging world of thought and emotion which we term man. How man can
ascend to God whilst bound in the trammels of the flesh or after having
shuffled off this 'muddy vesture of decay,' how God communicates Himself
to man, imparting to him the knowledge which has its fountain-head in
His own inexhaustible Being and the love which is the seal of His
abiding goodness and nearness,--these themes form, roughly speaking, the
staple of the *Zohar* mysticism which presents itself for brief
consideration in the coming pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Some General Features of the 'Zohar' Mysticism](jm10.md)
