[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jm09)  [Next](jm11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419967/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### SOME GENERAL FEATURES OF THE 'ZOHAR' MYSTICISM

THE *Zohar* (lit. = 'Shining' or 'Brightness' from the word in *Daniel*,
xii. 3--"And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament") is, *par excellence*, the textbook of Jewish mediæval
mysticism. Its language is partly Aramaic and partly Hebrew. While
purporting to be but a commentary on the Pentateuch, it is, in reality,
quite an independent compendium of Kabbalistic theosophy. Its style, its
subject-matter, its spirit lead the reader into realms which bear hardly
any conceivable resemblance to the manner and substance of the
Pentateuch.

The *Zohar* compares well with the Talmud in one respect. They are both
painfully unsystematic in the handling of their subject-matter. Both
present us with a bizarre medley of ideas and facts, an ill-assorted
conglomeration of history and fable, truth and fiction, serious comment
which has a value for all time and observations which

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the march of time asks us to dismiss as outworn and valueless. Both
works, too, cover a long stretch of time.

The *Zohar* is a pseudepigraphic work. It is impossible, in the present
book, to give the reader even the faintest outlines of the literature
written by Jews of many countries and many centuries, on the vexed
question of the authorship of the *Zohar*. It pretends to be the record
of a direct Divine revelation to Rabbi Simeon ben Yoḥai (born in Galilee
2nd century A.D.); and it is mainly written in the form of a series of
utterances from the mouth of Simeon to his disciples, who believed him
to be conveying to them the truths which he had received first-hand from
Heaven. Criticism has long ago demonstrated the utter untenability of
this view. The *Zohar* made its first appearance in Spain in the 13th
century, and its contents show incontestably that not alone must the
work, as a whole, be considerably later than the 2nd century (although
many an idea and doctrine certainly does go as far back as that, and
further too), but that it could not possibly be the production of a
single author or a single period of history. It is, like the *Yetsirah*
book, a syncretism. Many civilisations, many faiths, and many
philosophies went to the making of it. All these were, in some
instances, taken in their original state and

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

incorporated in the work, while, in other instances, they found room in
it only after they had passed through the crucible of the Jewish mind
and had thus become 'judaised' in the process. But that a goodly
proportion of it is the development of many a doctrine embodied in the
Talmud and Midrashim, there cannot be the least doubt. To ask whether
this or that doctrine of Talmudic literature is indigenous to the Talmud
or has its source elsewhere, is, of course, quite another matter. But
that it reached the *Zohar* from the Talmud and Midrashim and their
progeny, *directly*, is certain.

Where the foreign elements are drawn from is a fruitful subject of
speculation amongst scholars. There is general admission, however, that
Neoplatonism and Gnosticism are responsible for much.

And to this must be added a newer theory, which finds echoes of Persian
Sūfism in the *Zohar*. The sūfi mystics were very numerous in Persia
from the 8th century onwards, and it is maintained that the Jews of
Persia, influenced by Sūfism, transmitted to the Jews of Spain (who were
very numerous, very influential, and very distinguished in learning from
the 10th to the 15th century) many mystical interpretations of esoteric
tenets which in various shapes found an entrance into the *Zohar*.

Be this as it may, we must be on our guard

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

against following the mistaken opinion of a certain set of Jewish
theologians who would have us regard the whole of the mediæval Kabbalah
(of which the *Zohar* is a conspicuous and representative part) as a
sudden and strange importation from without. It is really a continuation
of the old stream of Talmudic and Midrashic thought with the admixture
of extraneous elements picked up, as was inevitable, by the stream's
course through many lands--elements the commingling of which must have,
in many ways, transformed the original colour and nature of the stream.

The *Zohar*, as was said above, purports to be but a commentary on the
Pentateuch. It is self-explanatory on this point. The following is a.
direct quotation:

"Woe unto the man," says Simeon ben Yoḥai," who sees in the Torah nought
but simple narratives and ordinary words. For if, in truth, it contained
only that, we should have been able, even to-day, also to compose a
Torah which would be, in very much another way, worthy of regard. In
order to find only simple statements we should only have to betake
ourselves to the ordinary legislators, among whom we could find valuable
words in even greater quantity. It would suffice us to imitate them and
to make a Law after their words and example. But it is not thus. Every
word of the Torah contains

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

an elevated sense and a sublime mystery."

Here is a direct intimation of the *Zohar's* emphasis upon the existence
of higher truths in the Bible. It continues:

"The narratives (or words) of the Law are the garment of the Law. Woe
unto him who takes this garment for the Law itself! It is in this sense
that David spake, saying, 'Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law' (*Psalm*, cxix. 18). David wished to
speak of that which is hidden beneath the garment of the Law. There are
fools who, seeing a man covered with a beautiful garment, look no
further than that; and yet that which gives a worth to the garment is
his body, and what is even more precious than that, his soul. The Law,
too, has its body. There are precepts which one might call the body of
the Law. The ordinary narratives which are intermingled are the garments
with which the body is covered. Simpletons have regard only to the
garments or narratives of the Law. . . . The better instructed pay no
regard to the garment, but to the body which it encloses. Finally, the
wise, the servants of the supreme King, they who inhabit the heights of
Sinai, are concerned only with the soul which is the foundation of all
else, which is the *real* Law. And in the time to come they will be
prepared to gaze at the soul of

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

that soul. which breathes through the Law."

The mystical sense of the Law, then, is its highest and truest sense.
What edifice of thought does the *Zohar* erect on this foundation? It
posits the cardinal principle that there is an esoteric as well as an
exoteric reality in the phenomena of the world. The world is a series of
emanations from the Divine. To quote the original:

"He is the beginning as well as the end of all stages (*dargin*); upon
Him are stamped (*etrashim*) all the stages. But He can only be called
*One*, in order to show that although He possesses many forms, He is
nothing other than ONE" (i. fol. 21).

Or, to give a fuller and more striking version of the same thought:

"Before the Holy One (blessed be He) created this world, He went on
creating worlds and destroying them. Whatsoever exists in this world,
everything that has been in existence throughout all generations, *was
in existence in His presence* (*kāmé*) in all their manifold forms"
(iii. fol. 61).

In other words, the universe is the outward expression of the inner
Divine thought. Everything germinated from the eternal archetypal Divine
idea. Or as it is put in another way:

"He made this world of below to correspond with the world of above.
Everything

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

which is above has its pattern here below and *all constitutes a unity*"
(ii. fol. 20).

What the *Zohar* thus aims at teaching us is, that man, having the
privilege to behold everywhere the Divine image--the world being an
embodiment of God--can, if he will, make his way to the Invisible Author
of all; can have union with the Unseen. "Whatsoever belongs to the
domain \[literally 'side,' *sitrā*\] of the Spirit, thrusts itself
forward and is visible" (ii. fol. 20). The universe is Divine Spirit
materialised, and it is given to man to have contact with it. The Rabbis
of the Talmud and Midrashim had an idea of a sort of image of God which
is immanent in the universe. Thus, a passage in the *Tanḥuma* (on
*Genesis*, xxiii.) says: "If a mortal king engraves his image upon a
tablet, the tablet is greater than the image. But God is great, and yet
His image is greater than the whole world."

But it is only fair to add--and it bears out the remark already made
about the curious mixture of ingredients which make up the *Zohar*--that
in conjunction with this high note of thought there is another note
which strikes the modern reader as being of a pitifully inferior nature.
The juxtaposition is deplorable. We are presented with an almost
unintelligible mass of mediæval astrology. Thus: "In the firmament above
which covers all things, signs are engraven in which

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

are fixed hidden things and secrets. These marks are those of the
constellations and the planets" (ii. fol. 74). Here is a tiny quotation
representative of a huge quantity of the *Zohar's* material. "He who has
to set out on a journey in the morning must rise at the break of day and
must look towards the east. He will behold letters moving in the
heavens, one ascending and another descending. These brilliant forms are
those of the letters with which God created the heaven and the earth.
They form His mysterious and holy Name" (*Ibid*. 76). This looks very
much like a mixture of Pythagorean theories of letters with mediæval
astrological notions. "When the spirits and the souls come out of Eden
\[the *Zohar*, like all the Kabbalah, abundantly teaches the
pre-existence of souls\] they all possess a certain appearance which,
later on, is reflected in the face" (*Ibid*. 73). From this, all sorts
of the strangest facts of physiognomy are seriously deduced.

In a work which professes to draw its substance from the secret and
esoteric aspect of the Old Testament, and which, as we have said, makes
the seen world so much akin to the unseen, it is only to be expected
that angelology should fill an important place. The impetus to much of
it is directly given by a saying of the Talmud, to the effect that "the
righteous are greater than the ministering

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

angels" (*T.B. Sanhedrin*, 93a). This idea is just of a piece with the
general drift of the *Zohar*. For, by its theories of emanation, and by
its insistence on the idea of the macrocosm or of the world as being an
evolution of the image of God and of man as a small copy of the world, a
microcosm, it cannot but make man as the centre, the crown and
consummation of all creation. Hence man must rank above the angels.

It is important to observe the framework of thought into which the
*Zohar* fits its ideas on the relative positions of angels and men in
the microcosm. The world as a manifestation of the Divine, as the
materialised expression of God's immanent activity, is really made up of
four component parts (or 'worlds,' as the Kabbalah always styles them).
These are: (*a*) the world of Azilut or emanation; (*b*) the world of
Beriah, *i.e.* creative ideas; (*c*) the world of *Yetsirah* or creative
formations; (*d*) the world of ‘Asiyah or creative matter.

The first term, Azilut, is based on the Hebrew verb *azal* in *Numbers*,
xi. 17 ("And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee and will put
it upon them"). The second, third, and fourth terms are derived from the
three Hebrew verbs in *Isaiah*, xliii. 7, 'I have created,' 'I have
formed,' 'I have made.' The world of Azilut constitutes the domain of
the Ten Sefirot--which will be considered

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

in our next chapter. The world of Beriah holds the Divine throne which
emanates from the light of the Sefirot, also the souls of the pious. The
world of *Yetsirah* is the scene of the 'divine halls' (*hekalot*)--the
seven heavenly halls guarded by angels, into which the ecstatic seekers
for the Merkabah (Chariot) strive to gain admission. The angels have
their abode there, presided over by Metatron; and there also are the
souls of ordinary men (as distinguished from the pious). In the world of
‘Asiyah are the lower order of angels--the Ophanim, whose business it is
to combat evil and to receive the prayers of men. Thus, seeing that the
hierarchy of angels only begins with the 'third world,' whereas the
souls of the pious belong to the 'second world,' the position of man in
the Divine evolution is superior to that of the angel.

The idea of the active part thus played by angels in the
emanation-worlds of Jewish mediæval mysticism is primarily derived from
such Old Testament verses as "he maketh his angels winds \[A.V.
spirits\]; his ministers a flaming fire" (*Psalm*, civ. 4), which has
already been quoted in a similar connection before. But suppose we
attempt to rationalise the old-world allegorical language, what
constructions would we place upon these angelic activities in the scheme
of man and the universe? Much light is shed

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

on the subject by the fact of the decisive names which are accorded to
the angels--names which denote missions. Thus Raḥmiel is the angel of
mercy, Tahariel is the angel of purity, Pedāel is the angel of
deliverance, Tsadkiel is the angel of justice, Raziel is the angel who
guards the Divine secrets. Metatron is the master of all these, and it
has been shown in a previous chapter how closely Metatron is allied to
the Deity, playing in the world a *rôle* akin to that of the Deity. The
inference from all these statements is that every particle of the
natural world, every shred of man's organism, is saturated with some
manifestation or other of the Divine Will--the Divine Will which is
goodness and truth and love and justice made manifest and real. It is
this impregnable Force underlying all phenomena that preserves the world
in its course and that makes its manifold and variegated parts work in
harmonious relations.

But what about the existence of sin and evil? How can their existence be
justified in a world such as the Zoharic mysticism implies--a world
which is a series of emanations from the Divine, a world wherein God is
eternally and intimately present in its every part, because the whole is
but a manifestation of Himself? If all things, *i.e.* everything good
and everything evil, are similarly and equally phases of the same

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine Life, then
the distinction between good and evil becomes meaningless. But to affirm
this, is to deny the first principles of both religion and morality. It
is the quagmire of pantheism. Does the *Zohar* lead to any pantheistic
conclusion? If not, how does it evade the difficulty?

The reply to these queries is that the *Zohar* steers clear of the
dangers of pantheism, and that it solves the problem of evil in a way
which, while appearing highly unsatisfactory to the modern scientific
Western mind, is quite in keeping with the intellectual level of the
times in which its writers lived. Evil, sin, and their personifications,
the demons, are termed *kélīfoth*, *i.e.* the coverings, wrappings,
externals of all existing things. Just as the covering (or husk) of
anything is not the real thing and far inferior to it, so sin and evil
are, as it were, the gross, inferior, imperfect aspects of creation. And
as the world is an emanation of the Divine, it follows that whatsoever
in the world is evil, and not of the Divine, cannot be real. Hence evil
is that which has no being; it is a sort of illusion; it is a state of
absence, negation; it is a thing which merely appears to be but is not.
It is symbolised, according to the *Zohar*, by the condition of the
primæval chaos as described in *Genesis*, i. 2, *viz*. 'without form,'
'void,' 'darkness,' *i.e.* the absence of all

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

visible form, order, life. By means of the creation of the world (which
is an emanation of the Divine) the Infinite became, as it were,
'contracted' (*Tsimtsum*) and took on certain attributes of the finite.
To this finite belongs the 'darkness' of the first chaos or, in other
words, evil. Hence the finite stands at the uttermost extremity of the
Divine emanation, *i.e.* the world. And as it is man's duty to strive
after union with the Infinite, his pursuit of the finite leads him to
that which lies at the extremity of the Divine nature rather than that
which lies at the heart of it. This constitutes evil. It is a state of
absence, a negation, because man who, like the universe, is but one of
the manifestations of the Divine, can only attain the real when he seeks
the Real who is his fount, his home.

It is of interest--and vital to an understanding of all Kabbalistic
literature--to note some of the favourite technical terms employed, in
addition to those already here mentioned in passing. A ubiquitous term
is *En-Sof*, applied to the Deity. These words mean literally 'No End.'
The Deity is boundless, endless. The *Zohar* was not the first mystical
work to use the words. The underlying idea was probably supplied by the
idea underlying the description of the Godhead in the philosophy of Ibn
Gabirol, the Spanish-Hebrew poet and mystic philosopher

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

of the eleventh century. He describes the Deity as the '*shě-ěn* *to
tiklah*,' *i.e.* the one who has no bounds or ends. Ibn Gabirol was a
Neoplatonist, and much of his philosophy shows the influence upon him of
Plotinus. But he forsakes his master and follows strictly in the line of
Jewish tradition in one respect, *viz*. that in order, as he thought, to
safeguard the Jewish doctrine of monotheism, the Deity must be freed
from the ascription to Him of all attributes. Hence God can only be
properly described by a title which emphasises the negation of all
attributes. The *En-Sof* of the *Zohar* and its predecessors is probably
an echo of this ultra-negative characterisation of the Deity. Let us
quote the *Zohar*:

"Before having created any shape in the world, before having produced
any form, He was alone, without form, resembling nothing. Who could
comprehend Him as He then was, before creation, since He had no form? It
is forbidden to picture Him by any form or under any shape whatsoever,
not even by His holy name, nor by a letter \[of the alphabet\] nor by a
point \[the Yod, which is the smallest letter in the Hebrew alphabet, is
usually designated as a point\]. Such is the sense of the words, 'For ye
saw no manner of similitude on the day when the Lord spake unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the fire' (*Deut*. iv. 15). This means

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

that you saw no other thing which you might possibly represent by a form
or shape. But after He had created the form of the Heavenly Man (*Adam
‘Ilā-ā*) He used him as a chariot (Merkābāh) on which to descend. He
wished to be called by the form which consists of the holy name of
Jahveh. He wished to make Himself known by His attributes, by each
attribute separately. So He let Himself be styled as the God of pardon,
the God of justice, the God omnipotent, the God of hosts and He who is
(Jahveh). His object was to make thus intelligible what are His
qualities and how His justice and His compassion extend over the world
as well as over the works of men. For, had He not shed His brightness
over all His creatures, how would we get to know Him? How would it be
true to say that the world is filled with His glory? Woe unto the man
who would dare to compare Him to even one of His own attributes! Yet
still less ought He to be likened unto the man who came from the earth
and who is destined for death! It is necessary to conceive of Him as
above all creatures and all attributes. And then when these things have
been removed, there is left neither attribute, nor shape, nor form" (ii.
fol. 42).

From this characteristic extract, the following deductions are possible:

(*a*) God as the *En-Sof* and as a Being

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

utterly divested of attributes is an idea that can only be postulated
negatively. You cannot tell what God is; you can only tell what He is
not. But if this be so, and if, as is axiomatic to the *Zohar* and all
the Kabbalah, the world is contained in God just as a small vessel is
contained in a larger, and nothing exists outside of God, how can
creation be explained, whence and how arose the universe? The universe
is imperfect and finite, and its creation must have involved, therefore,
some change in the character of God who *ex hypothesi* is perfect, free
from all attributes, and therefore free from all possibility of change.
How could this be? The answer is contained in the *Zohar's* teaching on
the Ten Sefirot, which will be considered in our coming chapter.

(*b*) The idea of God using the Heavenly Man (*Adam ‘Ilā-ā*) as a
chariot on which to descend indicates a noteworthy identity of teaching
in the *Zohar* and Plotinus. For both systems imply that there is a sort
of double movement in the universe, 'a way down and a way up.' There is
a process of Divine emanation, *i.e.* an outgoing of God, a self-descent
from His transcendent height towards the lowly abodes of man. And
correspondingly there is an ascent, a way up, on the man's part. For,
just as to Plotinus, the final stage of the soul's return journey to its
home in God, consists in its highest

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

experience (brought about by a withdrawal from desires and from objects
of sense) of contact and union with God, so also, according to the
*Zohar*, the three elements of which the soul is composed, *viz*. the
rational (*neshāmāh*), the moral (*ruaḥ*), and the vital (*nefesh*), are
each of them, not only emanations from the Sefirot, but also have the
potency of uniting him again with the Sefirot, and, in the case of the
pious man, of uniting him with the highest of the Sefirot, the Crown or
Supreme Intelligence.

(*c*) The idea of the Heavenly Man, or *Adam Kadmon* ('First' or
'Original' Man), or *Shechinta Tā-tā-ā* ('Lower' or 'Terrestrial'
Shechinah), is vital to an understanding of the *Zohar* and of all
Kabbalistic literature. It has resemblances to the Philonic exegesis on
the distinction between "the heavenly man born in the image of God," and
therefore having "no participation in any corruptible or earthlike
essence," and "the earthly man," who was made "of loose material, called
a lump of clay" (*On the Allegories of the Sacred Laws*, i. 12). One
thinks also in this connection of Paul's views on the First Adam who was
flesh and blood, a 'living soul,' and the Second Adam whom he describes
as a 'quickening spirit' (1 *Cor*. xv. 45-49). There is, too, a Rabbinic
*dictum* about a "spirit of Adam" which "moved upon the face of the
waters" (as

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

did the *Ruaḥ* in *Genesis*, i. 2)--a pre-existent First Man.

The *Zohar* is possibly indebted for its treatment of the Heavenly Man
to some one or, perhaps, all of these sources. It says as follows: "The
Heavenly Man after he had manifested himself from out of the midst of
the upper-world primitive obscurity, created the earthly man" (ii. 70
fol.). This means that the creation of man was the work, not of God, but
of His supreme manifestation, His first emanation. This manifestation or
emanation is the first of the Ten Sefirot (the Crown), which, as will be
shown later, is the primal will of God which contained within itself the
plan of the universe in its entire infinity of time and space. To say
that the plan of the world in its entirety is contained in one of the
emanations of God, is tantamount to saying that man (who is part of the
world) is the product of an immanent Divine activity in the world. This
immanent Divine activity is denoted by the term 'Heavenly Man,' as also
by the term 'First of the Sefirot,' and, in varying senses, by all the
Ten Sefirot.

But why, after all, such a title as 'Heavenly Man'? It is because,
according to the *Zohar*, man is a copy of the universe below as well as
or the universe above. Hence God in His creative capacity chose also the
form of man. The *Zohar* puts it thus:

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

"Believe not that man consists solely of flesh, skin, bones, and veins.
The real part of man is his soul, and the things just mentioned, the
skin, flesh, bones, and veins, are only an outward covering, a veil, but
are not the man. When man departs he divests himself of all the veils
which cover him. And these different parts of our body correspond to the
secrets of the Divine wisdom. The skin typifies the heavens which extend
everywhere and cover everything like a garment. The flesh puts us in
mind of the evil side of the universe. The bones and the veins symbolise
the Divine chariot, the inner powers of man which are the servants of
God. But they are all but an outer covering. For, inside man, there is
the secret of the *Heavenly Man*. . . . Everything below takes place in
the same manner as everything above. This is the meaning of the remark
that God created man in His own image. But just as in the heavens, which
cover the whole universe, we behold different shapes brought about by
the stars and the planets to teach us concerning hidden things and deep
secrets, so upon the skin which covers our body there are shapes and
forms which are like planets and stars to our bodies. All these shapes
have a hidden meaning, and are observed by the sages who are able to
read the face of man" (ii. 76a).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Ten Sefirot](jm11)
