[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jm10)  [Next](jm12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419967/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

# CHAPTER VII

### THE TEN SEFIROT

ALL finite creatures are, in divergent senses and varying degrees, part
and parcel of the Deity. *Creatio ex nihilo* is unthinkable, seeing that
God, in the Neoplatonic view, is the Perfect One, 'an undivided One,' to
whom no qualities or characteristics can be ascribed, and to whom,
therefore, no such idea as that of intention or purpose, or change or
movement, can be applied. All existences are emanations from the Deity.
The Deity reveals Himself in all existences because He is immanent in
them. But though dwelling in them, He is greater than they. He is apart
from them. He transcends them.

The foregoing might be said to be a general *résumé* of the philosophy
of the Ten Sefirot. To quote a passage from the section of the *Zohar*
called the *Idra Zūtta* ('Small Assembly'):

"The Most Ancient One <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) is at the same

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

time the most Hidden of the hidden. He is separated from all things, and
is at the same time not separated from all things. For all things are
united in Him, and He unites Himself with all things. There is nothing
which is not in Him. He has a shape, and one can say that He has not
one. In assuming a shape, He has given existence to all things. He made
ten lights spring forth from His midst, lights which shine with the form
which they have borrowed from Him, and which shed everywhere the light
of a brilliant day. The Ancient One, the most Hidden of the hidden, is a
high beacon, and we know Him only by His lights, which illuminate our
eyes so abundantly. His Holy Name is no other thing than these lights."

The 'ten lights' are, of course, the Ten Sefirot, the ten successive
emanations from the Godhead, the ten powers or qualities which were
latent from all eternity in the Godhead. But what is meant by saying
that 'His Holy Name is no other thing but these lights'? We turn to
another passage in the *Zohar* for the explanation. It reads as follows:

"The name 'I am' \[in Hebrew, *ěhěyěh*; see Exodus, iii. 14, 'I am that
I am'--in Hebrew, *ěhěyěh* *ăshěr ěhěyěh*\] signifies the unity of all
things. Afterwards He brought out that light which is the celestial
mother, and when she bare a child, then He called Himself 'that I am'
(*ăshěr* *ěhěyěh*). And

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

when all else came into existence, and everything became perfected and
in its right place, then He called Himself Jahveh" (iii. 65).

The passage seems hopeless as regards a meaning. But on deeper
consideration it becomes quite clear. The Divine Name, 'I am that I am,'
is inferior to the Divine Name Jahveh. It typifies an earlier,
less-developed stage. The student of Hebrew will readily know why this
is. Although translated into English as 'I am that I am' it belongs
grammatically to what the Semitic philologists call the 'imperfect
tense,' representing an unfinished action. But 'Jahveh' is grammatically
the 'present tense' (*i.e.* a noun formed from this tense). Hence 'I am
that I am' signifies the Godhead as He was when He existed as the
'Hidden of the hidden,' *i.e.* when He was the 'undivided One,' the
Absolute containing in Himself the All, before He had, so to speak,
unfolded Himself in His creative acts, before any emanations had
radiated out from Him. But 'Jahveh' denotes the crown and summit of the
Divine self-manifestation; in other words, it denotes God as immanent in
all the numberless parts of the cosmos, which is but a revelation, an
embodiment of the Divine thought. The idea of the 'celestial mother'
having a child is part of the *Zohar's* doctrine of emanation, where, as
will be shown later on, a certain one of the Ten Sefirot is

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

called 'father' (*Abba*) and another is called 'mother' (*Imma*), and
from the union of the two, there is born another of the Sefirot, called
the 'son' (*Ben*).

Hence to say that 'God's Holy Name is no other thing than these lights'
is but to say that the Sefirot which represent the world as the copy of
an ever-active, ever-energising God, sum up all that the Divine Name
stands for. And that the Divine Name denotes a strongly mystical aspect
of the relation between God and the universe is abundantly clear from
the Essenic literature, as well as from the Book *Yetsirah*. In fact, it
appears occasionally in this sense, in the Talmudic and Midrashic
records (see, *e.g.*, *T.B. Pesaḥim*, 55b), and the germ of the idea can
be traced back to the Old Testament, to such phrases as: "This is my
name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations" (*Exodus*,
iii. 15); or: "Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O
Lord, throughout all generations" (*Psalm*, cxxxv. 13).

One of the clearest passages in the *Zohar* stating what the Ten Sefirot
are, is the following:

"For the waters of the sea are limitless and shapeless. But when they
are spread over the earth, then they produce a shape (*dimiōn*), and we
can calculate like this: The source of the waters of the sea and the
force

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

which it emits to spread itself over the soil, are two things. Then an
immense basin is formed by the waters just as is formed when one makes a
very deep digging. This basin is filled by the waters which emanate from
the source; it is the sea itself, and can be regarded as a third thing.
This very large hollow \[of waters\] is split up into seven canals,
which are like so many long tubes, by means of which the waters are
conveyed. The source, the current, the sea, and the seven canals form
together the number ten. And should the workman who constructed these
tubes come to break them up, then the waters return to their source, and
there remains naught but the *débris* and the water dried up. It is thus
that the *Cause of causes* has created the Ten Sefirot. The *Crown* is
the source whence there springs a light without end, from which comes
the name *En-Sof*, *i.e.* Infinite, designating the *Supreme Cause*; for
while in this state it possesses neither shape nor figure; there are no
means of comprehending it; there is no way of knowing it. It is in this
sense that it has been said, 'Seek not the things that are too hard for
thee' (*Ecclesiasticus*, iii. 21). Then there is formed a vessel
contracted to a mere point \[the letter *Yod*, the smallest letter in
the Hebrew alphabet\] into which the Divine light penetrates. It is the
source of *Wisdom*, it is Wisdom itself, in virtue of which the
*Supreme* 

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Cause* is called
the God of Wisdom. Afterwards, it \[*i.e.* the *Supreme Cause*\]
constructs a channel, wide as the sea, which is called *Intellect* \[or
*Intelligence*\]. From this, comes the title of 'God who understands'
\[*i.e.* is intelligent\]. We must know, however, that God only
understands and is wise by means of His own essential substance; for
Wisdom does not merit the title by itself, but only by the
instrumentality of Him who is wise and who has produced it from the
light which emanates from Him. One cannot conceive what 'knowing' is by
itself, but by Him who is the 'knowing One,' and who fills it with His
own essential substance.

"Finally, the sea is divided into seven parts, and there result \[from
this division\] the seven precious channels which are called: (*a*)
Compassion (or Greatness), (*b*) Justice (or Force), (*c*) Beauty, (*d*)
Victory, (*e*) Glory, (*f*) Royalty, and (*g*) Foundation. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) It is for this reason that God is called the
'Great' or the 'Compassionate,' the 'Strong,' the 'Magnificent,' the
'God of Victories,' the 'Creator to whom all glory belongs,' and the
'Foundation of all things.' It is this latter attribute which sustains
all the others, as well as the totality of the worlds. And yet, He is
also the King of the universe, for all things are in His power whether
He wills to lessen the number of the channels and increase the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

light which springs from them, or whether He wills the contrary" (foll.
42, 43).

According to this characteristic passage, the Sefirot are the Names of
the Deity--but only in the deeply mystical sense of 'Names' as has been
referred to above. The Divine Name is, on this understanding, equivalent
to the Presence of God, the eternal Source of the power and intelligence
enshrined in the constitution of the world and the heart of man. The Ten
Sefirot together are thus a picture of how an infinite, undivided,
unknowable God takes on the attributes of the finite, the divided, the
knowable, and thus becomes the cause of, the power lying at the bottom
of, all the multifarious modes of existence in the finite plane--all of
which are thus a reflection of the Divine. The Sefirot have no real
tangible existence at all. They are but a figure of speech showing the
Divine immanence in all cosmic phenomena, in all the grades of man's
spiritual and moral achievement.

It should, however, be pointed out here, that the functions and natures
of the Sefirot are described by the *Zohar* in the most enigmatic of
enigmatic language. Hence different deductions have always been
possible, and hence, too, the rise of more than one school of *Zohar*
interpretation. The view mostly followed--and it may be said to be the
universally-accepted standard--is

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

that of the school of Luria and Cordovero, the two most famous
Kabbalists of the sixteenth century.

Let us now consider each of the Sefirot separately. What we shall say
will amount in substance, though not in form, to a commentary on the
lengthy passage from the *Zohar* previously quoted. Prior to the first
of the Sefirot must come, what our extract has termed the *Supreme
Cause* (literally the 'Cause of causes') or the *En-Sof*. What is the
relation of the *En-Sof* to the Sefirot? According to the theories of
Luria and Cordovero, all the Sefirot emanate from the *En-Sof*, who,
although eternally present in them all, is not comprehended in them, but
transcends them. All modes of existence and thought embody some fragment
of the *En-Sof*, but, with all this, the *En-Sof* is divided from them
by an impassable gulf. He remains the hidden, unapproachable Being. This
is why, while each of the Sefirot has a well-known name, the *En-Sof*
has no name. Just as in the Talmudic mysticism of the Shechinah the idea
of a universally-diffused, all-penetrating Deity is conveyed by the
metaphor of light, so in the case of the mediæval Kabbalah the *En-Sof*
is likewise spoken of as Light (*Or En-Sof* = 'The Infinite Light'). The
Christian mystics also favoured the same figure. Closely connected with
this teaching is the general Kabbalistic doctrine of *Tsimtsūm*,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

*i.e.* contraction. It, too, is found in the Talmud and Midrashim, and
it is from them that the Kabbalah, most likely, received it. Thus
*Genesis Rabba*, iv. 5, dwells on the paradox (mentioned also by Philo)
of the world being too small to hold God, but yet the space between the
Ark's staves being large enough. The Kabbalistic idea of *Tsimtsūm* is
an attempt to explain the contraction or limitation of the *En-Sof* (the
Infinite), in order to make possible the emanation of the Sefirot,
*i.e.* in order to produce the finite world of phenomena. The universal
infiltration of the light of the *En-Sof*, its diffusion throughout all
the Sefirot, gave rise to the idea of the existence of a changeable and
an unchangeable element in each of the Sefirot. The former represents
the material, outward, perishable side of man and the universe. The
latter is the changeless, unfading eternal quality embedded in man and
the universe. It is just this dual aspect which is referred to in the
long extract from the *Zohar* quoted above, in the words: "Should the
workman who constructed these tubes come to break them up, then the
waters return to their source, and there remains naught but the *débris*
and the water dried up." In other words, should the *En-Sof* withdraw
its eternal immanent light and life from any one of the Sefirot, or, to
speak in untechnical language, should God, who is

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

the Life of the universe, the Power lying beneath and behind all
phenomena, by some miraculous intervention withdraw or suspend some
fragment of Himself, then the cosmos reverts to chaos.

The first of the Ten Sefirot is the Crown (in Hebrew, *Keter*). It is of
importance for the reader to note that whereas Neoplatonism is largely
responsible for the basis of the *Zohar's* doctrines of emanation, the
names of the Sefirot and the teaching embraced and conveyed by those
names are entirely drawn from the field of the Old Testament and
Rabbinical theology. All ages of Jewish thought (as well as of Jewish
art) employ the word, image, and idea of a 'crown' in a considerable
variety of senses. In Biblical Hebrew there are no less than five
different words all indiscriminately translated as 'crown,' but denoting
really either different forms of the thing or different prominent
portions of it. In the Apocryphal and Rabbinical literature men
'crowned' themselves in all sorts of ways, and the crown was symbolic of
a host of religious ideas. In the theological realm, 'crown' played many
parts.

Only two references--both germane to our subject--can be quoted here. In
*T.B. Berachoth*, 17a, it is said: "In the world to come there is
neither eating nor drinking, nor marrying, nor bargaining, nor envy,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

nor hatred, nor quarrel; but the righteous sit, *with crowns upon their
heads*, and feed upon the splendour of the Shechinah, as it is said of
the nobles of the children of Israel, 'He laid not His hand upon them,
but they saw God, and this was equivalent to their eating and their
drinking' \[so the Targumic paraphrase of *Exodus*, xxiv. 11\]." *T.B.
Megillah*, 15b, says: "In the time to come, God will be a *crown of
glory* upon the head of each saint, as it is written, 'In that day shall
the Lord of Hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty,
unto the residue of His people' (*Isaiah*, xxviii. 5)." Hence, it is not
hard to discover by what process of reasoning the mediæval Jewish
mystics thought it fitting to designate the first of the Sefirot as the
Crown.

"It is," says the *Zohar*, "the principle of all principles, the hidden
Wisdom, the Crown which the Highest of the high, and by which all crowns
and diadems are crowned" (iii. 288). It is the first of the emanations
from the *En-Sof*. The latter being, as has been said above, the
infinite, hidden, unknowable Being, the Crown represents, as it were,
the first stage by which the Infinite Being takes on the properties of
the finite and becomes drawn out of His impenetrable isolation. But,
nevertheless, the Crown is an absolute indivisible unity, possessing no
attributes or qualities, and baffling all

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

analysis and description. It is, to quote the original, a '*nekūdah*
*peshtūah*,' *i.e.* 'a simple point,' or '*nekūda* *rishōnah*,' *i.e.*
'a primordial point.' The idea here is that the first manifestation of
the Divine is a point, *i.e.* a unity, unanalysable, indescribable, and
yet possessing the All. In other words, it is the Hegelian idea of 'pure
being' (*das reine sein*). This 'pure being' or 'existence' is the
thought or reason of God. The starting-point of everything is the
thought as it existed in God. The universe is this 'thought' of God. It
is in this 'thought' of God that everything was originally embraced. The
first of the Sefirot denotes, then, the primordial Divine Thought (or
Divine Will, as the Hebrew commentators often style it); and to say this
is tantamount to saying that the Crown contained within itself the plan
of the universe in its infinity of time and space, in its endless
varieties of form, colour, and movement. And it is an emanation from the
*En-Sof* who, while immanent in the Crown, and hence immanent in all the
Sefirot, yet transcends them all.

The Crown, for the reasons just mentioned, is ofttimes styled *Resha
Hivra*, *i.e.* the 'White Head'--'head' denoting the idea of source, and
'white' being the blend of all the colours (just as the Crown is the
blend of all forms in the cosmos). But the idea may possibly be drawn
from *Daniel*,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

vii\. 9, where "One that was ancient of days did sit; his raiment was
white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool" (cf. 1 *Enoch*,
xiv. 18-22; *Revelation*, i. 14). The original Aramaic for 'ancient of
days' is '*attik*'; and this, too, is a name for the first of the
Sefirot, and is frequently employed in the Kabbalah, generally as a
designation of the Deity.

Wisdom and Intelligence are the second and third of the Ten Sefirot.
They are parallel emanations from the Crown or first Sefirah. Here we
alight upon an interesting feature of this mysticism, *viz*. the
application of the idea of the sexual relationship to the solution of
the problem of existence. "When the Ancient One, the Holy One, desired
to bring all things into being, He created them all as male and female"
(iii. 290). Wisdom is the 'father,' *i.e.* the masculine active
principle which engenders all things and imposes on them form and
measure (an idea derived from Job, xxviii. 12). Intelligence is the
'mother,' the passive, receptive principle (derived from *Proverbs*, ii.
3, "Yea, if thou cry after discernment," *i.e.* 'Binah' in Hebrew; and
the word rendered by 'if' can, by the slightest alteration of a vowel,
be rendered by 'mother,' and thus the passage is translated by the
*Zohar* as, "Yea, if mother thou tallest discernment"). Out of the union
of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wisdom and
Intelligence comes a 'son' who is dowered with the characteristics of
both parents. This son is Reason (*Da‘at*), which is, by the way, not
regarded as an independent Sefirah. These three, father, mother, son
(*i.e.* the two Sefirot, *viz*. Wisdom and Intelligence, and their
offspring Reason), hold and unite in themselves all that which has been,
which is, and which will be. But they in their turn are all united to
the first Sefirah (the Crown), who is the all-comprehensive One who is,
was, and will be.

Here one meets again with a foreshadowing of the Hegelian teaching
concerning the identity of thought and being. The universe is an
expression of the ideas or the absolute forms of intelligence. Cordovero
says:

"The first three Sefirot must be considered as one and the same thing.
The first represents 'knowledge,' the second 'the knower,' the third
'that which is known.' The Creator is Himself, at one and the same time,
knowledge, the knower, and the known. Indeed, His manner of knowing does
not consist in applying His thought to things outside Him; it is by
self-knowledge that He knows and perceives everything which is. There
exists nothing which is not united to Him and which He does not find in
His own essence. He is the type of all being, and all things exist in
Him under their most pure and most perfect form. . . . It is thus that
all

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

existing things in the universe have their form in the Sefirot, and the
Sefirot have theirs in the source from which they emanate."

Thus, the first three Sefirot form a triad constituting the world as a
manifestation of the Divine Thought. The remaining seven Sefirot
likewise fall into triads. The Divine Thought is the source whence
emanate two opposing principles, one active or masculine, the other
passive or feminine. The former is Mercy (*Ḥesed*), the latter is
Justice (*Dīn*). From the union of these two there results Beauty
(*Tifěrěth*). The logical connections between these three principles, as
they stand in the *Zohar*, are extremely difficult to fathom. But
Cordovero and other Hebrew commentators give us the needed solution of
the problem. The Sefirot Mercy and Justice represent the universe as
being at one and the same time an expansion and contraction of the
Divine Will. Mercy, as the active masculine principle, is the
life-giving, ever-productive because ever-forgiving power innate in man
and the universe. Justice is the necessarily-opposed immanent faculty
holding in check what would otherwise prove to be the excesses of Mercy.
The theology of the Talmudic Rabbis shows itself unmistakably here. In
the beginning, say the Rabbis, God thought to create the universe by the
'attribute of justice' (designated by the word 'Jahveh'). But on
considering

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

that the universe could not exist by 'justice' alone, He determined to
join the 'attribute of mercy' (designated by the word 'Elohim') with the
'attribute of justice,' and to create the universe--as He finally
did--by the dual means. Likewise in the *Zohar* mysticism, the moral
order of the universe can only follow on a combination of the Sefirot
Mercy and Justice. And the inevitable product of the union is the sixth
Sefirah, Beauty. The reasoning is apparent. We have thus far seen how
the first triad of Sefirot pictures God as the immanent thinking power
of the universe, and how the second triad interprets God as the immanent
moral power of the universe.

The third triad are: Victory (*Nezaḥ*), Glory (*Hōd*), and Foundation
(*Yesōd*). The first of these is the masculine active principle. The
second is the feminine passive principle, while the third is the effect
of their combination. What aspect of a God-saturated world do these
three Sefirot point to? The *Zohar* tells us, as follows: "Extension,
variety \[or multiplication\], and force are gathered together in them;
and all forces that come out, come out from them, and it is for this
reason that they are called Hosts \[*i.e.* armies or forces\]. They are
\[the two fore-mentioned Sefirot\] Victory and Glory" (iii. 296). The
allusion is obviously to the physical, dynamic aspect of the universe,
the ceaseless, developing world with its multiplicity

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

and variety of forces, changes and movements. From their coalescence
comes the ninth Sefirah, Foundation. Rightly so; for it is the endless,
changeless ebb and flow of the world's forces that, in the last resort,
guarantees the stability of the world and builds up its 'foundation.' It
creates the reproductive power of nature, endows it with, as it were, a
generative organ from which all things proceed, and upon which all
things finally depend.

The last of the Sefirot is Royalty (*Malkūt*). Its function is not very
apparent, and its existence may be due to the desire on the part of the
Kabbalists to make up the number ten--a number which looms largely in
the Old Testament literature, as well as in the theology of the Talmud,
Midrashim, and Philo. Generally speaking, this tenth Sefirah indicates
the abiding truth of the harmonious co-operation of all the Sefirot,
thus making the universe in its orderliness and in its symmetry a true
and exact manifestation of the Divine Mind--an *‘Olam Azilut*, *i.e.* a
world of emanation, as the Kabbalists themselves style it.

The fact that the Sefirot fall into triads or trinities, and the
ascription to them of such sexual titles as 'father,' 'mother,' 'son,'
has encouraged many an apologist for Christianity to say that the
essential Christian dogma of the Trinity is implicit in the Jewish
mystical

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

literature. But it is beyond a doubt that the resemblance is quite a
matter of accident. It cannot be too often repeated that there is a
substantial admixture of foreign elements in all branches of the
Kabbalah. The philosophy of Salomon Ibn Gabirol (which largely echoes
Plato), Neoplatonism, Gnosticism, Philonism, and other systems have all
left indelible traces. But Christianity, be it remembered, besides being
a debtor to Judaism, is a debtor to these sources as well; so that what
appears to be Christian may be, in reality, Jewish; a development of the
original material by an unbroken succession of Jewish minds. This
original material is the old Talmudic and Midrashic exegesis upon which
was foisted the alien philosophies just alluded to. That there should be
a resultant resemblance to Christianity is quite a normal outcome; but
it is beyond dispute that the Christian Trinity and the trinities of the
Ten Sefirot lie in quite distinct planes.

The Jewish Prayer Book echoes much of the theological sentiment of the
*Zohar*. There is a fine hymn in the Sabbath-morning service which,
while giving a noteworthy prominence to the *names* of the Sefirot,
reproduces with a charming simplicity of Hebrew diction, the main body
of the Zoharic doctrine, its cosmology, angelology, astrology, and
psychology. It is as follows: <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) "God,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

the Lord over all works, blessed is He, and ever to be blessed by the
mouth of everything that hath breath. His greatness and goodness fill
the world; *knowledge* (*Da‘at*) and *understanding* (*Tebūnah* =
*Bīnah*) \[*i.e.* intelligence\] surround Him. He is exalted above the
holy Ḥayot, and is adorned in *glory* (*Kabod* = *Hōd*) above the
celestial chariot (*merkabah*); purity and rectitude are before his
throne, *loving-kindness* (*Ḥesed*) and tender mercy before his *glory*.
The luminaries are good which our God hath created: He formed them with
*knowledge*, understanding, and discernment; He gave them might and
power to rule in the midst of the world. They are full of lustre, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) and they radiate brightness; beautiful is
their lustre throughout all the world. They rejoice in their going
forth, and are glad in their returning; they perform with awe the will
of their Master. *Glory* and *honour* they render unto his name,
exultation and rejoicing at the remembrance of his *sovereignty*
(*Malkūt*). He called unto the sun, and it shone forth in light; He
looked and ordained the figure of the moon. All the hosts on high render
praise unto Him, the Seraphim, the Ophanim, and the holy Ḥayot ascribing
*glory* (lit. beauty, *i.e.* *Tifěrěth*) and *greatness*." <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[136:1](jm11.htm#fr_8.md) One of the favourite names
for God in the mediæval Kabbalah. It is based on the phrase in *Daniel*,
vii. 9, 13, 22, 'ancient of days.'

<span id="fn_9"></span>[141:1](jm11.htm#fr_9.md) Some authorities invert
the order of *f* and *g*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[153:1](jm11.htm#fr_10.md) From the Authorised
Daily Prayer Book, ed. Singer, p. 129.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[154:1](jm11.htm#fr_11.md) *Ziv* in Hebrew, a
mystical term for the shining of the Shechinah.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[154:2](jm11.htm#fr_12.md) Another appellation for
*Ḥesed*, the fourth Sefirah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Soul](jm12.md)
