[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsgr00)  [Next](wsgr02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*When the Storm God Rides*, by Florence Stratton, collected by Bessie M.
Reid \[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### Foreword

The Indian legends in this book have been collected by Mrs. Bruce Reid
of Port Arthur, Texas, during forty years of travel over Texas as a
naturalist. Mrs. Reid gathered these stories directly from full-blooded
Indians or from persons who had Indian blood in their veins or from
others long closely associated with Indians and familiar with stories
recounted by their parents and grandparents.

A few of the legends probably have filtered in to the Tejas Indians from
the ancient Mayan Indians of the Isthmus of Yucatan. "When the Storm God
Rides" likely is of Mayan origin. The legend "How Sickness Came Into the
World" was obtained by Mrs. Reid from the late Chief Sun Kee of the
Alabama tribe in east Texas. "The Swift Blue One" undoubtedly is of
Comanche origin, for it was the horse that gave Comanches their power.
The bluebonnet legend, with that of the blanket flower, point also to a
Comanche beginning.

From the late Jack Mitchell, a Texas hunter and a Texas ranger, a man
familiar with stories known to a group of Texas Indian hunters long his
close friends, the legends of the bluebonnet, the magnolia babies and
many others were obtained. Jack Mitchell secured

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

legends from his uncle, François Michel of New Orleans, one of that
large company of French-Indian traders who often associated intimately
with the aboriginals. Mitchell's wife and children are well known in
southeast Texas, where they live. Mrs. Mitchell says that François
Michel "sailed with Lafitte," and was related remotely to the noted
buccaneer of the Louisiana-Texas coast. Although Michel's expeditions
often took him well into the interior of Texas, the bulk of his trading
in furs and hides was mainly done with the agricultural tribes west of
the Sabine River. The trader's acquaintance with the Indian legends grew
through his contacts with Indians in the course of trading in guns,
knives, feathers, furs and trinkets. Campfire talks yielded many
stories.

The most reliable guides in determining the origin of Indian legends are
locale and subject matter. Legends of the Spanish moss and the iris, for
instance, in all likelihood came from the Indians of east Texas, where
this moss and this flower are most prolific. Different legends dealing
with the same subject have sufficient similarity to show that they came
from the same source; of such similarity are two bluebonnet stories, one
involving the sacrifice of an Indian maiden of the Mexican tablelands
and the other, which is included in this volume, dealing with a little
Indian girl's sacrificing of her doll. The essential similarity of tales
differing in details gives confidence to ethnologists investigating the
folklore of the American Indian.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

Some of these stories are known to be several hundred years old. Others
are so old as to have their origins shrouded in the mists of time. The
fact that in these legends is so seldom mentioned the horse, the
forerunners of which became extinct in North America at a very early
time, and which had to be introduced to the known tribes of Indians by
the white man, is strong evidence of the antiquity of the stories.

The anonymous authorship of nearly all old folklore is characteristic of
Indian legends. Although collected in Texas it is certain that the
legends include material from the Southwest as a whole and have
undergone alterations from time to time while passing from one tribe to
another and also through breed and purely white sources. Indians were in
general a roving people; the discovery in Louisiana and Texas of
artifacts of obsidian and copper, materials not native to the region,
exemplifies this well-known fact. It is but natural that not only the
weapons and implements but also the cultures of different groups and
different periods should become rather widely dispersed.

The illustrations, by Berniece Burrough, are combinations of authentic
Indian symbols, and are the result of careful research.

FLORENCE STRATTON.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](wsgr02)
