[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm03)  [Next](mhm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

## THE MAQÁMÁT OF BADÍ‘ AL-ZAMÁN AL-HAMADHÁNÍ

### INTRODUCTION

#### I. LIFE OF THE AUTHOR

THE Ḥáfiz Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusain ibn Yaḥya ibn Ṣa‘íd ibn Bashar Abú’l-Faḍl
al-Hamadhání, surnamed Badí ‘al-Zamán (the Wonder of the Age), was born
at Hamadhán on the 13th of Jumádí al-Ákhir A.H. 358 (A.D. 967) and,
therefore, like many other eminent Arabic writers, lived far from Arabia
and may have even been of Persian origin. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) He himself claimed to be descended from the
tribes of Taghlib and Muḍar. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

Unlike Ḥarírí, his great imitator, he had not the advantage of being
born and bred in the atmosphere and amid the inspiring associations of a
great seat of learning, and he himself appears to have shared the
popular opinion as to the stupidity and churlishness of the people of
Hamadhán.

He is said to have satirized his native place in the well-known lines:--

 <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)    …  
Hamadhán is my native town, I must allow it that honour, but it is the
vilest of cities.  
In ugliness its children are like its old men, and, in reason, its old
men are like its children.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

.

On page 419 of the Letters he quotes the verse of another poet:--

…  
Thou wilt not blame me for the weakness of my intellect,  
If thou art assured I am a man of Hamadhán.

Ibn Fáris, Hamadhání's instructor, ironically hints that the ignorance
of the people of Hamadhán was contagious. 'Why should I not ', says he,
'offer a sincere prayer for that city where I had the good fortune of
forgetting all I ever learned?' <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) In
spite of the uninspiring character of his immediate surroundings, ‘Aufí
tells us he gave, at a very early age, evidence of those great gifts
which eventually made him famous.

That great patron of letters, the Ṣáḥib ibn ‘Abbád, the famous Buwayhid
minister, tested his skill in *ex tempore* translation at the age of
twelve by giving the young scholar Persian verse to render into metrical
Arabic, a feat which he accomplished on the spot, the Ṣáḥib himself, at
the instance of the youthful poet, suggesting the metre and the
rhyme. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)

It must, however, be borne in mind that he had the good fortune of
sitting at the feet of learned men like Abú’l-Ḥusain ibn Fáris (ob. A.H.
390), the philologist and author of the *Mujmil fí’l-Lughát*, or
Collection of Philological Observations <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3](#fn_5) and ‘Īsá ibn Hishám the traditionalist. It
is not improbable that in the latter we have the original of the name of
the Ráwí or narrator of the Maqámát. The relater of tradition might by
an easy transition become the narrator of the story or adventure.

Each maqáma begins with …, which, being literally rendered, signifies
'he related news, or traditions to us'. It should also be remembered
that, notwithstanding internal dissensions, internecine strife and the
frequent wars with the Greeks, he lived in an age of great intellectual
activity. The literary renaissance, which began in the reign of Saif
al-Daula, <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6) was still making itself
felt.

Mutanabbí, considered by his countrymen to be the greatest of Islámic
poets, had just completed his great work. Two years before Hamadhání was
born Abú ‘Alí al-Qálí had finished in Cordova his excellent work on
philology, the *Book of Dictations*,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

and Abú’l-Faraj al-Isfahání had completed one of the most important and
useful works in the Arabic language, that rich mine of poetry, history,
antiquities and legend, the *Kitáb al-Aghání*, on which he had spent
fifty years of his life. In A.H. 360, or two years after the birth of
the author, the Brethren of Purity were endeavouring by means of their
teachings, set forth in fifty treatises, to reconcile science and
religion and to harmonize the law of Islám with the philosophy of the
Greeks.

Among other prominent men of his day were Abú Firás, the famous poet
prince, regarding whom the Ṣáḥib used to say, 'Poetry began with a
prince--Imr al-Qais--and ended with one--Abú’l-Firás.' <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) There were also Abú’l-Alá al-Ma‘arí, the
poet, philosopher and free-thinker; al-Babbghá, the poet and Ibn Nubáta,
the fiery preacher. To be called the Wonder of such an age was indeed a
proud distinction. And here one is led to enquire as to what were the
system of education and the method of study that could produce such a
prodigy.

In Hamadhání's time, education, in addition to the study of the Qur’án
and the commentaries thereon, consisted of the study of Traditions of
the Prophet, jurisprudence, legendary lore concerning the pagan times of
the Arabs, their days or battles, *ex tempore* recitations, philosophy,
philology, poetics, grammar, the art of writing ornate prose, and
travel. <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8)

In his reflections on knowledge, the course to be pursued in the
acquisition thereof and the essential qualifications of the seeker after
knowledge, the author gives us an insight into his own methods of study.
These comprised self-denial, dogged perseverance, much reading, patient
investigation and deep meditation joined to extensive travel. He makes
it clear that he knew of no royal road to learning and that he had
learned 'to scorn delights and live laborious days'. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9) In the Maqámát he shows how thorough had
been his education and how deeply he was imbued with the culture of his
age.

In the year A.H. 380 at the age of twenty-two he left his little-loved
native place and proceeded to the court of the Ṣáḥib. There is no
evidence as to the precise duration of his stay there, but, in the
society of the litterati that had gathered round the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

great Wazír and with, doubtless, free access to a library so vast that
the Ṣáḥib is reported to have said that it would require 400 camels to
transport it, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) it must have been for
the young aspirant to literary fame a period rich in opportunity and
experience. A breach of good manners on his part in the presence of the
Wazír is said to have brought his sojourn at Arraján to an abrupt
termination. Thence he journeyed to Jurján where, according to Tha‘álibí
(A.H. 350-429) he frequented the society of the Ismá‘ílí heretics, from
whom he acquired a great deal of knowledge and received much
enlightenment. <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) In A.H. 382 (A.D.
992-3) at the age of twenty-four he reached Nishapur where he composed
the work upon which his fame rests, the Maqámát. On his way to this city
he appears to have fallen among thieves who robbed him and stripped him
of everything he possessed. <span id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12)

If we accept the dates given by Tha‘álibí in the *Yatíma*, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[4](#fn_13) of Hamadhání's arrival at Nishapur (A.H.
382) and <span id="fr_14"></span>[5](#fn_14) of al-Khwárazmí's death
(A.H. 383), the Maqámát were the work of a very young man, completed
within the short space of two years. If such was the case there must
have been a great deal of scholarly preparation during the author's stay
at the court of the Ṣáḥib and his sojourn among the Ismá‘ílí heretics at
Jurján. The evidence in favour of this view is supplied by Hamadhání
himself. In replying to al-Khwárazmí's criticism of his work he
tauntingly remarks that, while he had dictated four hundred maqámát, his
detractor was unable to compose a tenth part of one. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[6](#fn_15)

There is, however, reason to suppose that the, work was begun before the
author left his native city. For example, the scene of the maqáma of
Maḍirah is laid in Baṣra while the concluding appeal is made to an
audience in Hamadhán. <span id="fr_16"></span>[7](#fn_16) The inference
is, therefore, that the Maqámát were begun in Hamadhán and completed in
Nishapur, probably some time after the death of al-Khwárazmí in A.H.
383.

While in this city a great literary duel took place between Hamadhání
and Abú Bakr al-Khwárazmí (A.H. 323-83), a nephew of Ṭabarí, the
well-known historian. Al-Khwárazmí was a poet of the first rank, a
master of the art of official writing,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

a renowned authority on philology and genealogy and noted for his
sententious sayings. In addition to all this he was endowed with a
marvellous memory.

It is related of him that having gone to see the Ṣáḥib ibn ‘Abbád, who
was then holding court at Arraján, he requested a chamberlain to
announce to him that a literary man desired permission to see him, and
his master replied: 'Tell him I have bound myself not to receive any
literary man, unless he know by heart twenty thousand verses composed by
Arabs of the desert'. The chamberlain returned with the answer, and Abú
Bakr said: 'Go back and ask him if he means twenty thousand composed by
men or twenty thousand composed by women?' This question was repeated
and the Ṣáḥib exclaimed: 'That must be Abú Bakr al-Khwárazmí: let him
come in!' <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) Such was the intellectual
giant, now about sixty years of age, whom the youthful scholar of
twenty-five essayed to challenge to literary combat.

Hamadhání opened the discussion. Addressing al-Khwárazmí he said: 'We
have cited thee in order that thou mayest fill this assembly <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) with benefits and quote unfamiliar verses
and rare proverbs. We will discuss with thee and profit by that which
thou hast, and do thou question us that thou mayest benefit by what we
have. Now we will begin with the arts of which thou art master and which
have made thee famous. They are memory, if thou wilt, poetry, if thou
desirest, prose, if thou choosest, or improvisation, if thou please, for
these are the subjects of the boast with which thou dost fill thy
mouth.'  <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) Al-Khwárazmí chose
improvisation and the result was his complete discomfiture. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20)

We are afraid the decision in favour of the author was not altogether
free from bias. Al-Khwárazmí was supported by his students while the
leading men of Nishapur, who had a grudge against him, sided with
Hamadhání. <span id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21) The verdict must have
been a foregone conclusion.

Hamadhání does not appear, however, to have cherished any

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

ill will against his vanquished rival. In his reply to some one, who
subsequently was uncharitable enough to write and felicitate him upon
al-Khwárazmí's illness, he administered a sharp rebuke to the writer and
told him that in the time of trouble all resentment disappears, that he
entertained the deepest affection for the great scholar and sincerely
prayed for his recovery. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

As no one had imagined there was a scholar who, under any circumstances,
had the temerity to enter the lists with al-Khwárazmí, Hamadhání's
success in vanquishing the great man caused his fame to spread far and
wide and secured him the patronage of the great and the powerful. In the
course of his subsequent travels there was not a prince, governor or
chief whose bounty he did not enjoy, and whose largess he did not
receive. <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23)

On the death of al-Khwárazmí in A.H. 383 (according to Ibn al-Athír in
A.H. 393) Hamadhání found himself without a rival. How long he remained
at Nishapur is not known, but writing to Shaikh Abd ‘Alí for a letter to
the Amír he complains that his sojourn there had been long, that he was
suffering from insomnia and, if there should be any delay in sending the
letter, he would be obliged to leave without it. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) After leaving this city he visited every
important town in Khurásán, Sijistán (Seistan) and the kingdom of
Ghazna, probably reciting his maqámát to admiring audiences wherever he
went. He finally settled in Herat <span id="fr_25"></span>[4](#fn_25)
where he greatly improved his position and circumstances by marrying the
daughter of a rich man named Abú ‘Alí Ḥusain al-Khushnámí. By this
marriage he had an only daughter to whom he refers in the most
affectionate terms. He writes: 'I am as devoted to her as a father to an
only son and I would not exchange her for ten sons.' <span
id="fr_26"></span>[5](#fn_26)

He appears to have carried on an extensive correspondence with a large
number of distinguished personages, the chief among whom were: Shaikh
Abd ‘Abbás, first minister of Sulṭán Maḥmúd of Ghazna, Adnán ibn
Muḥammad, the governor of

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Herat, Abú Ja‘far
al-Míkálí, Muḥammad ibn Zuheir, the governor of Balkh, the Wazír of Rayy
and others.

Proficiency in the epistolary art, such as Hamadhání could boast of, was
a sure passport to preferment in the author's time, but he does not
appear to have held any official position and the allusions to his being
appointed governor of Baṣra <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) and
administrator of a province in Syria <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28)
are, in all probability, a fiction. <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29)
He died at Herat on Friday, the 11th Jumádí’l ‘Ula. A.H. 398 (February,
1008) <span id="fr_30"></span>[4](#fn_30) at the comparatively early age
of forty lunar years, or eight years younger than Ḥarírí was when he
began to compose his Maqámát. <span id="fr_31"></span>[5](#fn_31)

According to Abú Ṣa‘íd ‘Abd al-Raḥmán ibn Muḥammad, 'He fell into a
lethargy and was buried with precipitation. He recovered when shut up in
the tomb, and his cries having been heard in the night his grave was
opened and he was found dead grasping his beard'. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[6](#fn_32) It is also said he was poisoned.

Judged by his Letters <span id="fr_33"></span>[7](#fn_33) he was a man
to whom family ties strongly appealed. His advice to his sister's son
manifests a commendable concern for the boy's education. He writes:
'Thou art my son as long as learning is thy business, the school thy
place, the ink-flask thy ally, and a book thy friend, but, if thou come
short, but methinks thou wilt not do so, then let another be thy
uncle.' <span id="fr_34"></span>[8](#fn_34)

Tha‘álibí, his acquaintance and biographer, sums up his ability and
character as follows: 'He was remarkable for his choice and correct
Arabic, the elegance of his epistles and the beauty of his poetry. He
was of pleasing appearance, cheerful, sociable, modest, large-hearted,
high-souled, a man of his word, sincere in his social relations, a true
friend, but a bitter enemy. <span id="fr_35"></span>[9](#fn_35)

His death, according to the same authority; was a great blow to
learning, and he was universally lamented and regretted; 'but', adds
Tha‘álibí, 'he is not dead whose fame liveth'. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[10](#fn_36) These words were written a short time
after the death of Hamadhání; and the succeeding nine centuries, during
which his influence

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

has penetrated the vast realm of Islámic literature, have proved that
they were not inappropriately applied to the author of the Maqámát.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](mhm04.htm#fr_0) See Letters of the author,
p. 47, line 1.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](mhm04.htm#fr_1) Ibid., pp. 8 and 9.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](mhm04.htm#fr_2) Abú’l-‘Ala Muḥammad ibn
Ḥusul, a native of Hamadhán, is the reputed author of these lines.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:1](mhm04.htm#fr_3) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, i, 101.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:2](mhm04.htm#fr_4) *Lubáb al-Albáb*, p. 17.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:3](mhm04.htm#fr_5) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, i, 101.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[2:4](mhm04.htm#fr_6) See *Yatíma*, i, 9.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[3:1](mhm04.htm#fr_7) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, i, 366.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[3:2](mhm04.htm#fr_8) See De Slane's Introduction
to Ibn Khallikan, pp. xxxi and xxxii,

<span id="fn_9"></span>[3:3](mhm04.htm#fr_9) Text, pp. 202-4 and
Letters, pp. 165-8.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[4:1](mhm04.htm#fr_10) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, i, 215.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[4:2](mhm04.htm#fr_11) *Yatíma*, iv, 168.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[4:3](mhm04.htm#fr_12) Letters, pp. 104-5.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[4:4](mhm04.htm#fr_13) *Yatíma*, iv, 168.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[4:5](mhm04.htm#fr_14) Letters, pp. 104-5.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[4:6](mhm04.htm#fr_15) Ibid., p. 390.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[4:7](mhm04.htm#fr_16) Text, pp. 110-15.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[5:1](mhm04.htm#fr_17) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, iii, 108. *Yatíma*, iv, 114.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[5:2](mhm04.htm#fr_18) The author uses the word
*Majlis* (…), Letters, p. 41, line 5.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[5:3](mhm04.htm#fr_19) Ibid., pp, 41-2.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[5:4](mhm04.htm#fr_20) Letters, pp, 80 and 83
and Yakút's *Dictionary of Learned Men*, i, 101.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[5:5](mhm04.htm#fr_21) *Yatíma*, iv, 137.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[6:1](mhm04.htm#fr_22) Letters, p. 187.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[6:2](mhm04.htm#fr_23) *Yatíma*, iv, 169. The
only one deemed worthy of praise in the Maqámát was Khalaf ibn Aḥmad,
the Amír of Sijistán.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[6:3](mhm04.htm#fr_24) Letters, p. 189.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[6:4](mhm04.htm#fr_25) See Letters, p. 337 for
the motives which prompted him to settle there.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[6:5](mhm04.htm#fr_26) Letters, p. 398.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[7:1](mhm04.htm#fr_27) Text, p. 196.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[7:2](mhm04.htm#fr_28) Ibid., p. 233.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[7:3](mhm04.htm#fr_29) See Letters, pp. 266-7.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[7:4](mhm04.htm#fr_30) Letters, p. 295.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[7:5](mhm04.htm#fr_31) De Sacy's Introduction to
Ḥarírí, p. 50.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[7:6](mhm04.htm#fr_32) Ibn Khallikan, De Slane's
Translation, i, 114.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[7:7](mhm04.htm#fr_33) Letters, pp. 245-9.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[7:8](mhm04.htm#fr_34) Ibid., p, 523.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[7:9](mhm04.htm#fr_35) *Yatíma*, iv, 168; also
Letters, pp. 253-5.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[7:10](mhm04.htm#fr_36) *Yatíma*, iv, 109.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Rhymed Prose](mhm05)
