[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm22)  [Next](mhm24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XV. THE MAQAMA OF JAHIZ <span id="fr_421"></span>[2](#fn_421)

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: I and a few friends were excited
at receiving an invitation to a banquet. <span
id="fr_422"></span>[3](#fn_422) I accepted it in accordance with the
well-known Tradition of the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Apostle <span
id="fr_423"></span>[1](#fn_423) of God, upon whom be the blessings of
God and peace--'If I were asked to share the shin-bone of a sheep, I
would not refuse, and were I presented with a leg of beef I would accept
it.' So we proceeded and reached a house,

'Completed and left <span id="fr_424"></span>[2](#fn_424) alone with
beauty from which it selected and chose what it would.  
And it had chosen from it its choicest charms, and requested more to
give away.'

whose carpets were spread and whose coverings were unfolded and whose
table was laid, and we found ourselves among a company who were passing
their time amid bunches of myrtle twigs, and bouquets of roses, broached
wine vats and the sound of the flute and the lute. We approached them
and they advanced to receive us. Then we clave <span
id="fr_425"></span>[3](#fn_425) to a table <span
id="fr_426"></span>[4](#fn_426) whose vessels <span
id="fr_427"></span>[5](#fn_427) were filled, whose gardens were in
flower, and whose dishes were arranged in rows with viands of various
hues, opposite a dish of something intensely black was something
exceedingly white, and against something very red was arranged something
very yellow.

Now with us at the feast was a man whose hand wandered over the table
playing the rôle of an ambassador between the viands of various hues,
seizing the choicest of the cakes and plucking out the centres of the
dishes, pasturing on his neighbour's territory, <span
id="fr_428"></span>[6](#fn_428) traversing the bowls, as the castle
traverses the chessboard, stuffing his mouth with morsel after morsel
and chasing mouthful with mouthful. And withal he was silent and spoke
not a word. We were conversing the while, until we got as far as the
subject of Jáḥiz and his oratory and a description of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ibn
al-Maqaffa’ <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_429) and his eloquence. Now
the commencement of this discussion coincided with the termination of
the meal. We then adjourned from that room and the man said to us:
'Where are ye in the discussion which ye were engaged in?' So we began
to praise what we knew of Jáḥiz and his language, of the elegance of his
style and quality of his rhetoric. Then he said: 'O people, every work
hath its men, every situation its saying, <span
id="fr_430"></span>[2](#fn_430) every house its occupants and every age
its Jáḥiz. If ye were to examine critically, your belief would be
falsified.' At this every one curled his lip <span
id="fr_431"></span>[3](#fn_431) in disapproval and turned up his nose in
contempt. But I smiled encouragingly upon him in order that I might draw
him out, and said: 'Inform us and tell us more.' He said: 'Verily Jáḥiz
limps in one department of rhetoric and halts in the other. Now the
eloquent man is he whose poetry does not detract from his prose and
whose prose is not ashamed of his verse: Tell me, do you know of a
single fine poem of Jáḥiz?' We said: 'No!' He said: 'Come, let us
consider his prose. It consists of far-fetched allusions, a paucity of
metaphors and simple expressions. He is tied down to the simple language
he uses, and avoids and shirks difficult words. Have you ever heard of a
rhetorical expression of his or of any recondite <span
id="fr_432"></span>[4](#fn_432) words?' We answered: 'No!' He then said
to me: 'Wouldst thou like a sample of speech which would lighten

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

thy shoulders <span id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_433) and disclose what
thou hast in thy hands?' I answered: 'By Heavens! Yes.' He said: 'Then
open thy little finger <span id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_434) for me by
means of that which will help in procuring thee thanks.' So I gave him
my mantle and he indited:--

'By the life of him <span id="fr_435"></span>[3](#fn_435) who hath
thrown over me his garment  
By him was that garment filled with glory.  
A worthy youth cheated out of his mantle by generosity,  
And it threw not a gaming arrow nor cast a gambling dice.  
O thou who hast given me thy raiment, look again,  
And let not the days bring ruin upon me.  
And tell them who, if they appear, appear as the morning sun,  
And, if they rise in the darkness, rise as the auspicious star,  
Observe the ties of your relationship to nobility and moisten her
palate,  
For the best of generosity is that whose downpour is prompt.' Cf. …--the
first is most generous.

Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: Then the company became expansive towards him and
gifts poured upon him. When we became mutually friendly, I enquired,
'Where is the orient of this full moon?' He answered:--

'Alexandria is my home, <span id="fr_436"></span>[4](#fn_436)  
If but there my resting-place were fixed,  
But my night I pass in Nejd, <span id="fr_437"></span>[5](#fn_437)  
In Ḥijaz my day.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[70:2](mhm23.htm#fr_421) Abú ‘Uthmán ibn Bahr
ibn Maḥbáb al-Kinání al-Laithí, generally known by the surname of
al-Jáḥiz, a native of Baṣra, was celebrated for his learning. He was the
author of numerous works, the three principal ones being *Kitáb
al-Haiwán* (the book of animals) *Kitáb al-Baian wa’l-Tabyín*
(description and exposition) and *Kitáb al-Bukhalá* (the book of
misers), and he also composed a discourse on the fundamentals of
religion. An offset of the Mu'tazilite sect was called al-Jáḥizíyya. It
is said of the works of Jáḥiz 'that they teach us to reason first, and
instruct us in literature next.' He was deformed in person, and the
prominence of his eyes, which seemed to be starting out of his head,
produced the surnames of al-Jáḥiz (the starer) and al-Ḥadaqí (the
goggle-eyed). He died at Baṣra A.H. 255 (A.D. 868-9), at the extreme age
of ninety years. Ibn Khallikan, ii, 405, Also Yaqút, Dictionary of
Learned Men (ed. by Professor Margoliouth), vi, p. 56.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[70:3](mhm23.htm#fr_422) *Were excited at
receiving an invitation to a banquet:* Literally, a banquet excited me
and a few friends. … a banquet, generally a marriage feast. For the
names of the various feasts. See *Khizanat al-Adáb*, iii, 212-13.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[71:1](mhm23.htm#fr_423) *According to the
Tradition of the Prophet:* This Tradition is cited by Jáḥiz himself. See
*Kitáb al-Bayán wa’l-Tabyín*, i, 163.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[71:2](mhm23.htm#fr_424) *Completed and left:*
Metre, *kámil*.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[71:3](mhm23.htm#fr_425) … *We clave to a
table:* For the meaning of this verb, see Qur’án, vii, 134.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[71:4](mhm23.htm#fr_426) … *A table:*
Arabicized from the Persian … pronounced … a thing upon which one eats,
said not to be so called except when food is upon it, but see Arabic
Text, p. 143.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[71:5](mhm23.htm#fr_427) *Vessels:* Literally,
cisterns, because of their size.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[71:6](mhm23.htm#fr_428) *Pasturing on his
neighbour's territory:* Contrary to …--A Tradition of the Prophet: 'Eat
from what is near thee,'

<span id="fn_429"></span>[72:1](mhm23.htm#fr_429) *Ibn al-Maqaffa’:* A
Persian convert to Islám renowned for the elegance of his style and
penmanship. He made several translations from the Pahlawi into Arabic.
The best specimen of his elegant and chaste Arabic is the Book of Kalila
and Dimna ultimately derived from the Sanskrit Fables of Bidpai, brought
over to Persia in the reign of al-Nushirwan. By command of the Khalífa
Al-Manṣúr, he was put to a horrible death on a charge of heresy in A.H.
142 (A.D. 759-60) by Sufyán the governor of Baṣra. Ibn Kallikan, i, 431.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[72:2](mhm23.htm#fr_430) *Every situation hath
its saying:* *Arab Proverbs*, ii, 456.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[72:3](mhm23.htm#fr_431) … *curled his lip in
disapproval:* Literally, showed him the tooth of denial.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[72:4](mhm23.htm#fr_432) … *Recondite:*
Literally, unheard of; rare; another reading … rhymed speech. Jáḥiz's
merits were a subject of controversy. Abú Hayyan Tanḥídí wrote an
encomium on him whereas the orthodox attacked him as a Mu'tazilite \[See
*al-Farq bain al-Firaq*, (A.H. 429), pp. 160 sqq\]. Hamadhání evidently
shared the orthodox opinion regarding this writer. In this Maqáma we
have an indication of Hamadhání's idea as to what constituted a good
style. It is evident he preferred rhetorical conceits and the recondite
to simple and straight-forward language. Of this the Maqámát affords
many illustrations.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[73:1](mhm23.htm#fr_433) *Lighten thy
shoulders:* i.e. relieve thee of the responsibility thou hast assumed in
thy defence of Jáḥiz.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[73:2](mhm23.htm#fr_434) *Open thy little
finger:* i.e. open thy hand and give something. The closing of the
little finger indicates avarice, e.g. in counting up to ten, the little
finger is the first to be closed and the last to be opened.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[73:3](mhm23.htm#fr_435) *By the life of hire:*
Metre, *tawíl*.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[73:4](mhm23.htm#fr_436) *Alexandria is my
home:* Metre, *mujtath*.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[73:5](mhm23.htm#fr_437) *Nejd:* is ten days
journey from, or about two hundred miles east of Yemáma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The Maqáma of the Blind](mhm24)
