[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm19)  [Next](mhm21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XII. THE MAQAMA OF BAGHDAD

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: When I was in Baghdad, <span
id="fr_360"></span>[4](mhm19.htm#fn_360) I longed for some of the Azaz
date, but I had no cash knotted up. So I went out to the shops seeking
an opportunity until my desire put me down at Karkh, <span
id="fr_361"></span>[5](#fn_361) when lo!

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I chanced upon a
rustic <span id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_362) urging his ass along his
waist-wrapper, tapering on one side with the weight of the money tied up
in it. Then I said: 'By Heavens, we have secured a quarry!' and I
addressed him with, 'Greeting on thee, Abú Zaid! whence art thou come,
and where art thou staying, and when didst thou arrive? Come, let us go
to the house.' The rustic said: 'I am not Abú Zaid, but Abú ‘Ubaid.' I
exclaimed, 'Of course; God curse the devil <span
id="fr_363"></span>[2](#fn_363) and put away forgetfulness; length of
time and distance made me forget thee; and how is thy father? Is he as
young as he was when I knew him, or has he aged since I left?' He
answered: 'The spring pasture <span id="fr_364"></span>[3](#fn_364) has
grown over and obliterated the traces <span
id="fr_365"></span>[4](#fn_365) of his grave and I hope God may receive
him to His paradise.' I exclaimed: 'Verily we are God's and to him do we
return! There is neither strength, <span id="fr_366"></span>[5](#fn_366)
nor power except in God, the High, the Great'; and my hand flew <span
id="fr_367"></span>[6](#fn_367) to my undershirt <span
id="fr_368"></span>[7](#fn_368) as if I wished to rend it. But the
rustic clasped my waist with his hands and said: 'I adjure thee by God
not to rend it.' Then I said: 'Let us go to the house and get some food,
or to the market and buy some roast meat, for the market is nearer and
the food there nicer.' Thus did I excite in him a fierce craving for
meat, and incline him with

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the inclination of gobbling and greed, and he became greedy. But he did
not know he had fallen into the trap.

Then we came to a fried-meat seller's whose roasted meats <span
id="fr_369"></span>[1](#fn_369) were dripping with fat, and whose cakes
were streaming with gravy. I said: 'Put aside for Abú Zaid a portion
from this fried meat and then weigh him some of that sweetmeat. Take
some of those plates and place upon them some of these wafer-cakes and
sprinkle upon them some juice of the Summak <span
id="fr_370"></span>[2](#fn_370) berry, in order that Abú Zaid may eat
and relish it.' So the fried-meat seller, with his long knife, bent over
the choicest productions of his oven, chopped them as small as collyrium
grains and pounded them as fine as flour. The rustic sat down and I did
likewise. He spoke not neither did I speak <span
id="fr_371"></span>[3](#fn_371) till we had eaten all. Then I said to
the *halwa-seller:* Weigh for Abú Zaid two pounds of confection of
almonds, for it is the easiest to swallow and the quickest to penetrate
through the veins. <span id="fr_372"></span>[4](#fn_372) It should have
been made overnight, <span id="fr_373"></span>[5](#fn_373) spread out in
the day, crisp, well stuffed, of pearl-like lustre and starry hue, and
should dissolve in the mouth like gum, before it is chewed, in order
that Abú Zaid may eat and enjoy it. He said: 'And

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

he weighed it.' So we got to work <span id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_374)
and ate till we finished it. Then I said: 'Abú Zaid, how badly we need
some iced water to quench this thirst and to allay the heat generated by
this meal. Sit down, Abú Zaid, till we fetch thee a water-carrier to
bring thee a drink of water.' Then I went out and sat where I could see
him but he could not observe me, in order to see what he would do. When
the rustic perceived that I delayed, he arose and went towards his ass,
but the fried-meat seller clung to his waist-wrapper and said: 'Where is
the cost of what thou hast eaten?' Said Abú Zaid: 'I ate it as a guest.'
Then the fried-meat seller struck him a blow with his fist and followed
it up with a cuff, saying: 'Take that, base-born fellow! When did we
invite thee? Pay <span id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_375) down twenty
dirhems.' The rustic began to weep .and to untie the knots with his
teeth saying, 'How often did I tell that contemptible ape, <span
id="fr_376"></span>[3](#fn_376) "I am Abú ‘Ubaid"', and he would say:--

'Nay but thou art Abú Zaid'.

Then I indited:--

'To obtain thy livelihood <span id="fr_377"></span>[4](#fn_377) make use
of every means;  
Do not be satisfied with any condition,  
But be equal to any enormity;  
For man becomes incapable, <span id="fr_378"></span>[5](#fn_378) there
is no doubt about it.'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_361"></span>[61:5](mhm20.htm#fr_361) *Al-Karkh:* The
business quarter of Baghdad on a site outside the city to which Manṣúr
transferred the trades people. Two reasons are assigned for this: (1) A
patrician came to Baghdad as an ambassador from the Byzantine court.
After he had been taken over the city, Manṣúr asked him what he thought
of it. He replied, 'It is a beautiful and well-fortified town, but for
the fact that your enemies are within its walls.' Manṣúr asked who they
were. The ambassador answered: The merchants who come from all parts as
spies, find out all they want to know and go away again and you are none
the wiser?' After the departure of the Ambassador, Manṣúr had all the
trades-people removed outside the city to Karkh. (2) The Khalífa found
that the smoke from the shops was spoiling the walls of the gates, and
to get rid of this smoke nuisance he had them transferred to Karkh.
Yaqút, i, 677.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[62:1](mhm20.htm#fr_362) … *a rustic:* From the
… the district of towns or villages and cultivated lands of al-‘Iráq, or
the district between Baṣra and Kúfa so-called because of …, which means
both greenness and a colour, approaching to blackness, of its trees and
seed produce. The Arabs call that which is … green, … black because it
appears to be thus at a distance. The meaning here is evidently 'a
greenhorn'.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[62:2](mhm20.htm#fr_363) *God curse the devil
and put away forgetfulness:* An allusion to Qur’án, xviii. 62.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[62:3](mhm20.htm#fr_364) … *The spring
pasture:* Literally, the spring. Another reading, … the pasture.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[62:4](mhm20.htm#fr_365) … *traces:* Cf. Hebrew
‏דמן‎

<span id="fn_366"></span>[62:5](mhm20.htm#fr_366) … *There is no
strength:* A formula used to express consternation or surprise.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[62:6](mhm20.htm#fr_367) … *My hand flew:*
Literally, I stretched the hasty hand.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[62:7](mhm20.htm#fr_368) … *undershirt:*
Literally, a certain garment with which the head and breast are covered,
worn by a woman mourning for her husband, or a small shirt worn next to
the body. A proverb says, … Every female having a ṣidár is a maternal
aunt, whom one is under an obligation to respect, and protect. *Arab
Proverbs*, ii, 310.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[63:1](mhm20.htm#fr_369) … *Whose roasted
meats:* pl. of … and … the latter formed by transposition, from the
Persian … a dish of meat, rice, vetches and walnuts in which a condiment
of syrup vinegar is poured food dressed under roast meat. It is also
called … The mother of Joyfulness, because it removes one's anxiety for
seasoning or condiment. See De Sacy, *Ḥarírí*, i, 227, and Mas‘údí,
viii, 405.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[63:2](mhm20.htm#fr_370) … *Summak: The rhus
coriaria of Linnaeus* or its berry, a well-known fruit; a certain acid
with which one cooks.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[63:3](mhm20.htm#fr_371) … *He despaired not,
neither did I despair*. Another reading to which I have given preference
… He spoke not, neither did I speak.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[63:4](mhm20.htm#fr_372) … or … *Confection of
almonds:* Lozenge and … from the Arabic … an almond. I think the
presumption in favour of the English lozenge being derived from this
word is strong. Originally …, Spanish *losanja* in which form it went
back to the east. This would explain the termination … See Mas‘údí,
viii, 240 for a poem by Ibn al-Rúmí (b. A.H. 221-84) in praise of this
sweetmeat. The word lauz occurs in Spanish as *alloza* and in Portuguese
as *arzolla*. See Dozy, *Loan words from Arabic*, and Letters, p. 307.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[63:5](mhm20.htm#fr_373) … *Overnight:*
Literally, a night old.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[64:1](mhm20.htm#fr_374) … *We got to work:*
Literally, he sat down and I sat down; he bared his arm and so did I.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[64:2](mhm20.htm#fr_375) … *Pay:* Literally,
weigh.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[64:3](mhm20.htm#fr_376) … *Contemptible ape*.
Diminutive of …. Another reading is … diminutive of … an ass. See
Cambridge MS.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[64:4](mhm20.htm#fr_377) *To obtain thy
livelihood:* Metre, *kámil*.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[64:5](mhm20.htm#fr_378) *Man is incapable
there is no doubt about it*. Meidání, *Arab Proverbs*, ii, 221 (Bulak
edition. A.H. 1287).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. The Maqáma of Basra](mhm21)
