[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm43)  [Next](mhm45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXVI. THE MAQAMA OF ARMENIA

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: When I was returning from
trading with Armenia, <span id="fr_857"></span>[3](#fn_857) the desert
guided us to its children and we stumbled on them upon the outskirts
thereof. They made our camels kneel down in that land of the ostrich,
while they cleared our provision bags, and eased our camels of their
burdens, and we remained all day <span id="fr_858"></span>[4](#fn_858)
in the hands of the band. The thong held us bound in groups and our
horses were forcibly tied up, until night followed up with its
darkness <span id="fr_859"></span>[5](#fn_859) and the Pleiades extended
its rays. <span id="fr_860"></span>[6](#fn_860)

Then they went in the direction of the hinder part of the desert and we
betook ourselves to the front thereof, and thus we continued till the
beauty of the dawn arose from behind the veil of modesty, and the sword
of the morning was drawn from the sheath of darkness. But the sun arose
upon nought except hair and skin. We ceased not to be in perils,
averting their

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

hindrances, and in the wastes traversing their surface, <span
id="fr_861"></span>[1](#fn_861) till we arrived at Merágha. <span
id="fr_862"></span>[2](#fn_862) And each one of us attached himself to a
companion and took a road. <span id="fr_863"></span>[3](#fn_863) There
clave unto me a youth with wretchedness apparent upon him and an old
worn-out garment over him, surnamed Abú’l-Fatḥ al-Iskanderí. We went in
search of the Father of Strengthening, <span
id="fr_864"></span>[4](#fn_864) and we found him appearing from a flame
fed with the *ghada* wood. So al-Iskanderí went to a man, begged a
handful of salt, and said to the baker: 'Allow me to use the top of the
oven, <span id="fr_865"></span>[5](#fn_865) for I am smitten with the
cold.' Now, when he had ascended its hump, he began to relate to the
people his condition, to inform them of his loss, and to scatter about
the oven salt from beneath his skirts, making the people think he had
vermin in his clothes. So the baker said: 'What aileth thee? Perish thy
father! Gather up thy skirts, for thou hast spoiled our bread.' And he
proceeded to take the loaves and to throw them away. And al-Iskanderí
began to pick them up and to put them under his arm. Now his cunning in
what he did amused me. He next said: 'Wait for me till I scheme to get
something to eat with it, <span id="fr_866"></span>[6](#fn_866) for
there is no device with destitution.' And he went to a man, who had
arranged in rows clean vessels, in which were different kinds of milk,
so he enquired the price and asked permission to taste it. The man said:
'Do so.' Then he moved his fingers about in the vessel as though he were
seeking something he had lost, and said: 'I have not the price of it
with me, but hast thou a desire for a shave?' The man exclaimed: 'God
disfigure thee! Art thou a barber?' <span
id="fr_867"></span>[7](#fn_867) He replied: 'Yes.' Then he made for his
ancestry to revile it,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

and the vessel to empty it. So al-Iskanderí said: 'Prefer me to Satan.'
He said: 'Take it, and mayest thou not be blessed through it.' So he
took it and we went to a secluded spot and consumed it all at once. Then
we journeyed on till we came to a village, and we begged food of its
inhabitants. So a young man from among the people hastened to his house
and brought us a large bowl whose utmost capacity milk had filled. <span
id="fr_868"></span>[1](#fn_868) We sipped it until we finished it. Then
we asked them for bread, but they refused it except on payment of the
price. Al-Iskanderí asked: 'What aileth ye that ye are generous with the
milk but refuse the bread except on payment?' The boy answered: 'This
milk was in a large vessel and a mouse fell into it. Therefore we give
it as alms to travellers.' Al-Iskanderí exclaimed: 'Good God!' <span
id="fr_869"></span>[2](#fn_869) and he seized the bowl and smashed it.
Then the boy shouted: 'Alas the loss! Alas my spoilation!' Then did our
flesh creep, our stomachs were turned and we got rid of what we had
eaten. And I said: 'This is the reward for what we did yesterday.' And
Abú’l-Fatḥ al-Iskanderí indited saying:

'O soul be not squeamish, <span id="fr_870"></span>[3](#fn_870) for the
hardy hath no qualms,  
He who associates with Time eats, the while, fat and lean.  
Therefore wear for one season the new, and put on for another the old.'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_857"></span>[142:3](mhm44.htm#fr_857) *Armenia:* The modern
name of a district south of the Caucasus and the Black Sea which formed
part of the ancient kingdom of Armenia which, according to Yaqút,
comprised 118 provinces.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[142:4](mhm44.htm#fr_858) … *All day:*
Literally, the whiteness of the day, i.e. daylight, and hence the whole
day as long as it is light.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[142:5](mhm44.htm#fr_859) *Its darkness:*
Literally, its tails; the dense darkness is compared to the thickness of
a horse's tail.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[142:6](mhm44.htm#fr_860) … *Its rays:*
Literally, its ropes; the similarity is obvious.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[143:1](mhm44.htm#fr_861) … *Traversing their
surface:* Literally, stripping their bark, figuratively for traversing
the surface.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[143:2](mhm44.htm#fr_862) *Merágha:* A town in
Azerbaijan the north-west province of Persia.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[143:3](mhm44.htm#fr_863) Took a road: That is,
each took a different way.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[143:4](mhm44.htm#fr_864) *Abú Jábir:* The
Father of Strengthening: Bread. Ḥarírí calls haríseh 'ummu Jábir', The
Mother of Strengthening. *Ḥarírí*, p. 224.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[143:5](mhm44.htm#fr_865) *Allow me to use the
top of the oven:* Literally, lend me the head of the oven.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[143:6](mhm44.htm#fr_866) … *something to eat
with it:* From … he mixed the bread with seasoning.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[143:7](mhm44.htm#fr_867) *Art thou a barber?*
An allusion to the contempt in which the calling of a barber was held.
According to Jáḥiz the barber was taken as typical of the lowest class
of society. Ḥaywán, iii, 46. Cf. *Ḥarírí*, p, 629.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[144:1](mhm44.htm#fr_868) … *Whose capacity
milk had filled:* Literally, the milk had stopped its breath.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[144:2](mhm44.htm#fr_869) … *Good God*! The
full formula is, 'verily we belong to God', so that He may do with us
what He pleaseth 'and verily to Him do we return', in the ultimate state
of existence. Said on an occasion of an affliction or calamity.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[144:3](mhm44.htm#fr_870) *O soul be not
squeamish:* Metre, *mujtath*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII. The Maqama of the Nájim](mhm45)
