[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Gnostic John the Baptizer

## Selections from the Mandæan John-Book

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Notes

The Mandæans are a small and little-known religious community living
principally in Iraq. They are the last group of traditional gnostics
left in the world and as such present a facinating and edifying 'field
of study.' They are not Christians,but trace their earthy heritage back
to the same John known as the 'Baptist' or 'Baptizer' in Christian
tradition, but they hold themselves radically aloof from both
Christianity and Judaism which they regard, in true gnostic fashion, as
perverted versions of the true relgion.

The author of this work, G. R. S. Mead, was a very prolific writer early
in the twentieth century, and most of his work focused on gnosticism and
other forms of western esoteric religion dating from the early centuries
of the Christian Era. He was also very active in the Theosophical
movement, serving for many years as H. P. Blavatsky's secretary. His
work is rarely mentioned in scholarly works these days, and his
credentials as a 'scholar' may be shaky, but given his background, he
had an understanding of esoteric religion that many university people
cannot approach to.

The translations contained in this book were almost all made at
second-hand from German translations of the originals, but the fact
remains that they are the only substantial source material on Mandæanism
that is in the public domain. More texts relating to the Mandæans are
available at the [Gnostic
Archives](https://www.gnosis.org/library/mand).

 

**On the transcription:**

This edition has been fully unicode-enabled. It utilizes the characters
ĀāĒēīŌōšūḍḥḪḫṣṬṭ—√, as well as full Greek text (*i.e.* ἀρχή). If any of
the characters in red do not display properly, you will need to install
a good unicode font to see them. Arial Unicode MS Font for Publisher
2000 is probably the most complete font available now for Windows. The
[Code 2000 shareware font](https://home.att.net/~jameskass/CODE2000.ZIP)
is also a very extensive Windows font.

NOTE: The Microsoft font mentioned above is no longer available. For
information about Unicode fonts, and general issues related to the use
of Unicode at Intangible Textual Heritage, please refer to [this
page](../../../unicode).--JBH

Quotations set in a smaller font in the original text have been rendered
indented (*i.e.* inside of &lt;BLOCKQUOTE&gt; tags).

Biblical citations which were rendered in the forms 3<span
class="small">7-9</span> and iii. 7-9 in the original text have been
normalized to the 3:7-9 format. Also, the abbreviation Matth. (used less
than half of the time) for Matthew has been normalized to Mt.

There is extensive use made of spacing between paragraphs in the
original text. Not all of this could be reproduced, and it is not always
clear that it is even intentional. I have put extra spacing where it
seemed that it was necessary to the meaning of the text. Also, the first
and last lines of almost every selection in part III are shown as
centered. This is not always the case in the original, but this is due
to the fact that the printed page was too small to show it that way, and
the centering helps to highlight those sections, which were sometimes
shown with extra spacing.

<span class="small">This book was reduced to HTML by Christopher M.
Weimer, March 2002, revised August 2002. All HTML content is copyright
and freely distributable for noncommercial use without the expressed
consent of the author.</span>
