[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index) [Previous](gjb-1) [Next](gjb-2-1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

## II.

## FROM THE JOHN-BOOK OF THE MANDÆANS.

WE will now proceed to see what the Gnostic John-folk have to say about
the person of Yōhānā and concerning their early Palestinian community,
and will conclude with some typical extracts from their John-Book
collection, of which the most characteristic and important will be what
may be called the sagas of the Fisher of Souls and of the Good Shepherd;
but first a word or two as to our sources of information.

 

### INTRODUCTORY.

   The Mandæans (lit. Gnostics—*mandā* = *gnōsis*) of the lower
Euphrates are the only known surviving community of the ancient Gnosis.
That they have survived to our own day<span
id="page_29_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_29_note_1) is a remarkable testimony
to the strength of their convictions and of loyalty to a tradition which
they claim to go back to pre-Christian days, The documents call them
Nāzōræans.<span id="page_29_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_29_note_2) The Arabs generally refer
to them as Sūbbā's or Baptists, while the first Portuguese Jesuit
missionaries of the Inquisition <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
erroneously introduced them to Europe in the early part of the 17th
century as the 'Christians of St. John.' But Christians they certainly
are not; on the contrary they have ever been strenuously opposed to
Christianity, though they may have sometimes so camouflaged themselves
to avoid Moslim persecution in the first place and the Inquisitional
methods of the missionaries in the second.

   The Mandæan religious literature (for of secular literature there is
none) supplies us with the richest direct sources of any phase of
ancient Gnosticism which we possess; these documents are also all the
more valuable because they are purely Oriental without any Hellenistic
immixture. Indeed our only other considerable direct sources, that is
sources not contaminated or rendered suspect by transmission through
hostile hands, are the Trismegistic literature, the Coptic Gnostic
documents and the recent Manichæan finds in Tūrfān. The Mandæan language
is little used by the faithful except for religious purposes. The M.
communities in general have for long used Arabic as their common speech,
though one or more groups speak Persian. Mandæan is a South Babylonian
dialect of Aramæan, its nearest cognate being the Northern Babylonian as
in the Babylonian Talmūd. Their graceful script is peculiar to the
Mandæans; the vowels are in full lettering and are not indicated by
points or other diacritical marks.

   Their literature was once far more extensive; for what we possess is
manifestly in the form of extracts collected from manifold more ancient
sources, which are no longer extant.

   The chief existing documents are as follows:

   1. The *Sidrā Rabbā* (Great Book) or *Genzā* <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> (Treasury), which is divided into Right and Left pages, for
the living and the deceased respectively, it is said, but I am told that
in some copies the alternate pages are reversed and in some ceremonies
read simultaneously by two readers facing each other. It consists of
sixty-four pieces or tractates,—theological, cosmological, mythological,
ethical and historical. This collection is indubitably prior to the
Mohammedan conquest (*cir*. 651 A.D.), and its sources are of course far
more ancient.

   2. The *Sidrā d'Yahyā* (Book of John), also called *Drāshē d'Malkē*
(Discourses of the \[Celestial\] Kings). A considerable number of its
pieces, which can be listed under thirty-seven headings, deal with the
life and teachings of John the Baptizer. Yahyā is the Arabic form of
John, the Mandæan Yōhānā, Heb. Yoḥanan; the two forms, Arabic and
Mandæan, alternate and show that the collection was made, or more
probably redacted, after the Moslim conquest.

   3. The *Qolastā* (Quintessence or Selections called also the Book of
Souls)—Liturgies for the Baptismal Ceremony, the Service for the
Departed (called the 'Ascent'—*Masseqtā*) and for the Marriage Ritual.
These hymns and prayers are lofty, though most of them are presumably
not so ancient as those in the *Genzā*.

   4. The *Dīvān* containing the procedure for the expiation of certain
ceremonial offences and sketches of the 'regions' through which the soul
must pass in its ascent.

   5. The *Asfar Malwāshē* (Book of the Zodiacal Constellations).

   6. Certain inscriptions on earthen cups and also pre-Mohammedan lead
tablets.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

   It would not be difficult to prepare an annotated bibliography (as we
have done elsewhere for the Coptic Gnostic *Pistis Sophia* document)
tracing the history of the development of Mandæan study in the West from
the 17th century onwards, but this is a sketch not a treatise. It is
sufficient to say that, owing to the difficulty of the language, no one
did any work of permanent value on the texts till the Dutch scholar A.
J. H. Wilhelm Brandt published his arresting studies—*Die Mandäische
Religion* (Leipzig, 1884) and *Mandäische Schriften* (Göttingen, 1803),
the latter containing a version of selected pieces from the *Genzā*.
Brandt was the real pioneer translator (basing himself on Nöldeke's
indispensable Mandæan Grammar, 1875); his predecessors were either
entirely ignorant of the language or indulged mainly in guess-work.
Brandt's art. 'Mandæans' in Hastings' *Encyclopedia of Religion and
Ethics* (1915) is a valuable summary of his most matured views, and to
it I would refer my readers as the best general Introduction
available.<span id="page_32_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_32_note_1) Brandt's philological
equipment in so difficult and rare a dialect as Mandæn, however, was not
sufficient for the work of full translation. Moreover he does not seem
to me to have sufficiently realized the great importance of the subject
for the general history of pre-Christian and early Christian Gnosticism.
This, however, was fully recognized by the late Prof. Wilhelm Bousset,
who devoted <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> many pages of his admirable
study *Hauptprobleme der Gnosis* (Göttingen, 1907) to showing the
enormous light which the earliest deposits of the *Genzā* throw on pre-
and non-Christian Gnostic notions. Indeed in this work Bousset gave a
quite new historical perspective to Gnostic studies, and showed the
great importance of the Mandæan, Coptic Gnostic and Manichæan documents,
when critically treated, for tracing the genesis and development of the
widespread Gnosis of antiquity, which had its proximate origin in the
influence of Persian ideas on Babylonian religious traditions from the
time of the Great Kings (6th century B.C.) onwards, with further
Hellenistic immixture and modifications after the conquest of Alexander
the Great (last third of 4th century B.C.). There is also a parallel
blending and Hellenization of Egyptian mystery-lore as seen most clearly
in the Trismegistic tradition. More recently Prof. R. Reitzenstein, who
has done such excellent work on the Trismegistic Gnosis and on the
Hellenistic mystery-religions, has published a valuable contribution to
M. research in his *Das Mandäische Buch des Heern der Grösse*
(Heildelberg, 1919). Both these scholars are free from that apologetic
tendency to which so few Christian scholars can rise superior in dealing
with the Gnosis. But the *savant* to whom we owe most is Prof. Mark
Lidzbarski, whose extraordinary knowledge of Aramæan dialects and allied
Semitic linguistics has at last placed in our hands reliable versions of
two of the M. collections: *Das Johannesbuch der Mandäer* (Giessen,
1915) and *Mandäische Liurgien* (Berlin, 1920). L. has also made a
translation of the *Genzā*, the publication of which is eagerly
expected.<span id="page_33_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_33_note_1)

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

   Until this appears it is not possible to be reasonably sure of all
one's ground and so get an all-round perspective of it. Meantime, as no
really adequate translation of any pieces have so far appeared in
English,<span id="page_34_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_34_note_1) I think it will be of
service to give a selection of renderings from the German of
Lidzbarski's John-Book, so that readers of these pages may become
acquainted with specimens of the material, and be in a better position
in some measure to appreciate for themselves its nature, quality and
importance; for it may eventually turn out to be one of the most
valuable indications we possess for Background of Christian Origins
research. These renderings will be as close to the German as possible,
so that readers may have L.'s version practically before them, and the
inevitable leakage of translation from translation be reduced to a
minimum. Even so, I hope that what seems to me to be the beauty of the
original, will not be entirely evaporated. The major part of the
material of the Liturgies is indubitably in verse; but the John-Book as
well, if not also mainly in verse, as a most competent Aramæan scholar
assures me, is clearly in rhythmic prose (*Kunstprosa*) and highly
poetical. L., however, has not broken up the lines as in the Liturgies.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

   First let us begin with the pieces purporting to give information
concerning the person of the prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. i. The Gnostic John the Baptizer](gjb-2-1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_29">p. 29</span>

<span id="page_29_note_1"></span>[1](#page_29_fr_1) In 1875 N. Siouffi,
the French Vice-Consul at Mosul, estimated them at some 4,000 souls in
all (*Etudes sur la Religion des Soubbas ou Sabéens*, Paris, 1880).
These were then to be found chiefly in the neighbourhood of Baṣra aud
Kút. Siouffi's estimate, however, was certainly too low; for Shaikh K.
Dojaily, Lecturer in Arabic at the School of Oriental Studies, informs
me that he quite recently obtained from the supreme head of all the
communities at Naziriyah the precise statistics, and that they still
number about 10,000 men, women and children.

<span id="page_29_note_2"></span>[2](#page_29_fr_2) This is a very
ancient general designation used by a number of early sects. It has
nothing to do with Nazareth (Q. Nazara), which is quite unknown outside
the gospel-narratives, not to speak of the philological impossibility of
such a word-formation as Nazoræan from Nazareth. Lidzbarski rejects W.
B. Smith's (in *Der vorchristliche Jesus*, Giessen, 1906)
derivation—Nazar-Ya ( = Jehoshua—Jesus—Sotēr—Saviour), and makes a good
case for origin in √NZR, with the meaning of 'to observe'; hence
'Observers'—*sc*. of the laws or ordinances or may be of the holy life
(*Liturgies*, pp. xvi.ff.).

<span id="footnotes_page_32">p. 32</span>

<span id="page_32_note_1"></span>[1](#page_32_fr_1) Brandt passed away
from this scene of his labours on March 4, 1915, and his posthumous work
*Die Mandäer: ihre Religion und ihre Geschichte* (Trans. of Koninklijke
Akadamie van Wetenshappen te Amsterdam, Nov., 1915) is practically a
German edition of this article. Kessler's art. 'Mandäer' (*Redencyk f.
prot Theolog.*, 3rd ed., Herzog-Hauck, Leipzig 1903) is a helpful study;
it entirely supersedes his *Enc. Brit.*, 9th ed., art. K. avers that the
M. literature preserves the oldest form of the Gnosis known to us. Art.
'Mandæans,' *Enc. Brit.*, 11th ed., 1911, is stated to be part K. and
part. G. W. Thatcher; it is a poor production even as a summary of K.'s
later art. It is short, contemptuous and superficial, and deprives the
reader of much that is most valnable in K. in the shape of references
and parallels. It would have been really better to have translated K.
literally.

<span id="footnotes_page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="page_33_note_1"></span>[1](#page_33_fr_1) On May 15, 1923, Dr.
R. Eisler informed me: "L. writes that his trans. of *Genzā* is
fininhed; printing will begin soon and take about a year and a half."
Unfortunately since then the difficuities of publication in Germany have
so increased, that the arrangements for printing have fallen through,
and this most indispensable basic source of infomation for students of
the Mandæan Gnosis is accordingly held up.

<span id="footnotes_page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="page_34_note_1"></span>[1](#page_34_fr_1) To be precise, in
book-form; for I have already published the following versions in *The
Quest* in the last two years; they are but a third of the translations I
have made in MS. from the John-Book, and the Liturgies. I say this,
however, in no disparagement of Miss A. L. B. Hardcastle's sympathetic
and painstaking studies, containing some versions in which the work of
Brandt and his predecessors was fortitied by her own praiseworthy
efforts to grapple with a dictionary-less language. These studies were
suggested, warmly encouraged and appreciated by myself, and were as
follows: 'The Liberation of Jōhannā. (*Theosophical Rev.*, Sept, 1902);
'Fragments from the Mandæan Traditions of J. the B.' (*Quest*, Ap.
1910); 'The Book of Souls: Fragments of a Mandæan Mystery Ritual' (*ib*.
Jan. 1912); 'The Mandæan Chrism' (*ib*. Jan. 1914).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
