[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index) [Previous](gjb-0-2) [Next](gjb-2-0)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

## I.

## JOHN THE BAPTIZER AND CHRISTIAN ORIGINS.

A RECENT STUDY ON JOHN'S SYMBOLISM.

A DISTINCT ray of light has been cast on the obscure background of
Christian origins by Dr. Robert Eisler in a series of detailed studies
on the movement and doctrines of John the Baptizer. These studies, with
other cognate essays, appeared originally in the pages of *The Quest*
(1909-14), and are now available in book-form in an arresting volume,
called *Orpheus—the Fisher: Comparative Studies in Orphic and Christian
Cult Symbolism*.<span id="page_1_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_1_note_1)

   By way of introduction and as the most complete contrast to the
Mandæan tradition of the Gnostic John, I will set forth in my own way
the chief points of these detailed and fully-documented essays in
summary fashion. Eisler's main point of view is that John based his
doctrines and practices largely, if not entirely, on the Hebrew
scriptures—the Law and the Prophets—of which, he contends, he was a
profound knower. The John-movement is thus regarded as a characteristic
Jewish prophetical reform founded on absolute faith in the present
fulfilment of prior prophecy. Hereby is brought out in the strongest
possible manner the Jewish conditioning of John's preaching and
teaching, and this stands in the sharpest contradiction to the <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> Mandæan tradition which claims that John was a
Gnostic and not a Torah-man, and declares that the Jews could by no
means understand him, but on the contrary rejected his revelation and
drove out his community.

   In Eisler we have a ripe scholar in whom the heredity of Rabbinical
lore is so to say innate. He has almost an uncanny *flair* for biblical
texts; it is not too much to say that his knowledge of the religious
literature of his people is profound, his acquaintance with oriental
sources very extensive and his linguistic accomplishments are enviable.
Few are thus better able to enter with sympathy and understanding into
the idiosyncrasies and depths of the Jewish mind in the various periods
of its development, and thus for the time to live in the prophetical,
apocalyptic and rabbinical thought-world of the days of the Baptist and
share in its old-time beliefs and hopes and fears. Our exponent is thus
an excellent advocate of the theme he sets forth. If his wide-flung net
has not caught all the fish of the literary and archæological ocean, he
has fished most carefully the stream of John the Baptist tradition,
apart from the Mandæan, landed a rich catch and shown others how most
fruitfully to set about bringing to the surface things about John which
have long been hidden in the depths of a buried past.

 

THE JOHN-PASSAGE IN 'THE ANTIQUITIES' OF JOSEPHUS.

   In all reason, apart from Christian testimony, John the Baptizer is a
historic character, witnessed to by the Jewish historian Josephus, the
courtly Flavian chronicler who flourished in the last quarter of the
<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> 1st century A.D. The famous passage in his
*Antiquities* (XVIII. v. 2, ed. Niese, iv. 161, 162) referring to John
is undoubtedly genuine, and has been assailed only by the very extreme
doctrinaire non-historical school, who find it a very inconvenient thorn
in their flesh. A Christian forger would have dotted the i's and crossed
the t's with the pen of his tradition, or at any rate betrayed himself
in some way by the prejudice of his thought; but this we do not find.
The passage runs as follows as nearly as I can render it:

>    Some of the Jews thought that Herod's army had been destroyed, and
> indeed by the very just vengeance of God, in return for \[his putting
> to death of\] John the Baptizer. For in fact Herod put the latter to
> death \[though he was\] a good man, nay even one who bade the Jews
> cultivate virtue and, by the practice of righteousness in their
> dealings with one another and of piety to God, gather together for
> baptism. For thus in sooth \[John thought\] the dipping (in water)
> would seem acceptable to him (God), not if they used it as a
> begging-off in respect to certain sins, but for purity of body, in as
> much as indeed the soul had already been purified by righteousness.
>
>    Now since the others<span id="page_3_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
> class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_3_note_1) were gathering
> themselves together (or becoming organized),—for indeed they were
> delighted beyond measure at the hearing of his (John's) 'sayings'
> (*logoi*),—Herod, fearing that his extraordinary power of persuading
> men might lead to a revolt, for they seemed likely in all things to
> act according to his advice, judged it better, before anything of a
> revolutionary nature should eventuate from him, to arrest him first
> and make away with him, rather than when the change came, he should
> regret being faced with it.
>
>    Accordingly, on Herod's suspicion, he was sent in bonds to
> Machærus,<span id="page_3_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
> class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_3_note_2) the above-mentioned
> fortress, and put to death there. The Jews, however, believed that
> destruction befell the army to avenge him, God willing to afflict
> Herod.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

   This statement of Flavius Josephus is sufficiently categorical. It
states clearly that John the Baptizer was a very remarkable prophetical
reformer of the day and that his following was very considerable. John's
'sayings,' Josephus tells us, had an astonishingly persuasive power over
the Jewish populace. Herod fears John's influence and is convinced that
he could do anything he pleases with the people. But what interests us
most in this unfortunately too short statement is the reference to the
nature of John's practice and teaching. His proclamation to the Jews,
like that of all the prophets before him, was a strenuous call to
righteousness,—they were to practise righteous dealings with one another
(love of neighbour) and piety to God (love of God). There was also an
external rite of baptism; but it had to be preceded by a cleansing of
the soul through the fulfilling of this duty to neighbour and to God.
Josephus particularly points out that the public washing or dipping was
by no means intended as a magical rite, which so many believed in those
days capable of washing away sins. The baptism was not a daily practice,
Josephus seems to imply, as among the Essenes and other sects, but a
public corporate act; and therefore the historian is clearly in error in
regarding it as simply for the purifying of the body. On the contrary,
it distinctly conveys the impression of being designed as an outer
testimony to some belief—an act of faith.

 

THE N.T. ACCOUNT: THE DRESS AND FOOD OF REPENTANCE.

   And now let us pass to our New Testament information. Without laying
stress on the details of the story of John's infancy as given in the
third gospel, <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> reminiscent as they may be
of the Old Testament birth-stories of the old-time national heroes
Isaac, Samson and Samuel, not to mention the coincidence that the two
heroines of the gospel birth-narratives bear the names of Miriam and
Elisheba, the sister and wife respectively of Aaron, the first priest,
we may very reasonably believe, as it is stated, that John was of
priestly descent; and therefore in every probability he was well versed,
if not highly trained, in the scriptures.

   Vowed from his birth to God by his parents, his strange dress and
peculiar ascetic mode of life are quite in keeping with prophetical
traditions, and thus of the schools of the prophets and of the Nazirs.
As the prophets of old, notably Elijah, he wore a skin robe. But in
keeping with the spiritual significance of his whole teaching, which
will be more fully brought out in the sequel, such an outer sign in high
probability had an inner meaning for this great proclaimer of
repentance, of the turning back of Israel in contrition unto God.

   Now there were certain Palestinian pre-Christian allegorists or
exponents of the scriptures on quasi-mystical lines called Dorshē
Reshumōth. According to a Rabbinic legend, going back along this line of
interpretation, the ancient myth of [Gen.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#3:21) was conceived more spiritually.
After the fall, the first falling away from God, Yahveh-Elohīm clothed
Adam and Eve in coats of skin (*'ōr*), not because of their nakedness,
but in exchange for their lost paradisaical garments of light (*'ōr*).

   John lived at a time when such mystical interpretations, with a host
of prophetical and apocalyptic notions, were in the air. It might very
well then be <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> that he himself in wearing a
skin-robe intended something more than a simple copying of the fashion
of the ancient prophets. In keeping with his ruling idea he may have
thought it a most appropriate outer sign of repentance, a return to the
first garments of fallen man, the proper robe of penitent sinners, and
therefore especially of a leader who would show the people a
whole-hearted example of turning again to God, thus retracing in a
contrary direction the way of the fall.

   So too with regard to food, there must be a return to the primitive
law laid down for primal fallen man [(Gen.
1:29)](../../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#1:29): "Behold, I have given you every
herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of the earth, and every tree,
in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for
meat." It was only after the Deluge that men were permitted to eat
animal food, according to the Noahic covenant as it is called. Imbued
with ideas of penitence and repentance, John would desire to return to
the strictest food-regulations of the earliest days of the fall, in
keeping with his symbolic manner of clothing. Not only so, but seemingly
with a refinement of self-discipline as a means of contrition, John
chose from out the many 'fruits from a tree yielding seed' that of the
carob or locust-tree, which was considered by the Jewish allegorists the
most appropriate food of repentance. For we have preserved from this
line of tradition an ancient proverb: "Israel needs carob-pods to make
him repent," said to be based on a prophecy in [Isaiah
(1:20)](../../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#1:20) which the Midrash (*Wayikra
Rabba*, 35) quotes as: "If ye be willing and obedient, the good of the
land shall ye eat; but if ye refuse and resist, carob-pods shall ye
eat"—where the last clause differs considerably from the R.V., which
reads: "ye shall be devoured by the <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>
sword." Perhaps the 'husks' eaten by the Prodigal in the gospel-parable
may in the original Aramaic have been carob-pods [(Lk.
15:16)](../../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#15:16). Much controversy has raged
round the 'locusts' eaten by John, and early versions are various.

   As for drink,—in addition to water for general purposes, John is said
to have in particular sipped the honey of the wild bees. Why is this
brought into so great prominence? Again perhaps this custom was
determined for John by the same circle of ideas. He probably bethought
him of [Deut. 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#32:13): "He made him to
suck honey out of the rock," and also of [Ps.
81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#81:16): "And with honey out of the rock
shall I satisfy thee." From such considerations it may plausibly be
believed that John adopted an asceticism of repentance with regard to
clothing and food as completely in accordance with the scriptures as
possible, and this in addition to the customary discipline of a vowed
Nazir, 'consecrated' or 'made holy' as such from birth. The technical
term for a Nazir is a Nazirite unto God, or holy unto God, as of Samson
(LXX. Judges, [13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg.htm#13:7),
[16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg.htm#16:9)),—in brief God's 'holy one.'

 

POPULAR MESSIANIC EXPECTATIONS.

   According to Josephus the great fear of Herod was that the
reformatory movement of John would develop into a dangerous political
Messianic revolt. The populace was on the tip-toe of expectation; many
rumours were afloat as to the nature of the long-expected God's
Anointed. Some thought he was to be a Nazir who would free Israel from
their present foes, even as in days of old the Nazir Samson had freed
them from the yoke of the Philistines. Moreover the well-known prophecy
[(Is. 11:1)](../../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#11:1) about the 'sprout' from the
<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> root or stem of Jesse gave rise to much
speculation, helped out by that word-play which exercised so powerful a
fascination over the imaginative minds of the Jews of that day, and long
before and after over other minds in many other lands. Now 'sprout' in
Hebrew is *neṣer* or *nezer*; and this *neṣer* was to be the longed-for
'saviour' (again *neṣer*)—sounding so well together with *nazir*.
Indeed, as was thought, he must needs be a Nazarai-an (Heb. *noṣeri*,
Gk. *nazōrai-os*). Or again, as others expected, he was to be a
carpenter (Aram. *bar nasar*), this being, according to a Samaritan
Midrash, as we shall see in the sequel, in association with the
expectation that the coming Redeemer was to be a second Noah,
spiritually hewing and preparing the timber for a new ark of salvation.

   All this was in the air and widespread; it is then quite believable,
whether John himself made any such claims or no, that there were many
rumours current of a Messianic purport concerning the strange appearance
and powerful appeal of the renowned Baptizer. His Nazarite vow, his garb
and diet of repentance, his confident proclamation of the very near
approach of the catastrophic end of this æon or age or world,—all would
conspire to make some, if not many, think that he himself was the great
Nazir-Neṣer, the expected 'holy one' of God. By others he was thought to
be Elijah returned, as the prophet Malachi (the Book of the Angel or
Messenger of Yahveh) had foretold ([4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal.htm#4:5)):
"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and
terrible Day of the Lord come"; or even, may be, some thought that that
prophet of promise like unto Moses [(Deut.
18:15)](../../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#18:15) had been raised up in John. John
himself apparently made no claim to be any of these; he was a proclaimer
of the near approach of the great and terrible Day and <span
id="page_9">p. 9</span> a powerful exhorter to repentance. It is
doubtful even whether he gave himself out to be simply "the voice of one
crying in the wilderness" [(Mk. 1:3)](../../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#1:3); for
such a knower of the scriptures would have been aware that the original
of [Isaiah 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#40:3) read: "The voice of one
crying: In the wilderness, etc." But apparently John was not only an
inspired prophet, he was also a wonder-worker, if certain echoes
concerning him in the Synoptics ring true. For there we read that
because of his healing wonders Jesus was thought by some to be John
returned from the dead, and that the same accusation in this connection
of being possessed by a demon brought against Jesus had also been
brought against John.

 

THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE JORDAN-WATER.

   However all this may be, John was utterly convinced, not only that
the time of the End was close at hand, but also that the prophecies were
beginning to be fulfilled. But what of his characteristic baptizing in
the Jordan of all places? This is taken as a simple historic fact which
requires no explanation by the vast majority; but it presents a serious
problem for those who are aware that in those days the brackish waters
of the sluggish Jordan were deemed by theologians and ritualists as
unfit for purificatory purposes. What then could have induced John to
reject this priestly and purist tabū? Tho only feasible motive is to be
found in supposing that John was convinced that a remarkable prophetical
vision of [Ezekiel (47:1-8)](../../../bib/kjv/eze.htm#47:1), where the
prophet is addressed as Son of Man, was being fulfilled. In the
longed-for time of the Messianic deliverance a mighty stream of holy
water from the temple-hill of Zion was to flow down and heal the waters
of the unclean Jordan-land, the Arabah or Desert.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

   Eisler has acutely conjectured that this idea of a fount of living
and healing water for Israel goes back ultimately to [Isaiah
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#28:16), not however as it stands at
present in the R.V. wording, but in its extended form which was well
known up to the 3rd century A.D. This reads as follows according to his
rendering: "Behold, I lay down in Zion a living stone, a stone of
probation, a precious threshold-stone for a foundation. Out of its
hollow shall flow forth rivers of living water; he that believeth on me
shall not suffer from drought."

   This was naturally taken by the allegorists of the time in a
spiritual sense, even as they explained the water miraculously supplied
to the Israelites in the Desert as a figure for the Torah or Law. The
living water signified the Word of Yahveh, the outpouring of the spirit
of God. Thus the Messianic Spring of living water could well be believed
to typify an intensification or consummation of the Divine Law,
heralding the manifestation of the Sovereignty of God in the Last Days.
But spiritual reality and material happenings were never widely divorced
in the mind of a pious Jew, and thus there was a literal meaning as well
to be given to prophecy.

 

THE PROBABLE SYMBOLIC SIGNIFICANCE OF JOHN'S BAPTISM.

   If all this is well conceived, it is not difficult to understand what
Josephus tells us of John's method, though the proper sense of John's
motive seems to have escaped the historian. Deeply stirred by the
strenuous exhortations of the teacher and the extraordinary power of a
proclaimer so utterly convinced of the near coming of the terrible Day,
little wonder that the people, just <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> as
in evangelical revivals of our own day, were filled with an agony of
penitence which would find relief only in a public confession of their
sins. Thereafter they were plunged in the Jordan, signifying no external
washing, but a very drowning as it were of the old body of sin in that
now sacred stream to which faith ascribed life-redeeming properties, a
regeneration wrought by the saving spring of God's outpouring flowing
down from the sanctuary into the desert. If they repented, if they once
unfeignedly turned again to God, then would the prophetical promise in
[Micah 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic.htm#7:19) be fulfilled: "He will turn
again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities.
Yea, thou wilt wash away all our sins into the depths of the sea."

 

THE BAPTISM OF THE PROSELYTES.

   But in practising this baptismal rite John was running counter to far
more than the priestly purist tabū which regarded the Jordan water as
unfit for purification. He was baptizing *Israelites*, and in so doing
putting the Chosen ones on a level with those gentiles who had to submit
to a bath of purification before they could be admitted to the
privileges of the sons of Abraham. A proselyte or a 'new-comer'
(*advena*) who would join the church or ecclesia of Israel, had to
submit to a baptismal rite, the pre-Christian origin of which is no
longer disputed. It was a bath not only of purification but also of
regeneration in the presence of legal witnesses. The candidate stood in
the water and listened to a short discourse consisting of commandments
from the Law. Thereon the gentile convert dipped completely under the
water, signifying the drowning of his previous impious and idolatrous
self. Thereafter he arose <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> reborn a true
Israelite. And this new birth was taken in a very literal sense, for
after the rite the neophyte, or 'new-born babe,' could no longer inherit
from his former gentile relatives; not only so, but according to
Rabbinic casuistry he could not even commit incest with one of them.
This regenerative gentile baptism (*tebilah gerīm*). was made by the
theologians to depend from the promise in [Ezekiel
(36:25-26)](../../../bib/kjv/eze.htm#36:25): "I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness and from
all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart I will give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you."

   But this prophecy clearly applied to Israel only. It could never have
been intended as the sanction of a customary rite for converted
gentiles. It is thus very credible that a fervent eschatologist, filled
with Messianic expectations, such as John, would conceive the promise as
foreshadowing a unique miraculous event of the Last Days. Moreover
John's insistence on baptism for the Jews, at a time when their
religious leaders thought it necessary to impose baptism on gentile
converts as a purificatory regenerative rite making them fit to be
associated religiousy with the naturally born sons of Abraham, seems
clearly to have been dictated by the deeper spiritual conviction that it
was Israel itself who required regeneration. For John, from the
standpoint of spiritual values, the Jews were no more a privileged
people; they had forfeited their birthright; Israel itself was now no
better than the heathen. Physical kinship with Abraham could no longer
be considered a guarantee against the Wrath to come. To escape the
trials and terrors of that Day the only way for them was to repent, and
so become members of the new spiritual Israel by submitting to <span
id="page_13">p. 13</span> a rite similar to that which they arrogantly
imposed on the gentiles. What greater humiliation than this could there
be to the racial pride of the Jew? But things were so desperate, that it
required even this act of humiliation as an earnest of truly sincere
repentance and contrition. Unrepentant they were no better than heathen
idolaters.

 

ONE OF JOHN'S DISCOURSES AND ITS SYMBOLISM.

   Let us now turn to the first part of the short but powerful address
of the Baptizer handed on by [Mt.
(3:7-10)](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#3:7) and [Lk.
(3:7-9)](../../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:7), a most interesting example of
those stirring utterances or 'sayings' of his referred to by Josephus.

>    Ye out-births of vipers, who hath given you a glimpse of fleeing
> from the Wrath to come? Make fruit, therefore, worthy of (or
> sufficient for) your repentance. And think not (Lk. begin not) to say
> within (or among) yourselves: We have Abraham \[for\] father. For I
> say unto you that God is able of these stones (Aram.
> *'ab<sup>e</sup>nayya*) to raise (or wake) up children (Aram.
> *b<sup>e</sup>nayya*) for Abraham. But even now the axe is laid unto
> the root of the trees: every tree, therefore, which beareth not good
> fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

   This graphic discourse, contained in Q, begins with the same terrible
phrase 'generation' or 'out-births of vipers' which Jesus also uses on
several occasions. It may possibly go back to [Micah
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic.htm#7:17), where we read, referring to the
heathen: "They shall lick the dust like serpents, like those creeping on
the earth." And if 'licking the dust' can be taken in the sense of the
allegorists of the time, who interpret it as eating excrement, a fate
allotted to the serpent-shaped souls of the damned in Sheōl, it becomes
all the more strikingly graphic. In vain do they think they will <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> escape because they are of kinship with
Abraham, or that God cannot repeat the wonder he once wrought, of
raising up children out of the barren rock of their forefather. God is
able to make a new Israel out of the very stones, just as he had of old
hewn, like stones (Heb. *'abanīm*), a line of sons (Heb. *bānīm*) from
the once barren rock of Abraham, as Isaiah says
([51:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#51:1)): "Look unto the rock whence ye
were hewn . . . look unto Abraham your father."

   This for the 'stones'; but what of the 'trees'? There are other
passages in the O.T. (*e.g.* [Ps. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#1:1),
[Jer. 17:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer.htm#17:5)) which liken the man who
delights in the Law and has faith in Yahveh to fruit-bearing trees; but
the most arresting verse in this connection is to be found in the
continuation of the same vision in [Ezekiel
(47:1-8)](../../../bib/kjv/eze.htm#47:1) which so graphically depicted
the Messianic Source. This reads (v. 12):

   "By the river upon the banks thereof, on this side and on that side,
shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade; they shall
bring forth new fruit month after month, because their waters issue from
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat and the leaf
thereof for medicine."

   The mystical application of this prophetical utterance to the
righteous of Israel as the fruit-bearing trees of the longed-for days of
the Messiah, would surely strike the imagination of so intuitive a mind
as John's; it is indeed all of a piece with his general conception and
expectation and fits in most deftly.

 

THE FISH AND FISHERS SYMBOLISM.

   But this does not exhaust the imagery of Ezekiel's striking vision of
the outpouring of God's spirit in the <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>
days of the End, which made so deep an impression upon John. The prophet
uses another graphic figure, which also greatly influenced early
Christianity and was made much of later on in the symbolic
interpretations of some of the Church Fathers. If only we had the
mystical exegesis of this figure as conceived in the mind of the
pre-Christian Palestinian Dorshē Rashumōth, who anticipated in some ways
the Alexandrian Jewish allegorists of Philo's day, we should probably
find that they had already given spiritual significance to the following
arresting verses (9 and 10) of the vision. These read in Eisler's
rendering:

   Wheresoever the river shall come, everything that moveth shall live;
and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because the waters
shall come thither. . . . And it shall come to pass \[that\] the fishers
stand by it from En-Gedi unto En-Eglaim; they shall be \[a place\] to
spread forth nets \[for all fish\] according to their kinds."

   En-Gedi and En-Eglaim were two oases with fresh-water springs—the
Gedi or Kid Spring and the Eglaim or (?) Calf Spring—on the shores of
the Dead Sea or Salt Lake. The former was the chief centre of the
Essenes. With such a striking figure before him it would be easy for
John, the proclaimer of repentance aud the turning again to God of a
righteous remnant, to believe that in the Days of the End there were to
be prophets who should be 'fishers of men.'

   Now it is remarkable that we have a number of references to this
fishing of souls bound up with echoes of legends of John the Baptizer,
which blend into a rich stream of Gnostic traditions which still exists
to-day and goes back eventually to very early times. <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> The Mandæans, that is believers in the Mandā
or Gnosis, or Nazorāyā as they call themselves, known to the Arabs as
the Sūbbā's or Baptists, have much to tell us of the 'Fisher of Souls'
and the evil 'fishers of men,' as we shall see later on.

   Their saga of the Fisher of Souls is a beautiful conception within
the setting of eschatological and soteriological notions, and seems to
be an integral element of the syncretic stream of the Mandā which goes
back far towards Gnostic beginnings. Now the Mandæan traditions are
hostile not only to Christianity but also to Judaism. Many of their
notions can be closely paralleled with some of the doctrines of the
religion of Mānī, with some of the main elements underlying the scheme
of the Coptic Gnostic Pistis Sophia and the two treatises of the Bruce
Codex; points of contact may also be found in what we know of the
doctrines of the Elchasaites, and in some parts of the Clementine
romances which preserve early Ebionite traditions and legends of Simon
the Magian, with whom John is brought into connection.

   And here it may be noted that, if it is surprising to find the
influence of John the Baptizer spreading as far east as Mesopotamia, it
is not out of keeping with the fact that the baptism of John was also
practised in the east Mediterranean area far outside Palestine among the
Dispersion and indeed among some of the early Christian communities, as
we learn from the Acts and Epistles, witness especially the Apollōs
incident ([Acts 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act.htm#18:24), [I. Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#1:12)).

 

ḪANI-ŌANNĒS-IŌANNĒS.

   No little of mythic notions from old Babylonian, Chaldæan and Iranian
traditions is to be found <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> immixed in the
oldest deposits of this Mandæan stream; there is thus a pre-Christian
background as well. Indeed the Fisher-figure cannot fail at once to
remind students of the comparative science of religion of the ancient
Babylonian fish-clad fisher-god Ḫani-Ōannēs—the archaic Ea, father of
Marduk the saviour-god of Babylon who rose yearly from the dead. This
primeval God of Wisdom was the culture-god who had taught early mankind
all the arts of civilization. Berossus, the Chalæan priest who wrote for
the Greeks a history of his people, tells us of no less than six
manifestations of Ōannēs in successive periods; and this notion of
revelation and saving in successive periods is fundamental with the
Mandæans. Ōannēs rose from the sea—the waters presumably of the Persian
Gulf, in the old story; but Marduk, his son, descended from heaven.

   It is by no means improbable that the picturing of appropriate
ancient myths which floated freely in the thought-atmosphere of
Babylonia, may have determined some of the imagery of Ezekiel's visions
by the 'river of Babylon,' and indeed may otherwise have psychically
influenced indirectly no little of Jewish apocalytic literature, as for
instance when the Ezra Apocalypse (at the end of the 1st century A.D.)
tells us that the Redeemer of the world, the Celestial Man, is expected
to rise from the 'heart of the ocean.' If then, as Ezra IV. permits us
to conclude, certain apocalyptists and allegorists, who were probably
Jews of the Babylonian or Syrian Dispersion, could conceive of their
pre-existent Messiah as in some way associated with the figure of the
ancient Ḫani (Ōannēs, Iannēs, Iōannēs), and expected the Redeemer of
Israel to arise from the depths of the great waters, it is not <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> improbable that in those days, when the
interplay of mystical associations was so prevalent and eagerly sought
out, some of the most enthusiastic followers of John may have believed
that this baptizing 'fisher of souls' was the expected manifestation.

 

JOHN-JONAH.

   Similarity in the sounds of names fascinated men's minds, and
Ḫani-Ōannēs-John is not the only name-play we meet with in the Baptist's
story. Attempts have been made by scholars to show that 'the sign of the
prophet Jonah' (Q—[Mt. 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#12:19)f. = [Lk.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#11:29)f.) was perhaps originally
connected with John, and that a testimony of Jesus to John has been
converted already in Q, the early non-Markan source of matter common to
Mt. and Lk., into a testimony of Jesus concerning himself. (On this
point see Eisler, *op. cit.*, pp. 156-162, where all is set out in
detail.) It is further of interest to note that Jonah in Hebrew means
Dove, and that among the Mandæans there was a class of the perfect
called Doves. Compare also the Greek *Physiologus* (xli.): "The Dove . .
. which is John the Baptist." The names Jonah and John could easily be
brought into close connection, and indeed Jonah is sometimes found as a
shortened form of Joḫanan.

   The Jonah-legend provided a very suitable setting wherein to depict
the life of a prophet who caused his hearers to repent, and it may be
that Jesus referred to John as 'a greater Jonah' [(Mt.
12:41)](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#12:41). The most striking image in the
mythic story is the Great Fish. Now the belly of the Great Fish for the
Jewish allegorists, and indeed it is plainly stated in the legend
itself, was Sheōl, the Underworld, the Pit. But another mythic Great
<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> Fish, or perhaps the same in another
aspect, was the cosmic monster Leviāthān. And symbolists, allegorists
and mystics got busy with this mythic figure. Thus we find that
Leviāthān was the name given by the Ophites of Celsus, who are plainly
of Syrian Babylonian origin, to the Seven,—that is to the cosmic animal
psychē, the hierarchy of rulers and devourers of the animal souls of men
as well as of animals proper, each of the Seven being symbolized by an
animal figure, probably an animal-faced (lion, etc.) dragon or fish. In
the Mandæan tradition the Fisher of Souls takes the Seven in his net and
destroys them, even as in the old Babylonian myth the Saviour-god Manduk
{sic., read Marduk} catches Tiamāt, their mother, the primeval dragon of
the deep, in his net and destroys her. And strangely enough there is an
old Rabbinical legend of Jonah preserved in the *Midrash Yalqut Yona* (§
1), which relates that, when the prophet was in the belly of the Great
Fish, he prayed that it should carry him quickly to the Leviāthān, so
that be might catch it with his fishing tackle. For Jonah desired, when
once again safely ashore, to make of its flesh a feast for the
righteous,—a distinct reference to the Messianic fish-banquet which is
to take place in the days of the End.

   The Jewish folk of the Babylonian dispersion, who were surrounded
with images of the fish-clad Ḫani-Ōannēs and of his priests, would
easily think of them as representing a man swallowed by a fish, and as
easily be reminded of the story of their great prophet Jonah, who was
fabled to have made the proud King of Ashshur and all the Ninevites
repent; and the mystics subsequently would easily associate all this
with Messianic notions.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

RABBINIC FISH-SYMBOLISM.

   It has recently been shewn by that acute scholar J. Scheftclowitz
from hitherto neglected Rabbinical documents that 'fish' was quite a
common symbol for the righteous man of Israel, who lived all his life in
the waters of the Torah or Sacred Law. The evidence goes back as early
as the times of Rabban Gamaliel the Elder, the teacher of Paul, who was
therefore a contemporary of John and Jesus. Thus we read in the *Midrash
Tanḫuma* to [Deut. 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#5:32): "As a fish
delights in water, even so a master of the scriptures dives into the
streams of balm"—the sweet smelling waters of the Law; compare the sweet
savour and perfume of the gnōsis and of the heavenly essences and *per
contra* the stench of the evil fishers or teachers of false doctrine in
the Mandæan John-Book. Decisive in this connection is the following
passage from the *Aboth de R. Nathan* (ch. 40):

   "The pupils of Rabbi Gamaliel the Elder were divided into four kinds
of fish: into clean and unclean \[brackish water\] fish from the Jordan
and fish from the Ocean, according to their high and low descent and to
the degree of their learning and quickness of their understanding."

   Though they were not 'fishers of men,' they were fish of Yahveh
swimming in the holy stream, the life-giving waters of the Law. It was
thus very natural for John, remembering the striking passage in [Ezekiel
(47:12)](../../../bib/kjv/eze.htm#47:12) about the fish who repented, to
contrast with them the unrepentant as a 'generation of vipers,' (cp. the
fish-scorpion contrast in [Mt. 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#7:10)).
Nor could John have been ignorant of the prophecy in [Jeremiah
(16:16)](../../../bib/kjv/jer.htm#16:16) <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>
concerning the gathering together of dispersed Israel: "Behold, I will
send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them," and
have given it a spiritual significance. But of an even more arresting
nature is the following from *Berešith Rabba* (ch. 97):

"As the Israelites are innumerable, even so are the fishes; as the
Israelites will never die out on the earth, the fishes will never die
out in their element. Only the Son of Man named 'Fish' could lead Israel
into the Land of Promise,—namely Joshuah ben Nun ( = Fish)." The Greek
transliteration of Joshuah in the LXX. version is invariably Jesus.

 

THE SAMARITAN TA'EB—A REBORN JOSHUAH OR NOAH.

   Now in Samaritan tradition, and it will be remembered that the
Samaritans rejected all the Jewish scriptures save the Five Fifths of
the Law, their future Redeemer was to be called Joshuah. This Deliverer
they called the Ta'eb, the Returner, and they believed he would be a
reborn or returned Joshuah. The Ta'eb is the Samaritan 'Messiah.' In
this connection a recently translated Samaritan Midrash (B.M. Samaritan
MS. Or. 3393<span id="page_21_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_21_note_1)) is especially
instructive. It understands the title Ta'eb as signifying 'he who
repents' or even 'he who makes to repent,' not so much the Returner as
the Turner-back of others. It is brought into close connection also with
Noḫam, meaning Repenting, and is thus by word-play associated with Noah.
Our Samaritan Midrash accordingly brings Noah on to the scene of
expected redemption, and becomes a spiritualized version of the
Deluge-story, abounding in mystical word-plays. One or two specimens
<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> of them may now be given, as the ideas
behind them are reminiscent of the John-circle of ideas.

   Whereas in the old story Yahveh orders Noah: "Make thee an ark
(*t<sup>e</sup>bah*)," the Midrash makes God say unto the Ta'eb: "Make
thee a conversion"—or repentance (Aram. *shuba, tubah*). And so it
continues in many details glossing the original parts of the ark by
means of word-play, introducing notions of propitiation, expiation and
atonement. A single passage from the original will make this clear, and
in reading it we should remember that Samaria was a hot-bed of mystic
and gnostic movements of all sorts.

>    Behold I bring a \[flood of\] conversion \[and\] of divine favour
> upon the earth, to save Israel and gather it from everywhere under the
> sky. I shall perform my covenant, which I have set up with Abraham,
> Israel and Jacob. And thou shalt enter into the conversion, thou and
> thy house and the whole house of Israel with thee; and take with thee
> all kind of . . . praying and fasting and purification, which thou
> performest, and take all unto thee, and it shall be for conversion for
> thee and for them. And the Ta'eb did everything as God had commanded
> him.
>
>    The ark (*t<sup>e</sup>bah*) saved Noah from the flood of
> perdition, and the conversion (*shubah, tubah*) will save the Penitent
> One (*Ta'eb*) and all the sons of Israel from the \[flood of\]
> perversion.

   The 'flood of perversion' is that of 'the cursed æon.' Among the many
Messianic expectations of those days, therefore, was the belief that in
the Last Days it would again be as in the times of Noah, as indeed we
are expressly informed by Q ([Mt.
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#24:37)ff. = [Lk.
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#17:26)ff.)

 

JOHN'S ESCHATOLOGICAL SYMBOLISM.

   There are other points of interest in the fragmentary 'sayings' of
John and other references preserved in the synoptic accounts, but of
these we shall select only <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> one as being
of special interest. John's expectation of the nature of the catastrophe
of the times of the End was somewhat complex. Three phases of elemental
destruction haunted his imagination. Similar disasters had already
happened in the past at the culmination of certain successive critical
periods in the history of mankind. There had been a destruction by
water, another by a mighty wind and tempest which overwhelmed the great
Tower (to which many a Rabbinic legend testifies), and a destruction by
fire in the days of Lot. John's baptism or water-purification may well
have been intended as an outer sign of the inner attempt to avert from
the righteous the dire results of the great forthcoming world 'trial' by
the water of God's Wrath that would overwhelm the wicked. But there were
two other 'baptisms' or purifications which he expected a greater than
himself to effect in similar fashion and for a similar purpose. There
was to be a purification or baptism by fire; and, in Christian
interpretation, the third and last and greatest was to be effected by
means of the holy 'spirit.' This would not be out of keeping with the
belief of John, for it was ever the spirit of God, as water, fire or
wind, that would purify and save the righteous. But the graphic figure
of the winnowing fan in John's declaration shows clearly that the notion
was connected in his mind with the necessary wind without which
winnowing was impossible—the mighty wind or spirit of God. For the good
this would result in a blessed harvesting, but for the evil it would be
a scattering as of chaff.

   Though all these notions may well have come to John within the ambit
of the Jewish scriptures, many prophetical pronouncements in which
graphically depict all these forms of Divine visitation, it is
nevertheless <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> not without significance
that the rites of purification by water, fire and wind (ventilation)
were an integral element of some of the Hellenistic
mystery-institutions, and that the periodic catastrophic scheme is
clearly to be paralleled in the later Babylonian astral religion, and
especially in its blending with Iranian conceptions which centre round
the æon-cult (Zervanism), and all those notions of the Great Year and
world-periods, which later Stoicism took over and made familiar to
Imperial times. This Great Year had three 'seasons'—summer, winter,
spring—each of which was assigned to one of the three most ancient
elements: fire, water and wind. As the Great Year turned on itself the
constellations returned at the end of the revolution to the same
positions they had occupied in a former Great Year. There were thus
critical moments in the æonic movement, and at these cosmic catastrophes
occurred.

   It is hardly to be supposed that John had any such 'scientific'
notions in his mind: but it is undeniable that many had such conceptions
in his day, and indeed among the learned and mystics we find blends of
such 'science' with prophetical intuitions. But for the Jewish
eschatologist it was a once for all event he expected, whereas for such
men as the Stoic thinkers it was a perpetual recurrence.

 

JOHN AND JESUS GENERALLY.

   And what is the outcome of this enquiry? It seems to me that a very
important background of Christian origins is here indicated. It points
to a wide-spread Jewish eschatological and therefore necessarily
Messianic movement prior to Christianity, of which earliest Christianity
was at first a culmination, whatever <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>
modifications and completions were subsequently introduced. It is
therefore to be regretted that our information concerning John the
Baptizer and his doctrines is so meagre.

   It is quite natural that some of John's adherents should have
attached themselves to Jesus on his public appearance as a proclaimer
before the martyrdom of their own imprisoned prophet. The suddenness
with which Mk., our earliest narrative, introduces Jesus 'calling' the
first four of his disciples and their instant leaving all and following
him to become 'fishers of men,' is inexplicable without there having
been some prior knowledge of the Way on the part of Simon and Andrew,
James and John. They may well have already been familiar with John's
teaching. Indeed the writer of the Fourth Gospel tells us categorically
[(Jn. 1:40)](../../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#1:40) that Andrew, the brother of
Simon-Peter-Kephas, had been a disciple of the Baptizer.

   But if some of John's actual 'disciples' followed Jesus before any
question of Messiahship arose, it is probable that far more of his
lay-adherents also did so. Indeed the earliest history of the expansion
of Christianity, that is of the Jesus Messianic movement, preserves
traces that in some places there was a considerable Johannine influence,
notably the continued use of John's baptism. On the contrary, most of
John's disciples to all seeming refused to recognize the Jesus Messianic
claims, and the echoes of history preserved in the Mandæan traditions
declare that they most emphatically rejected them.

   In any case it may well be that some of the great figures, types and
symbols used by Jesus in his exhortations and teaching were not original
to him, but that he shared them, together with other mystic, <span
id="page_26">p. 26</span> apocalyptic and prophetical notions, with
circles that had been instructed by John. Jesus is made to distinguish
John as the greatest prophet who had come before him, nay as more than a
prophet; and yet the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is said to be
greater than a John. This can only mean in the Kingdom in its fulness;
for surely most of the Christians fell far short of the high virtue of
the Baptist. What is furthermore exceedingly probable, if not
unquestionably evident, is that the whole of John's mentality was
flooded with what we can only call mystic notions and conceits, graphic
figures, highly spiritualized, the mentality of a prophet and seer. If
John is the forerunner of Jesus, many of the Baptizer's eschatological
and associated beliefs are probably the forerunners of earliest
Christian general doctrine. And with all this in mind, it is difficult
not to believe that Jesus not only knew more of John personally and what
lay at the back of him, but used more of his ideas and symbolisms than
the gospels would lead us to suppose.

   The Mandæan tradition deserves most careful analysis from this point
of view; but before presenting it we may add a few words on the
estrangement of the John- and Jesus-movements.

 

JOHN AND THE MESSIAHSHIP OF JESUS.

   Though the Synoptics in some passages are at pains to let it appear
as if John recognized the Messiahship of Jesus, and the later and
'correcting' Fourth Gospel emphatically affirms that he did so from the
baptism onwards, there was evidently very considerable doubt on the
question in the earliest tradition. Q ([Mt.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#11:3)f. = [Lk.
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#7:19)f.) lets the reader see that John
<span id="page_27">p. 27</span> to the end had no conviction, much less
prior spiritual apperception, on the subject. For it tells us that just
before his end the imprisoned prophet sent messengers to Jesus asking
him in complete uncertainty: "Art thou he that should come, or look we
for another?" To this unambiguous question no direct answer is given.
John's disciple-messengers are bidden simply to report to their master
the wonderful healings of which they have been told or which they have
witnessed. The proof of Messiahship is made here to rest solely on
wonder-doings; any prior spiritual recognition by John of Jesus as the
Expected One is unknown to this tradition, nor is it able to report that
John accepted the wonders as proof of the fulfilment of his expectation.
From this we may reasonably feel assured that, though some of John's
disciples followed Jesus when he began his public ministry after John
had been put in prison, and continued the proclamation of the near
Coming of the Kingdom, the majority refrained. They continued in their
own way and discipline; nor did they subsequently recognize the
Messiahship of Jesus, for above all they had no authority from their
master to do so.

   This is a negative inference; but the positive rejection of the
Christian Messianic claim is brought out with sharp polemical emphasis
in the Mandæan tradition, which claims to derive from John and regards
Jesus as the Deceiver-Messiah. The baptism of Jesus by John is
acknowledged, but explained in polemic mystic fashion. There are however
signs that, apart from the subsequent bitterness of outer theological
controversy, there was originally an inner deeper gnostic ground of
division, for Jesus is not represented as unknowing, but on the
contrary, is made to answer <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> certain test
questions of John with profound moral insight. But the most surprising
fact of Mandæan tradition is that it preserves no indications of having
entertained any belief in distinctive Jewish Messianism at all. Its
soteriology is peculiar to itself and the tradition repudiates Jewish
prophecy and apocalyptic and in fact the whole Torah, as emphatically as
it does Christian doctrine. Nevertheless on its own showing, in the
beginning the particular community of which John was so great a prophet,
is depicted as settled in Judæa, even in Jerusalem, and is claimed to
have had a profound knowledge of the inner meaning of the Law. It is
made to look back to a still more ancient tradition which is claimed to
be purer and wiser than that of the Hebrews. Though the legendary
'historical' side of the question is exceedingly obscure, our best
authorities are agreed that, as far as the mythic element is concerned,
the Mandæan tradition preserves many traces of the earliest forms of the
pre-Christian Gnosis known to us. The problem is thus exceedingly
complex.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. From the John-Book of the Mandæans](gjb-2-0)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="page_1_note_1"></span>[1](#page_1_fr_1) London, Watkins, 1921.
Chh. xv-xxvi. (pp. 129-207) are devoted to the special subject of John
and his doctrines.

<span id="footnotes_page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="page_3_note_1"></span>[1](#page_3_fr_1) The rest of the Jews
other than Herod's party presumably.

<span id="page_3_note_2"></span>[2](#page_3_fr_2) A mountain fortress;
in Peræa on the boundary between Palestine and Arabia.

<span id="footnotes_page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="page_21_note_1"></span>[1](#page_21_fr_1) Ed. by Adalbert
Merx, *Zeitschr. f. alt. Wiss.*, 1909, xvii. 80.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
