[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index) [Previous](gjb-4.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

## AFTERWORD.

THE legend-Like Mandæan tradition concerning the person of John and the
distinctive gnostic type of doctrine which it associates with him could
by no means have been deduced from, or expanded out of, the bare
external historical facts reported by the classical Josephus; it differs
moreover in many ways from the more detailed story of the Gospels and
their perspective of his doctrinal and prophetical activity. As to the
graphic picture of the Gospels, which suggests the sudden arising of a
solitary wild figure unconnected with any community or order, a feature
so strongly stressed also by the Slavonic Josephus,—the Mandæan
handing-on is completely silent. It gives no hint of any peculiarity of
this nature in John's dress, much less of any uncouthness in his
appearance; indeed, though it makes no statement, it would lead us to
infer that John was clad in white, and in all other respects presented
little of the wild features of a desert-bred, skin-clad eremite. The
classical Josephus is also silent on this popular trait. That John was a
prophet, all these accounts are agreed; that he baptized, all are
agreed. That he suffered a martyr's death, Josephus and the Gospels are
agreed; but strange to say, the Mandæan tradition has not a word on so
important and tragical an event. It is difficult to believe that the
Mandæan Nazōræans could have been ignorant of the way in which their
great prophet met his end; for had they believed he was not executed by
Antipas, <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> they would in all probability
have contradicted in their own fashion the report of the Jews and
Christians in this respect.

   This omission of all reference to the death of John would be
incomprehensible, did we not reflect in the first place that no attempt
is made in the existing Mandæan documents to give anything that could be
called a 'Life' of John, and conjecture in the second that in all
probability nothing of doctrinal importance was attached to the way of
his ending as it was in the case of Jesus. It is of course supposable
that there may have been at one time documents of greater detail and
more historical value relating to John, which have since fallen into
oblivion owing to the focussing of interest on the more plastic material
of psychical legend and mystical reverie; but conjecture cannot restore
them.

   Though in the present restricted exposition no attempt is made to
treat the comparative side of the subject, owing to the regrettable fact
that we are still without the scientific translation of the main and
oldest deposit of the Mandæan scriptures, it may be noted that there are
fragmentary traditions on other lines that would make both Dositheus and
Simon the Magian disciples of John. Now Dositheus (Dousis or Dosthai)
was the precursor of Simon; and the latter was held by the
heresiological Church Fathers to be the *fons et origo* of gnosticism,
which he certainly was not, but only one of many of the time with
already a long heredity behind them. It is to be further noted that the
distinctive Simonian school or tradition, which was in no sense
Christian, continued at least well on into the third century, and that
the Dositheans, who were equally non-Christians, are known of as <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> being numerous even in the sixth
century.<span id="page_130_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_130_note_1.md) By the rumour that these
Gnostic teachers were 'disciples of John' we must understand in general,
I believe, that there was simply in some respects similarity of doctrine
betwen them. These Dosthai-Simon legends and reports are associated with
early Ebionite controversies (underlying the Pseudo-Clementine
romances), and the doctrines involved in them link up with similar
notions found in the wide-spread pre-Christian syncretisms, and even
universalizing attempts, of many kinds of saving-cults of both a popular
and restricted apocalyptic and gnostical character, common to such
plainly distinguishable types as the Persian, Chaldæan, and Aramæan
religious complexes of the early Hellellistic period. The mass of
detailed research work which has been done chiefly in the last
generation on Babylonian, Iranian, Syrian, Aramæan, Egyptian and East
Mediterranean religious endeavours, whether Hellenistically tinged or
otherwise, which flourished so luxuriously during the three centuries
before our era and continued to do so in their various ways for the
following three centuries and some of them far later, is beginning to
make an impression outside the ranks of the specialists, and compelling
the attention of the general historian. It is coming to be seen that the
unprejudiced evaluation of these many endeavours and movements and the
getting of them into a proper perspective constitute an indispensable
task for those who would trace the religious features, phases and
fortunes of 'world history' in the main moments of its development, and
especially those of them which most strongly influenced Western culture
in its later formative periods.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

   We have recently had presented to us an arresting, if provocative,
attempt of this kind in Oswald Spengler's *Downfall of the West*. Its
two stout volumes of some 1,200 pages have been very widely read in
Germany and by knowers of German, and the work has been much discussed
and criticized. For naturally specialists and authorities cannot easily
brook the incursions into their distinctive territories of a free lance
with a knack of, or even genius for, recognizing underlying similar
tendencies where previously for the most part the more superficial
distinctions have been stressed into fundamental differences. It is true
that where so wide a field is surveyed, it is not difficult to catch up
such an historical innovator on numerous points of detail, but on the
other hand his method certainly does at times enable the reader to fix
his attention on the wood rather than on the trees and on the great
rivers rather than on the streamlets. We do not, perhaps naturally
enough, see eye to eye with Spengler throughout, but here we are not
considering his work as a whole. He is referred to because he is the
first general historian and philosopher of history who has brought the
Mandæans into the picture; and in this he seems, in our judgment, to
have got them into a tolerably proper perspective. It may be mentioned
also that it was only after the whole of the preceding matter had been
written that I read Spengler's work, and that for many years I have been
regarding the phenomena of pre-Christian Gnosticism and allied movements
from more or less the same angle. It may then be of interest to
reproduce Spengler's boldly sketched picture of the conditions in which
the heredity of the pre-Christian Gnosis is to be sought and of the
apocalyptic eschatological <span id="page_132">p. 132</span>
expectations and hopes of salvation that preceded the birth of
Christianity.<span id="page_132_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_132_note_1.md)

   "What lay in the prophetical religions (Persian, Chaldæan, Jewish) as
a presage or presentiment, what at the time of Alexander the Great
emerged in metaphysical outlines, was now brought to completion. And
this completion aroused in tremendous strength the primitive feeling of
nervous dread. It pertains to the last mysteries of humanity and of
free-moving life in general that the birth of the I and the birth of
world-dread are one and the same; that a macrocosm is spread out before
a microcosm,—vast, overwhelming, an abyss of foreign, light-shot being
and activity that makes the tiny, solitary self shrink back timorously
into itself. Such fear of their own consciousness as from time to time
suddenly overwhelms children, is experienced again by no grown-up even
in the darkest hours of his life. This deadly fear, however, oppressed
the dawning of the new culture. In this morn of the 'magic'
world-consciousness, that was faint-hearted, uncertain, obscure about
itself, a new glance was taken at the near end of the world. This is the
first thought with which up to now every culture has come to
consciousness of itself. A downpour of revelations, wonders and peerings
into the primordial ground of things swamped every deeper mind. They
thought, they lived, only in apocalyptic images. Reality became
appearance. Strange and awesome sights were recounted from one to
another, read out of confused and obscure scriptures and at once seized
on with immediate <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> inner certainty.
From one community to another, from village to village, wandered such
writings, of which it is impossible to say that they belonged to any one
single religion. They are Persian, Chaldæan, Jewish in colouring; but
they have all taken up what was at that time circulating in men's minds.
The canonical books are national; the apocalyptic are international and
literally so. They come into existence without any appearing to be their
authors. Their contents mingle and melt together; they read to-day one
way and to-morrow another. But they are anything but poësy, fiction
(*Dichtung*). They are like the fearsome figures round the doors of the
Romance cathedrals in France, which also are no 'Art,' but Dread turned
into stone. Every man knew these angels and demons, these
heaven-ascending and hell-descending numinous beings,—the Primal Man or
Second Adam, the Messenger of God, the Saviour of the Last Day, the Son
of Man, the Eternal City and the Final Judgment. In the foreign cities
and in the high-seats of the powerful Persian and Jewish priesthood
there had to be a conceptual fixation of distinctive doctrines; but here
down among the folk there was hardly any particular religion, but rather
a general 'magic' religiosity which filled all souls and fastened upon
sights and shapes of every conceivable origin. The Last Day had drawn
nigh. They expected it. They knew that 'he' must now be manifested, 'he'
of whom all revelations spake. Prophets arose. People banded together
into ever new associations and circles in the conviction of having now
come to better knowledge of their native religion or of having found the
true one. In this period of tremendous and yearly increasing tension, in
the years hard by the birth of <span id="page_134">p. 134</span> Jesus,
alongside numerous other communities and sects arose the Mandæan
religion of salvation. Of its founder or origin we are in ignorance. In
spite of its detestation of the Judaism of Jerusalem and its marked
predilection for Persian settings of the notion of salvation, it
nevertheless seems to have stood very near the popular belief of Syrian
Jewry. Of its marvel-filled scriptures one piece after another now comes
to light. 'He' is everywhere,—the Son of Man,<span
id="page_134_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_134_note_1.md) the Saviour sent into
the deep, who must himself be saved, the goal of the expectation. In the
John-Book the Father raised on high in the House of Perfection,
surrounded with Light, speaks to his only-begotten Son: My Son, be for
me an Envoy—go unto the world of the Darkness, in which is no Light-ray.
The Son cries on high: Father of Greatness, what sin have I done that
thou hast sent me into the deep? And at the end: Without faults I
ascended, and fault and defect were not in me.

   "All the traits of the great prophetical religions and the whole
treasury of the deepest insights and figures which have since been
assembled in apocalyptic, lie here at the bottom in common. But of
'antique' (? = Hellenic) thinking and feeling not a breath has
penetrated into this underworld of the 'magic.' The beginnings of the
new religion are, it may well be, for ever lost to memory. But *one*
historical figure of Mandaism comes on to the stage with arresting
clearness, tragical in its striving and ending, like Jesus himself: it
is John the Baptizer. Scarce still belonging to Jewry, and filled with
strong detestation . . . of the spirit of Jerusalem, he proclaims the
End of the <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> World and the Coming of the
Barnasha, the Son of Man, who is *no longer the promised national
Messiah of the Jews, but the Bringer of the World-conflagration*. To him
went Jesus and became one of his disciples. Jesus was thirty years old
when the awakening came upon him. The apocalyptic and in particular the
Mandæan thought-world from now on filled his whole consciousness. The
other world of historic reality lay round him as in seeming only,
strange and unmeaning. That 'he' will now come and put an end to this so
unreal reality, was Jesus' great certainty, and for this certainty he
came forward as announcer like John, his teacher. The oldest
gospel-accounts taken into the New Testament still let some glimmer of
this period shine through in which he was in his consciousness no more
than a prophet." It was later that the conviction came upon him: Thou
art thyself 'he.'

   This is a boldly sketched outline bringing into special prominence
the dominant eschatological feature of the picture, but with no
indications of the particular Mandæan colouring or shading that must be
used in the completed canvas. For this, however, we cannot reproach
Spengler, seeing that we find ourselves compelled to refrain from any
such attempt. And the reason for this abstention is quite simple.
Lidzbarski's substantive and scientific translation of the John-Book and
Liturgies enables the student at first-hand to become so exhaustively
acquainted with this part of the material, that much in it reads
differently, and the whole atmosphere savours differently from the
general impression produced even by the most attentive perusal of
Brandt's praiseworthy and painstaking pioneer labours. It seems
therefore naturally to follow that, when we get the full translation of
the remaining <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> and earliest deposit,
the *Genzā*, from Lidzbarski, and can then survey the whole of its
matter in detail, and so review in their native settings and contexts
the selected features of it sketched by Brandt and in reliance on him
utilized by Bousset and Reitzenstein, for instance, we shall be enabled
to appreciate the whole tradition more understandably and analyze it
more accurately. We shall then be in a position to trace, for instance,
the development of the meaning attached to the figure of the victor and
of the formula 'the Man who has come hither,' and also the modifications
of eschatological notions within the Mandæan scheme of reference and
much else.

   Meantime it is already evident that the Mandæan Nazōræan tradition
preserves traces of doctrine and endeavour and other features of very
great value for recovering long-lost indications of one of the most
important backgrounds of Christian origins and of a subsequent parallel
development of religious faith. In any case the study of the Mandæan
documents cannot fail to come to the front as an indispensable task in
the elucidation of the characteristic Gnosis as an integral and
widely-diffused factor in the general history of religion in the
critical centuries in the Near East and Mediterranean West before and
after the beginnings of the present era. And this study, were it
necessary where so much similar recent research has already made it
certain on all hands, gives the final death-blow to the old misleading
view that Gnosticism was of interest solely as a Christian heresy, and
was to be evaluated as such and comfortably disposed of in the good old
cavalier Patristic fashion.

 

   It is pleasant to think that new light will be <span id="page_137">p.
137</span> thrown, directly or indirectly, on our subject by a number of
important studies which are in hand or which have been already made
public in lecture-form. Among them may be mentioned the Lectures on
Manichæism by Prof. F. Crawford Burkitt and the long-expected work on
the same religion by the veteran Iranist Prof. J. Williams Jackson, and
also the arresting Schweich Lectures of this year on the Samaritans by
Dr. Moses Gaster, whose researches into their little-known literature,
based on his unique and famous collection of MSS. that has just been
acquired by the British Museum, open up quite new vistas of O.T. study
and also supply indications of a new and hitherto unsuspected background
that may be brought into line with Mandæanism and hence with general
Christian origins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_130">p. 130</span>

<span id="page_130_note_1"></span>[1](#page_130_fr_1.md) See my *Fragments
of a Faith Forgotten* (London, 2nd ed., 1906), pp. 162 ff.

<span id="footnotes_page_132">p. 132</span>

<span id="page_132_note_1"></span>[1](#page_132_fr_1.md) *Der Untergang des
Abendlandes: Untrisse einer Morphologie der Weltgeschichte*, Band II.
*Welthistorische Perspectiven* (München, 1923, revised ed.), pp. 258ff.
The work has now run into upwards of 50,000 copies, a proof of very
widely extended serious interest, for it is not a 'popular' exposition.
It may be stated that Spengler shows by his references that he is
acquainted with the most recent Mandæan studies.

<span id="footnotes_page_134">p. 134</span>

<span id="page_134_note_1"></span>[1](#page_134_fr_1.md) The Mandæans do
not use this idiom; it is ever simply the Man.—G. R. S. M.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
