[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv01)  [Next](ogv03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### TRANSLATOR’S FOREWORD

IN this twentieth century, the sacred books of the ancients are
undoubtedly better understood than they were even by their
contemporaries, for their authors, by the greatness of their genius, are
as much nearer to us, as they were distant from them. At the close of
the eighteenth century, the light which came from the illimitable mind
of Fabre d’Olivet shone with solitary splendour and was destined to be
seen by only a few devoted followers. But history shows that a great
inspirer always appears at the beginning of every great epoch, and
however small the number of his disciples, these disciples with their
pupils form the magnetic chain which, according to Plato, carries his
thought out into the world.

Fabre d’Olivet, born at Ganges, Bas-Languedoc, Dec. 8, 1768, was
distinguished even in his own day not only for the extent of his
learning but for the rectitude of his judgment and the sublimity of his
conceptions. If one can infer from the all too scarce records available
since the calamitous fire which destroyed so many of his valued
manuscripts, he evidently suffered keenly from the fetters of mortality,
and sought with unfailing fervour what Porphyry so aptly called the
"Olympia of the Soul."

Saint Yves d’Alveydre, writing of him in *La France vraie*, says, that
it was in 1790, while in Germany, he received his Pythagorean
initiation, the profound imprint of which marked all his later
productions. After returning to Paris he applied himself to philological
and philosophical studies

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

undisturbed by the terrible revolutionary storm. In obscure seclusion he
amassed, to quote Sédir, "a disconcerting erudition." He became familiar
with all the Semitic tongues and directs, the Aryan languages, and even
penetrated the secrets of the Chinese hieroglyphics.

It was during these ten years of retirement that he wrote his
*Examinations of the Golden Verses* which were not published until 1813,
with its dedication to the Section of Literature of the Imperial
Institute of France. It is known that the *Golden Verses of Pythagoras*
were originally transcribed by Lysis and that it is to Hierocles we owe
the version which has come down to us. Fabre d’Olivet has translated
them into French verse, the style of which he calls *eumolpique*, that
is, subject to measure and harmonious cadence but free from rhyme, with
alternate masculine and feminine terminations. In the *Essence and Form
of Poetry* which precedes the Golden Verses, he illustrates this
melodious style, in applying it to the opening lines of some of the
well-known classics, and to others not so well-known.

These Golden Verses, so remarkable for their moral elevation, present
the most beautiful monument of antiquity raised in honour of Wisdom.
They formed the *credo* of the adepts and initiates. In his recondite
Examinations, Fabre d’Olivet has drawn the metaphysical correlation of
Providence, Destiny, and the Will of Man, in which combined action
Destiny reigns over the past, the Will of Man over the future, and
Providence over the present, which, always existing, may be called
Eternal. One will find this given at greater length in his *Hermeneutic
Interpretation of the Origin of the Social State of Man and the Destiny
of the Adamic Race:* admirable work of this little known theosophist,
"to give him the name he loved best to hold," says Pierre Leroux in *De
l’Humanité*.

The inequality of human conditions, upon which depend the social and
political questions, forms one of the vital subjects of these esoteric
teachings. He has also endeavoured

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

to explain the true opinion of Pythagoras concerning metempsychosis
which was his sacred dogma, and said that the dogma of transmigration of
souls, received by all peoples and revealed in the ancient mysteries,
has been absolutely disfigured in what the moderns have called
metempsychosis.

His strange death, which occurred March 25, 1825, is mentioned by des
Essarts in *Les Hiérophantes*, and other authorities including Pierre
Leroux, have asserted that he died at the foot of his altar.

NAYÁN LOUISE REDFIELD.

HARTFORD, CONN., October, 1916.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](ogv03.md)
