[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv21)  [Next](ogv23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. . . . That riches and the honours Easily acquired, are easy thus to lose.

Be just: injustice has often easy triumphs; but what remains after death
of the riches that it has procured?

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nothing but the
bitter remembrance of their loss, and the nakedness of a shameful vice
uncovered and reduced to impotency.

I have proceeded rapidly in the explanation of the foregoing lines,
because the morals which they contain, founded upon the proofs of
sentiment, are not susceptible of receiving others. I do not know if
this simple reflection has already been made, but in any case it ought
to draw with it one more complicated, and serve to find the reason for
the surprising harmony which reigns, and which has always reigned, among
all the peoples of the earth upon the subject of morals. Man has been
allowed to disagree upon subjects of reasoning and opinion, to differ
.in a thousand ways in those of taste, to dispute upon the forms of
cult, the dogmas of teachings, the bases of science, to build an
infinity of psychological and physical systems; but Man has never been
able, without belying his own conscience, to deny the truth and
universality of morals. Temperance, prudence, courage, and justice, have
always been considered as virtues, and avarice, folly, cowardice, and
injustice, as vices; and this, without the least discussion. Never has
any legislator said that it was necessary to be a bad son, a bad friend,
a bad citizen, envious, ungrateful, perjured. The men most beset with
these vices have always hated them in others, have concealed them at
home, and their very hypocrisy has been a new homage rendered to morals.

If certain sectarians, blinded by a false zeal and furthermore
systematically ignorant and intolerant, have circulated that the cults
differing from theirs lacked morals, or received impure ones, it is
because they either misunderstood the true principles of morals, or they
calumniated them; principles are the same everywhere; only their
application is more or less rigid and their consequences are more or
less well applied in accordance with the times, the places, and the men.
The Christians extol, and with reason, the purity and the sanctity of
their morals; but if it must be told them

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

with frankness they have nothing in their sacred books that cannot be
found as forcibly expressed in the sacred books of other nations, and
often even, in the opinion of impartial travellers, one has seen it much
better practised. For example, the beautiful maxim touching upon the
pardon of offences <span id="fr_363"></span>[a](#fn_362) is found
complete in the *Zend-Avesta*. It is written: "O God! greater than all
that which is great! if a man provoke you by his thoughts, by his
speech, or by his actions, if he humbles himself before you, pardon him;
even so, if a man provoke me by his thoughts by his speech or by his
actions may I pardon him." <span id="fr_364"></span>[b](#fn_363) One
finds in the same book, the precept on charity, such as is practised
among the Mussulmans, and that of agriculture placed in the rank of
virtues, as among the Chinese. "The King whom you love, what desire you
that he shall do, Ormuzd? Do you desire that, like unto you, he shall
nourish the poor?" <span id="fr_365"></span>[c](#fn_364) "The purest
point of the law is to sow the land. He who sows the grain and does it
with purity is as great before me as he who celebrates ten thousand
adorations. . . ." <span id="fr_366"></span>[d](#fn_365) "Render the
earth fertile, cover it with flowers and with fruits; multiply the
springs in the places where there is no grass." <span
id="fr_367"></span>[e](#fn_366) This same maxim of the pardon of
offences and those which decree to return good for evil, and to do unto
others what we would that they should do unto us, is found in many of
the Oriental writings. One reads in the distichs of Hafiz this beautiful
passage:

Learn of the sea-shell to love thine enemy, and to fill with pearls the
hand thrust out to harm thee. Be not less generous than the hard rock;
make resplendent with precious stones, the arm which rends thy side.
Mark thou yonder tree assailed by a shower of stones; upon those who
throw them it lets fall only delicious fruits or perfumed flowers. The
voice of all nature calls aloud to us: shall man be the only one
refusing to heal the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

hand which is wounded in striking him? To bless the one who offends
him? <span id="fr_368"></span>[a](#fn_367)

The evangelical precept paraphrased by Hafiz is found in substance in a
discourse of Lysias; it is clearly expressed by Thales and Pittacus;
Kong-Tse taught it in the same words as Jesus; finally one finds in the
*Arya*, written more than three centuries before our era, these lines
which seem made expressly to inculcate the maxim and depict the death of
the righteous man:

The duty of a good man, even at the moment of his destruction, consists
not only in forgiving but even in a desire of benefiting his destroyer;
as the Sandal-tree, in the instant of its overthrow sheds perfume on the
ax which fells; and he would triumph in repeating the verse of Sadi who
represents a return of good for good as a slight reciprocity, but says
to the virtuous man, "confer benefits on him who has injured
thee." <span id="fr_369"></span>[b](#fn_368)

Interrogate the peoples from the Boreal pole to the extremities of Asia,
and ask them what they think of virtue: they will respond to you, as
Zeno, that it is all that is good and beautiful; the Scandinavians,
disciples of Odin, will show you the *Hâvamâl*, sublime discourse of
their ancient legislator, wherein hospitality, charity, justice, and
courage are expressly commended to them <span
id="fr_370"></span>[c](#fn_369): You will know by tradition that the
Celts had the sacred verses of their Druids, wherein piety, justice, and
valour were celebrated as national virtues <span
id="fr_371"></span>[d](#fn_370); you will see in the books preserved

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

under the name of Hermes <span id="fr_372"></span>[a](#fn_371) that the
Egyptians followed the same idea regarding morals as the Indians their
ancient preceptors; and these ideas, preserved still in the
*Dharma-Shastra*, <span id="fr_373"></span>[b](#fn_372) will strike you
in the *Kings* of the Chinese. It is there, in those sacred books whose
origin is lost in the night of time, <span
id="fr_374"></span>[c](#fn_373) that you will find at their source the
most sublime maxims of Fo-Hi, Krishna, Thoth, Zoroaster, Pythagoras,
Socrates, and Jesus. Morals, I repeat, are everywhere the same;
therefore it is not upon its written principles that one should judge of
the perfection of the cult, as has been done without reflection, but
upon their practical application. This application, whence results the
national spirit, depends upon the purity of the religious dogmas upon
the sublimity of the mysteries, and upon their more or less great
affinity with the Universal Truth which is the soul, apparent or hidden,
of all religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_362"></span>[165:a](ogv22.htm#fr_363) *Evang. St. Math.*,
ch. 18.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[165:b](ogv22.htm#fr_364) *Vendidad Sadé*, p.
89.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[165:c](ogv22.htm#fr_365) 34<sup>e</sup> *hâ*,
p. 174.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[165:d](ogv22.htm#fr_366) 3<sup>e</sup>
*fargard*., p. 284.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[165:e](ogv22.htm#fr_367) *Jeshts Sadès*, p.
151.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[166:a](ogv22.htm#fr_368) Hafiz, cité par les
auteurs *Des Recherches asiatiques*, t. iv., p. 167.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[166:b](ogv22.htm#fr_369) *L' Arya*, cité comme
ci-dessus:

"L’homme de bien, paisable au moment qu’il expire,  
 Tourne sur ses bourreaux un œil religieux,  
 Et bénit jusqu’au bras qui cause son martyre:  
 Tel l’arbre de Sandal que frappe un furieux,  
 Couvre de ses parfums le fer qui le dechire."

<span id="fn_369"></span>[166:c](ogv22.htm#fr_370) Edda Island;
*Hâvamâl*.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[166:d](ogv22.htm#fr_371) Diogen. Laërt., *In
Prœm.*, p. 5.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[167:a](ogv22.htm#fr_372) *Pœmander et
Asclepius*.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[167:b](ogv22.htm#fr_373) This is the vast
collection of Brahmanic morals. One finds there many of the lines
repeated word for word in the Sepher of Moses.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[167:c](ogv22.htm#fr_374) In them, antiquity
goes back three thousand years before our era. There is mention of an
eclipse of the sun, verified for the year 2155 B.C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. As to the evils which Destiny involves](ogv23)
