[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv22)  [Next](ogv24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. As to the evils which Destiny involves, Judge them what they are; endure them all and strive, As much as thou art able, to modify the traits. The Gods, to the most cruel, have not exposed the sage.

I have said that Pythagoras acknowledged two motives of human actions,
the power of the Will and the necessity of Destiny, and that he
subjected both to one fundamental law called Providence from which they
emanated alike. The first of these motives was free, and the second
constrained: so that man found himself placed between two opposed, but
not injurious natures, indifferently good or bad, according as he
understood the use of them. The power of the Will was exercised upon the
things to be done,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

or upon the future; the necessity of Destiny, upon the things done, or
upon the past: and the one nourished the other unceasingly, by working
upon the materials which they reciprocally furnished each other; for
according to this admirable philosopher, it is of the past that the
future is born, of the future that the past is formed, and of the union
of both that is engendered the always existing present, from which they
draw alike their origin: a most profound idea that the Stoics had
adopted. <span id="fr_375"></span>[a](#fn_374) Thus, following this
doctrine, liberty rules in the future, necessity in the past, and
Providence over the present. Nothing that exists happens by chance but
by the union of the fundamental and providential law with the human will
which follows or transgresses it, by operating upon necessity. <span
id="fr_376"></span>[b](#fn_375) The harmony of the Will and Providence
constitutes Good; Evil is born of their opposition. Man has received
three forces adapted to each of the three modifications of his being, to
be guided in the course that he should pursue on earth and all three
enchained to his Will. The first, attached to the body, is instinct; the
second, devoted to the soul, is virtue; the third, appertaining to
intelligence, is science or wisdom. These three forces, indifferent in
themselves, take this name only through the good usage that the Will
makes of it; for, through bad usage they degenerate into brutishness,
vice, and ignorance. Instinct perceives the physical good or evil
resulting from sensation; virtue recognizes the moral good or evil
existing in sentiment; science judges the intelligible good or evil
which springs from assent. In sensation, good or evil is called pleasure
or pain; in sentiment, love or hate; in assent, truth or error.
Sensation, sentiment, and assent, dwelling in the body, in the soul, and
in the spirit, form a ternary, which becoming developed under favour of
a relative unity constitutes the human quaternary, or Man considered
abstractly. The three affections which compose this ternary act and
react upon one another, and become mutually

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

enlightened or obscured; and the unity which binds them, that is to say,
Man, is perfected or depraved, according as it tends to become blended
with the Universal Unity or to become distinguished from it. The means
that this ternary has of becoming blended with it, or of becoming
distinguished from it, of approaching near or of drawing away from it,
resides wholly in its Will, which, through the use that it makes of the
instruments furnished it by the body, soul, and mind, becomes
instinctive or stupefied; is made virtuous or vicious, wise or ignorant,
and places itself in condition to perceive with more or less energy, to
understand and to judge with more or less rectitude what there is of
goodness, excellence, and justice in sensation, sentiment, or assent; to
distinguish, with more or less force and knowledge, good and evil; and
not to be deceived at last in what is really pleasure or pain, love or
hatred, truth or error.

Indeed one feels that the metaphysical doctrine that I have just briefly
set forth is nowhere found so clearly expressed, and therefore I do not
need to support it with any direct authority. It is only by adopting the
principles set down in the Golden Verses and by meditating a long time
upon what has been written by Pythagoras that one is able to conceive
the *ensemble*. The disciples of this philosopher having been extremely
discreet and often obscure, one can only well appreciate the opinions of
their master by throwing light upon them with those of the Platonists
and Stoics, who have adopted and spread them without any reserve. <span
id="fr_377"></span>[a](#fn_376)

Man, such as I have just depicted him, according to the idea that
Pythagoras has conceived, placed under the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

dominion of Providence between the past and the future, endowed with a
free will by his essence, and being carried along toward virtue or vice
with its own movement, Man, I say, should understand the source of the
evils that he necessarily experiences; and far from accusing this same
Providence which dispenses good and evil to each according to his merit
and his anterior actions, can blame only himself if he suffers, through
an inevitable consequence of his past mistakes. <span
id="fr_378"></span>[a](#fn_377) For Pythagoras admitted many successive
existences, <span id="fr_379"></span>[b](#fn_378) and maintained that
the present, which strikes us, and the future, which menaces us, are
only the expression of the past which has been our work in anterior
times. He said that the greater part of men lose, in returning to life,
the remembrance of these past existences; but that, concerning himself,
he had, by a particular favour of the gods, preserved the memory of
them. <span id="fr_380"></span>[c](#fn_379) Thus according to his
doctrine, this fatal Necessity, of which man unceasingly complains, has
been created by himself through the use of his will; he traverses, in
proportion as he advances in time, the road that he has already traced
for himself; and according as he has modified it by good or evil, as he
sows so to speak, his virtues or his vices, he will find it again more
smooth or laborious. when the time will come to traverse it anew.

These are the dogmas by means of which Pythagoras established the
necessity of Destiny, without harming the power of the Will, and left to
Providence its universal empire, without being obliged either to
attribute to it the origin of evil, as those who admitted only one
principle of things, or to give to evil an absolute existence, as those
who admitted two principles. In this, he was in accordance with the
ancient doctrine which was followed by the oracles of the gods. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[d](#fn_380) The Pythagoreans, however, did not
regard

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

pain, that is to say, whatever afflicts the body in its mortal life, as
veritable evils; they called veritable evils only sins, vices, and
errors into which one falls voluntarily. In their opinion, the physical
and inevitable evils being illustrated by the presence of virtue, could
be transformed into blessings and become distinguished and
enviable. <span id="fr_382"></span>[a](#fn_381) These last evils,
dependent upon necessity, Lysis commended to be judged for what they
were; that is, to consider as an inevitable consequence of some mistake,
as the chastisement or remedy for some vice; and therefore to endure
them, and far from irritating them further by impatience and anger, on
the contrary to modify them by the resignation and acquiescence of the
will to the judgment of Providence. He does not forbid, as one sees in
the lines cited, assuaging them by lawful means; on the contrary, he
desires that the sage should apply himself to diverting them if
possible, and healing them. Thus this philosopher did not fall into the
excess with which the Stoics have been justly reproached. <span
id="fr_383"></span>[b](#fn_382) He considered pain evil, not that it was
of the same nature as vice, but because its nature, a purgative for
vice, makes it a necessary consequence. Plato adopted this idea, and
made all the inferences felt with his customary eloquence. <span
id="fr_384"></span>[c](#fn_383)

As to what Lysis said, always following Pythagoras, that the sage was
never exposed to the cruelest evils, this can be understood as Hierocles
has understood it, in a simple and natural manner, or in a more
mysterious manner as I stated. It is evident at once, in following the
inferences of the principles which have been given, that the sage is
not, in reality, subject to the severest evils, since, not aggravating
by his emotions those which the necessity of destiny

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

inflict upon him, and bearing them with resignation, he alleviates them;
living happy, even in the midst of misfortune, in the firm hope that
these evils will no more trouble his days, and certain that the divine
blessings which are reserved for virtue, await him in another
life. <span id="fr_385"></span>[a](#fn_384) Hierocles, after having
revealed this first manner of explaining the verse in question, touches
lightly upon the second, in saying that the Will of man can have an
influence on Providence, when, acting in a lofty soul, it is assisted by
succour from heaven and operates with it. <span
id="fr_386"></span>[b](#fn_385) This was a part of the doctrine taught
in the mysteries, whose divulgence to the profane was forbidden.
According to this doctrine, of which sufficiently strong traces can be
recognized in Plato, <span id="fr_387"></span>[c](#fn_386) the Will,
exerting itself by faith, was able to subjugate Necessity itself, to
command Nature, and to work miracles. It was the principle upon which
was founded the magic of the disciples of Zoroaster. <span
id="fr_388"></span>[d](#fn_387) Jesus saying parabolically, that by
means of faith one could remove mountains, <span
id="fr_389"></span>[e](#fn_388) only spoke according to the theosophical
traditions known to all the sages. "The uprightness of the heart and
faith triumphs over all obstacles," said Kong-Tse <span
id="fr_390"></span>[f](#fn_389); "all men can render themselves equal to
the sages and to the heroes whose memory the nations revere," said
Meng-Tse; "it is never the power which is lacking, it is the will;
provided one desire, one succeeds." <span
id="fr_391"></span>[g](#fn_390) These ideas of the Chinese theosophists
are found in the writings of the Indians, <span
id="fr_392"></span>[h](#fn_391) and even in those of some Europeans who,
as I have already observed, had not enough erudition to be imitators.
"The greater the will," said Boehme, "the greater the being and

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

the more powerfully inspired." <span id="fr_393"></span>[a](#fn_392)
"Will and liberty are the same thing." <span
id="fr_394"></span>[b](#fn_393) "It is the source of light, the magic
which makes something from nothing." <span
id="fr_395"></span>[c](#fn_394)

The Will which goes resolutely forward is faith; it models its own form
in spirit and overcomes all things; by it, a soul receives the power of
carrying its influence in another soul, and of penetrating its most
intimate essences. When it acts with God it can overthrow mountains,
break the rocks, confound the plots of the impious, and breathe upon
them disorder and dismay; it can effect all prodigies, command the
heavens, the sea, and enchain death itself: it subjugates all. Nothing
can be named that cannot be commanded in the name of the Eternal. The
soul which executes these great things only imitates the prophets and
the saints, Moses, Jesus, and the apostles. All the elect have a similar
power. Evil disappears before them. Nothing can harm the one in whom God
dwells." <span id="fr_396"></span>[d](#fn_395)

It is in departing from this doctrine, taught as I have said in the
mysteries, that certain gnostics of the Alexandrian school assert that
evils never attended the true sages, if there were found men who might
have been so in reality; for Providence, image of divine justice, would
never allow the innocent to suffer and be punished. Basil, who was one
of those who supported this Platonic opinion, <span
id="fr_397"></span>[e](#fn_396) was sharply reprimanded by the orthodox
Christians, who treated him as a heretic, quoting to him the example of
the martyrs. Basil replied that the martyrs were not entirely innocent,
because there is no man exempt from faults; that God punishes in them,
either evil desires, actual and secret sins, or sins that the soul had
committed in a previous existence; and as they did not fail to oppose
him again with the example of Jesus, who, although fully innocent, had,
however,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

suffered the torture of the cross, Basil answered without hesitation
that God had been just, in his opinion, and that Jesus, being man, was
no more than another exempt from sin. <span
id="fr_398"></span>[a](ogv24.htm#fn_397)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[168:a](ogv23.htm#fr_375) Senec., *De Sen.*, l.
vi., c. 2.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[168:b](ogv23.htm#fr_376) Hiérocl., *Aur.
carmin.*, v. 18.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[169:a](ogv23.htm#fr_377) Jamblic., *De Vitâ
Pythag.*; Porphyr., *ibid*., *et de Abstin.*; *Vitâ Pythag.* *apud;*
Phot., *Cod.*, 259; Diog. Laërt., *In Pythag.*, l. viii.; Hierocl.,
*Comment. in Aur. Carm.*; *ibid*., *De Provident.*; Philost., *In Vitâ
Apollon*; Plutar., *De Placit. philos.*; *ibid*., *De Procreat. anim.*;
Apul., *In Florid.*; Macrob., *In Saturn.* et *Somn. Scip.*; Fabric.,
*Bibl. græc. in Pythag.*; Clem. Alex., *Strom.*, passim., etc.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[170:a](ogv23.htm#fr_378) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carm.*, v. 14; Phot., *Cod.*, 242 et 214.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[170:b](ogv23.htm#fr_379) Diog. Laërt., *In
Pythag.*; *ibid*., *In Emped.*

<span id="fn_379"></span>[170:c](ogv23.htm#fr_380) Hiérocl., Pont.
*apud* Diog. Laërt., l. viii., § 4.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[170:d](ogv23.htm#fr_381) Maximus Tyrius has
made a dissertation upon the origin of Evil, in <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> which he asserts that the prophetic oracles, having been
consulted on this subject, responded by these two lines from Homer:

"We accuse the gods of our evils, while we ourselves  
 By our own errors, are responsible for them."

<span id="fn_381"></span>[171:a](ogv23.htm#fr_382) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carm.*, v. 18.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[171:b](ogv23.htm#fr_383) Plutar., *De Repugn.
Stoïc.*

<span id="fn_383"></span>[171:c](ogv23.htm#fr_384) *In Gorgi*. et
*Phileb*.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[172:a](ogv23.htm#fr_385) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carmin.*, v., 18.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[172:b](ogv23.htm#fr_386) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carmin.*, v. 18, 49 et 62.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[172:c](ogv23.htm#fr_387) *In Phédon;* *In
Hipp.*, ii.; *In Theæt*.; *De Rep.*, l. iv., etc.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[172:d](ogv23.htm#fr_388) Hyde, *De Relig. Vet.
Pers.*, p. 298.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[172:e](ogv23.htm#fr_389) *Evan. S. Math.*, ch.
xvii., v. 19.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[172:f](ogv23.htm#fr_390) *Vie de Kong-Tzée*
(*Confucius*), p. 324.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[172:g](ogv23.htm#fr_391) Meng-Tzée, cité par
Duhalde, t. ii., p. 334.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[172:h](ogv23.htm#fr_392) Krishna,
*Bhagavad-Gita*, lect. ii.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[173:a](ogv23.htm#fr_393) *XL Questions sur
l’Ame (Viertzig Fragen von der Seilen Orstand, Essentz, Wesen, Natur and
Eigenschafft*, etc. Amsterdam, 1682). Quest. 1.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[173:b](ogv23.htm#fr_394) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[173:c](ogv23.htm#fr_395) *IX Textes*, text. 1
et 2.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[173:d](ogv23.htm#fr_396) *XL Questions*,
quest. 6.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[173:e](ogv23.htm#fr_397) Plato, *In Theag.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Even as Truth, does Error have its lovers](ogv24)
