[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv26)  [Next](ogv28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 16. Let fools act aimlessly and without cause, Thou shouldst, in the present, contemplate the future.

That is to say, thou shouldst consider what will be the results of such
or such action and think that these results, dependent upon thy will
(while the action remains in suspense and free, while they are yet to be
born), will become the domain of Necessity the very instant when the
action will be executed, and increasing in the past, once they shall
have had birth, will coöperate in forming the plan of a new future.

I beg the reader, interested in these sorts of comparisons, to reflect a
moment upon the idea of Pythagoras. He will find here the veritable
source of the astrological science of the ancients. Doubtless he is not
ignorant of what an extended influence this science exercised already
upon the face of the globe. The Egyptians, Chaldeans, Phœnicians, did
not separate it from that which regulated the cult of the gods. <span
id="fr_428"></span>[a](#fn_427) Their temples were but an abridged image
of the Universe, and the tower which served as an observatory was raised
at the side of the sacrificial altar. The Peruvians followed, in this
respect, the same usages as the Greeks and Romans. <span
id="fr_429"></span>[b](#fn_428) Everywhere the grand Pontiff

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

united the science of genethlialogy or astrology with the priesthood,
and concealed with care the principles of this science within the
precincts of the sanctuary. <span id="fr_430"></span>[a](#fn_429) It was
a Secret of State among the Etruscans and at Rome, <span
id="fr_431"></span>[b](#fn_430) as it still is in China and Japan. <span
id="fr_432"></span>[c](#fn_431) The Brahmans did not confide its
elements except to those whom they deemed worthy to be initiated. <span
id="fr_433"></span>[d](#fn_432) For one need only lay aside an instant
the bandage of prejudice to see that an Universal science, linked
throughout to what men recognize as the most holy, can not be the
product of folly and stupidity, as has been reiterated a hundred times
by a host of moralists. All antiquity is certainly neither foolish nor
stupid, and the sciences it cultivated were supported by principles
which, for us today, being wholly unknown, have none the less existed.
Pythagoras, if we give attention here, revealed to us those of
genethlialogy and of all the sciences of divination which relate
thereunto.

Let us observe this closely. The future is composed of the past—that is
to say, that the route that man traverses in time, and that he modifies
by means of the power of his will, he has already traversed and
modified; in the same manner, using a practical illustration, that the
earth describing its annual orbit around the sun, according to the
modern system, traverses the same spaces and sees unfold around it
almost the same aspects: so that, following anew a route that he has
traced for himself, man would be able not only to recognize the imprints
of his steps, but to foresee the objects that he is about to encounter,
since he has already seen them, if his memory preserved the image, and
if this image was not effaced by the necessary consequence of his nature
and the providential laws which rule him. Such is

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

the doctrine of Pythagoras as I have already revealed. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[a](#fn_433) It was that of the mysteries and of all
the sages of antiquity. Origen, who has opposed it, attributes it to the
Egyptians, to the Pythagoreans, and to the disciples of Plato. It was
contained in the sacred books of the Chaldeans, cited by Syncellus,
under the title of *livres géniques*. <span
id="fr_435"></span>[b](#fn_434) Seneca and Synesius have supported it as
wholly in accordance with the spirit of the initiations. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[c](#fn_435) What the ancients called the *great
year*, was a consequence of this doctrine; for it was taught in the
mysteries, that the Universe itself traversed, after a sequence of
incalculable centuries, the same revolutions that it had already
traversed, and brought around in the vast unfolding of its concentric
spheres, as much for it as for the worlds which compose it, the
succession of the four ages, the duration of which, relative to the
nature of each being, immense for the Universal Man, is limited in the
individual to what is called infancy, youth, manhood, and old age, and
is represented on the earth by the fleeting seasons of spring, summer,
autumn, and winter. This great year, thus conceived, has been common to
all the peoples of the earth. <span id="fr_437"></span>[d](#fn_436)
Cicero has plainly seen that it constituted the veritable basis of
genethlialogy or the astrological science. <span
id="fr_438"></span>[e](#fn_437) Indeed if the future is composed of the
past—that is, a thing already made, upon which the present is gradually
unfolded as upon the circumference of a circle which has neither
beginning nor end, it is evident that one can succeed, up to a certain
point, to recognize it, whether by means of remembrance, by examining in
the past, the picture of the whole revolution; or by means of prevision
carrying the moral sight, more or less far, upon the route through which

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

the Universe is passing. These two methods have grave disadvantages. The
first appears even impossible. For what is the duration of the great
year? What is the immense period, which, containing the circle of all
possible aspects and of all corresponding effects, as Cicero supposes,
is able, by observations made and set down in the genethliatic archives,
to foresee, at the second revolution, the return of the events which
were already linked there and which must be reproduced? <span
id="fr_439"></span>[a](#fn_438) Plato exacts, for the perfection of this
great year, that the movement of the fixed stars, which constitutes what
we call the precession of the equinoxes, should coincide with the
particular movement of the celestial bodies, so as to bring back the
heavens to the fixed point of its primitive position. <span
id="fr_440"></span>[b](#fn_439) The Brahmans carry the greatest duration
of this immense period, which they name *Kalpa*, to 4,320,000,000 of
years, and its mean duration, which they name *Maha-Youg*, to
4,320,000. <span id="fr_441"></span>[c](#fn_440) The Chinese appear to
restrict it to 432,000 years, <span id="fr_442"></span>[d](#fn_441) and
in this they agree with the Chaldeans; but when one reduces it again to
a twelfth of this number, with the Egyptians, that is, to the sole
revolution of the fixed stars, which they made, according to Hipparchus,
36,000 years, and which we make no more than 25,867, according to modern
calculations, <span id="fr_443"></span>[e](#fn_442) we feel indeed that
we would be still very far from having a series of observations capable
of making us foresee the return of the same events, and that we could
not conceive even, how men could ever attain to its mastery. As to the
second method, which consists, as I have said, in carrying forward the
moral sight upon the route which one has before him, I have no need to
observe that it can be only very conjectural and very uncertain, since
it depends upon a faculty which man has never possessed except as a
special favour of Providence.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

The principle by which it is claimed that the future is only a return of
the past, did not therefore suffice to recognize even the plan of it; a
second principle is necessary, and this principle, openly announced in
the Golden Verses, as we shall see farther on, was that by which it was
established that Nature is everywhere alike, and, consequently, that its
action, being uniform in the smallest sphere as in the greatest, in the
highest as in the lowest, can be inferred from both, and pronounced by
analogy. This principle proceeded from the ancient dogma concerning the
animation of the Universe, as much in general as in particular: a dogma
consecrated among all nations, and following which it was taught that
not only the Great All, but the innumerable worlds which are like its
members, the heavens and the heaven of heavens, the stars and all the
beings who people them even to the plants and metals, are penetrated by
the same Soul and moved by the same Spirit. <span
id="fr_444"></span>[a](#fn_443) Stanley attributes this dogma to the
Chaldeans, <span id="fr_445"></span>[b](#fn_444) Kircher to the
Egyptians, <span id="fr_446"></span>[c](#fn_445) and the wise Rabbi
Maimonides traces it back to the Sabæans. <span
id="fr_447"></span>[d](#fn_446) Saumaise has attributed to them the
origin of astrological science, <span id="fr_448"></span>[e](#fn_447)
and he is correct in one point. But of what use is it to consider the
movement of the heavens and the respective position of the stars
belonging to the same sphere as the earth, in order to form the
genethliatical theme of the empires of nations, cities, and even of
simple individuals, and conclude from the point of departure in the
temporal route of existence, the aim of this route and the fortunate or
unfortunate events with which they should be sown, if one had not
established, primarily, that this route, being only

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

some portion of an existing sphere and already traversed, it belonged
thus to the domain of Necessity and could be known; and, secondarily,
that the analogical *rapport* ruling between the sentient sphere that
one examined and the intelligible sphere that one could not perceive,
authorized drawing inferences from both and even deciding from the
general to the particular? For, believing that the stars have an actual
and direct influence upon the destiny of peoples and of men, and that
they even determine this destiny by their good or evil aspects, is an
idea as false as ridiculous, born of the darkness of modern times, and
that is not found among the ancients, even among the most ignorant
masses. The genethliatical science is supported by principles less
absurd. These principles, drawn from the mysteries, were, as I have
explained, that the future is a return of the past and that nature is
everywhere the same.

It is from the union of these two principles that resulted
genethlialogy, or the science by which the point of departure being
known in any sphere whatever, they believed they had discovered, by the
aspect and direction of the stars, the portion of this sphere which must
immediately follow this point. But this union, outside of the enormous
difficulty that it presented, still involved in its execution very
dangerous consequences. This is why they concealed in the sanctuaries
the science which was its object, and made of religion a secret and
state affair. The prevision of the future, supposing it possible as the
ancients did, is not, in effect, a science that one should abandon to
the vulgar, who, being unable to acquire previously the learning
necessary, and having but rarely the wisdom which regulates its use,
risked debasing it, or making use of it wrongfully. Furthermore, the
pontiffs, who were in sole charge, initiated in the great mysteries and
possessing the *ensemble* of the doctrine, knew very well that the
future, such even as they could hope to understand it in the perfection
of the science, was never aught but a doubtful future, a sort of canvas
upon

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

which the power of the Will might exercise itself freely, in such a
manner that, although the matter might be determined beforehand, its
form was not, and that such an imminent event could be suspended,
evaded, or changed by a coöperation of the acts of the will,
inaccessible to all prevision. This is what was said with such
profoundness by Tiresias, the most famous hierophant of Greece and whom
Homer called the only sage, <span id="fr_449"></span>[a](#fn_448) these
words so often quoted and so little understood: "Whatever I may see will
come to pass, or it will not come to pass" <span
id="fr_450"></span>[b](#fn_449); that is to say, The event that I see is
in the necessity of Destiny and it will come to pass, unless it is
changed by the power of the Will; in which case it will not come to
pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_427"></span>[182:a](ogv27.htm#fr_428) Hermes, *In
Asclepio;* Porphyr., *De Antr. Nymph.*, p. 106; Origen, *Contr. Cels.*,
l. vi., p. 298; Hyd., *De Vet. Pers. Relig.*, p. 16; Jamblic., *De
Myster-Egypt.*, c. 37.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[182:b](ogv27.htm#fr_429) *Hist. des Voyag.*,
t. lii., p. 72; Divd., l. iv., c. 79; Plutar., *In Vitâ Num.*

<span id="fn_429"></span>[183:a](ogv27.htm#fr_430) Boulanger, *Antiq.
dévoil.*, l. iii., ch. 5, § 3.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[183:b](ogv27.htm#fr_431) *Mém. de l’Acad. des
Insc.*, t. i., p. 67; Tit.-Liv., *Decad*., i, l. ix.; Aul. Gell., l.
vi., c. 9.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[183:c](ogv27.htm#fr_432) Duhald., t. ii., p.
578; t. iii., p. 336, 342; Const. d’Orville, t. i., p. 3.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[183:d](ogv27.htm#fr_433) Philostr., *In Vitâ
Apoll.*, l. iii., c. 13.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[184:a](ogv27.htm#fr_434) Dans mon
21<sup>e</sup> Examen, où j’ai cité particulièrement Diogène Laërce, l.
viii., § 4.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[184:b](ogv27.htm#fr_435) Syncell., p. 35.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[184:c](ogv27.htm#fr_436) Senec., *Quæst.
Nat.*, l. iii., c. 30; Synes., *De Provid.*, l. ii., *sub fin*.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[184:d](ogv27.htm#fr_437) Plato, *In Tim.*;
Ovid, *Metam*., l. xv., fab. v.; Senec., *Epist*., 35; Macrob., In
*Somn. Scip.*, l. ii., c. 2; *Hist. des Voyages*, t. xii., p. 529;
Dupuis, *Orig. des Cultes*, l. v., in 12, p. 474; Bailly, *Hist. de
l’Astr. Anc.*, l. ix., § 15.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[184:e](ogv27.htm#fr_438) Ciceron, *De Divin.*,
l. ii., c. 97.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[185:a](ogv27.htm#fr_439) Cicer., *De Natur.
Deor.*, l. ii., c. 20; *ibid*., *De Divin.*, l. ii., c. 97.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[185:b](ogv27.htm#fr_440) Plato, *In Tim.*

<span id="fn_440"></span>[185:c](ogv27.htm#fr_441) *Souryâ-Siddhanta*.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[185:d](ogv27.htm#fr_442) *Asiat. Research.*,
t. ii., p. 378.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[185:e](ogv27.htm#fr_443) Biot., *Astr. Phys.*,
ch. xiv., p. 291.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[186:a](ogv27.htm#fr_444) *Vitâ Pythag.*;
Phot., Bibl. *Cod.*, 259; Plato, *In Tim.*; Macrob., In *Somn. Scip.*;
Virg., *Æneid*, l. vi., v. 724; Sevius, *Comm.*, *ibid*.; Cicer., *De
Nat. Deor.*, l. i., c. 5, 11, 14, et 15; Diog. Laërt., *In Zon.*;
Batteux, *Causes premières*, t. ii., p. 116; Beausob., *Hist. du
Manich.*, t. ii., l. vi., c. 6, § 14.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[186:b](ogv27.htm#fr_445) Stanley, *De Phil.
Chald.*, p. 1123.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[186:c](ogv27.htm#fr_446) Kircher, *Ædip.*, t.
i., p. 172, et t. ii., p. 200.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[186:d](ogv27.htm#fr_447) Maimon., *More
Nevoch.*, i., part., c. 70.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[186:e](ogv27.htm#fr_448) Salmas, *Ann.
Climat.*, *Præf*., p. 32.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[188:a](ogv27.htm#fr_449) Homer, *Odyss.*, K.
V. 494; Diodor. Sic., l. v., C. 6; Plin., l. vii., C. 56; Plutar., *De
Oracul. Defect.*, p. 434.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[188:b](ogv27.htm#fr_450) Horat., S*at*., v.,
l. ii., v. 59.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. That which thou dost not know, pretend not that thou dost.
Instruct thyself: for time and patience favour all.](ogv28)
