[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv36)  [Next](ogv38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26. But before all, thy soul to its faithful duty, Invoke these Gods with fervour, they whose aid, Thy work begun, alone can terminate.

All the cults established upon the face of the earth have made a
religious duty of prayer. This alone would prove, if it were necessary,
what I have advanced concerning the theosophical dogma of the volitive
liberty of man; for if man were not free in his actions, and if an
irresistible fatality led him on to misfortune and to crime, what use
would be invoking the gods, imploring their assistance, begging them to
turn aside from him the evils which must inevitably overwhelm him? If,
as Epicurus taught, an impenetrable barrier separated gods and men; if
these gods, absorbed in their beatitude and their impassive immortality,
were such strangers to the evils of humanity that they neither troubled
to alleviate them nor to prevent them, for what purpose then the incense
burning at the foot of their altars? <span
id="fr_557"></span>[a](#fn_556)

It was, he said, on account of the excellence of their nature that he
honoured them thus, and not from any motive of hope or fear, not
expecting any good from them and not dreading any evil. <span
id="fr_558"></span>[b](#fn_557) What miserable sophism!

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How could Epicurus
say such a thing before having explained clearly and without
amphibology, what the origin of good and evil is, so as to prove that
the gods indeed do not cooperate either for the augmentation of the one,
or the diminution of the other? But Epicurus had never dreamed of giving
this explanation. However little he might have considered it, he would
have seen that in whatever fashion he had given it, it would have
overthrown the doctrine of atoms; for a sole principle, whatever it may
be, cannot produce at the same time good and evil. Nevertheless, if he
has not explained this origin, and if he has not shown in a peremptory
way that we are in a sphere where absolute evil reigns, and that
consequently we can have no sort of communication with that wherein good
resides, it will remain always evident that if we are not in such a
sphere, and if we possess a portion of good, this good must come to us
from the sphere wherein absolute good has its source. Now, this sphere
is precisely that in which Epicurus places the gods. <span
id="fr_559"></span>[a](#fn_558) But, perhaps, a defender of Epicurus
will say, the good that we possess comes to us only once from the divine
sphere and thenceforth it comes to us no more. This is contrary to the
most intimate and most general notion that we have of the Divinity, to
that of its immutability upon which Epicurus himself leans most, and
from which it results that the gods could never be what they have been,
nor do what they have done.

In one word, just as well as in a thousand, any maker of a system is
obliged to do one of two things, either to declare himself what the
origin is of good and evil, or to admit *a priori* the theosophical
dogma of the liberty of man. Epicurus knew this, and although this dogma
might ruin his system completely, he preferred to admit it than expose
himself to give an explanation beyond his capability and beyond that of
all men. But if man is free, he can be counselled; if he can be
counselled, it is evident that he can,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

even that he must, demand counsel. This is the rational principle of
prayer. Now, common sense is the asking for counsel wiser than its own,
and sagacity shows in the Gods the source of wisdom.

Epicurus, nevertheless, denied the intervention of divine Providence and
pretended that the Gods, absorbed in their supreme felicity, do not
mingle in any affair. <span id="fr_560"></span>[a](#fn_559) A single
question, simple and naïve, would overthrow this assertion destitute of
proofs, and besides, inconsistent with the conduct of Greek philosophy;
but I prefer to leave this question to Bayle, who has expended much
logic in sustaining this point. This French philosopher, under pretext
of making Epicurus dispute with a polytheistic priest, advances against
Providence an argument which he believes irresistible, and which is,
indeed, one of the most subtle that one could possibly advance. "Are the
gods satisfied with their administration or are they dissatisfied? Be
mindful," he says, "of my dilemma: if they are satisfied with what comes
to pass under their providence, they are pleased with evil; if they are
dissatisfied, they are unhappy." <span id="fr_561"></span>[b](#fn_560)
The manner in which Bayle throws himself into the midst of the question,
without examining the principles of it, denounces him as a skeptic; it
is necessary therefore to use against him the weapons that I have given
against skepticism; that is, to bring him back abruptly to the
principles, by interrogating him before replying to him. It is necessary
to ask him, if he admits a difference between that which is and that
which is not? He is forced to admit it, as I have said; for in whatever
region of himself his will takes refuge, whether it exercises its
judgment in the instinct, in the understanding or in the intelligence,
you will pursue it in him opposing, in the first case, the axiom of
common sense: nothing is made from nothing; in the second, that of
reason: that which is, is; in the last, that of sagacity: everything has
its opposite and can have only one. Nothing is made from nothing

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

therefore that which is not, can never produce that which is. That which
is, is; therefore, that which is not, is not that which is. Everything
has its opposite and can have only one; therefore the absolute opposite
of that which is, is that which is not. If the skeptic refuses himself
the evidence of common sense, of reason and of sagacity united, he lies
to his conscience, or he is mad and then one must leave him.

The difference admitted between that which is and that which is not,
proceeds therefore against Bayle, or against those who resemble him; ask
them if man is a prey to absolute evil, whether physical or moral? They
will reply to you, no; for they will feel that if they should respond
otherwise, you would prove to them that not having the faculty of making
a difference between good and evil, nor of comparing them together, they
could never draw from this comparison their strongest argument against
Providence. They will, therefore, reply that man is not a prey to
absolute evil, but to a very great relative evil; as great as they wish.
You, nevertheless continue thus: if man is not a prey to absolute evil,
he might be, since it would suffice for this to take away the sum of
good which mitigates the evil, and which the difference, previously
established between that which is and that which is not, teaches to
distinguish. Now, this sum of good, whence comes it? Who dispenses it?
Who? If the skeptics are silent, affirm for them that it emanates from
the gods themselves and that Providence is the dispenser. Then reply to
their dilemma, and say that the gods are content with their
administration and that they have reason to be, since by it they procure
a sum of good increasing more and more, for the beings which without
Providence would never know it; and that their Providence, which has
mitigated evil from its origin, mitigates it still and will mitigate it
to its end; and if the astonished skeptics object that Providence takes
a great deal of time to make what should be made in an instant, reply to

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

them that it is not a question of knowing how nor why it makes things,
but only that it makes them; which is proved by the overthrow of their
dilemma; and which, after all, is saying with more reason in this
circumstance than in any other, that time has nothing to do with the
affair, since it is nothing to Providence, although for us it may be
much.

And if, continuing to draw inferences from your reasoning, the skeptics
say to you that, according to the continual effusion of good which you
establish, the sum ought to be daily augmented, whilst that of evil,
diminishing in the same proportion, ought at last to disappear wholly,
which they cannot believe; reply, that the inferences of a reasoning
which confounds theirs are at their disposal; that they can deduce from
them as much as they wish; without engaging you, for that matter, to
discuss the extent of their view, either in the past, or in the future,
because each one has his own; that, besides, you owe it to truth to
teach them that the dogma, by means of which you have ruined the
laborious structure of their logic, is no other than a theosophical
tradition, universally received from one end of the earth to the other,
as it is easy to prove to them.

Open the sacred books of the Chinese, the Burmans, Indians, and
Persians, you will find there the unequivocal traces of this dogma.
Here, it is Providence represented under the traits of a celestial
virgin, who, sent by the Supreme Being, furnished arms to combat and to
subjugate the genius of evil, and to bring to perfection everything that
it had corrupted. <span id="fr_562"></span>[a](#fn_561) There, it is the
Universe itself and the Worlds which compose it, which are signalized as
the instrument employed by this same Providence to attain this
end. <span id="fr_563"></span>[b](#fn_562) Such was the secret doctrine
of the mysteries. <span id="fr_564"></span>[c](#fn_563) Good and

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Evil were
represented in the sanctuaries under the emblems of light and darkness:
the formidable spectacle of the combat between these two opposed
principles was given there to the initiate; and after many scenes of
terror, the most obscure night was insensibly succeeded by the purest
and most brilliant day. <span id="fr_565"></span>[a](#fn_564) It was
exactly this that Zoroaster had publicly taught.

Ormuzd \[said this theosophist\] knew by his sovereign science that at
first he could in no way influence Ahriman; but that afterwards he
united with him and that at last he finished by subjugating him and
changing him to such a degree that the Universe existed without evil for
a duration of centuries. <span id="fr_566"></span>[b](#fn_565) When the
end of the world comes \[he said in another place\] the wickedest of the
infernal spirits will be pure, excellent, celestial: yes \[he adds\], he
will become celestial, this liar, this evil doer; he will become holy,
celestial, excellent, this cruel one: vice itself, breathing only
virtue, will make long offerings of praise to Ormuzd before all the
world. <span id="fr_567"></span>[c](#fn_566)

These words are the more remarkable when one considers that the dogma
relating to the downfall of the rebellious angel has passed from the
cosmogony of the Parsees into that of the Hebrews, and that it is upon
this dogma alone, imperfectly interpreted by the vulgar, that the
contradictory doctrine of the eternity of evil and the torments that
follow it, have been founded. This doctrine, but little understood, has
been sharply attacked. <span id="fr_568"></span>[d](#fn_567) Simon, very
inappropriately surnamed the *Magician*, forced St. Peter himself,
disputing with him, to acknowledge that the Hebraic writings had said
nothing positive on this subject. <span id="fr_569"></span>[e](#fn_568)
This is certain. These writings, interpreted as they have been by the
Hellenic Jews and given out under the name of *Version* 

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

*of the Septuagint*, shed no light upon this important point; but it is
well to know that these interpreters have designedly concealed this
light, in order not to divulge the meaning of their sacred book. If one
understood thoroughly the language of Moses, one would see that, far
from setting aside the theosophical traditions which he had received in
Egypt, this theocratic legislator remained constantly faithful to them.
The passage in his Sepher where he speaks of the annihilation of Evil,
in the meaning of Zoroaster, is in chapter iii., v. 15, of the part
vulgarly called *Genesis*, as I hope one day to show. <span
id="fr_570"></span>[a](#fn_569) But without entering at this time, into
the discussion where the real translation of this passage would lead me,
let it suffice to say that the early Christians were very far from
admitting the eternity of evil; for without speaking of Manes and his
numerous followers who shared the opinion of Zoroaster, <span
id="fr_571"></span>[b](#fn_570) those who are versed in these sorts of
matters know that Origen taught that torments will not be eternal, and
that demons, instructed by chastisement, will be converted at last and
will obtain their pardon. <span id="fr_572"></span>[c](#fn_571) He was
followed in this by a great number of learned men, by the evidence of
Beausobre who quotes, on this subject, the example of a philosopher of
Edessa, who maintained that after the consummation of the ages, all
creatures would become consubstantial with God. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[d](#fn_572)

One thing worthy of notice is that Zoroaster, who has made prayer one of
the principal dogmas of his religion, has been imitated in this by
Mohammed, who, unknowingly, perhaps, has borrowed a great number of
things from this ancient legislator of the Parsees. It is presumable
that the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

followers of Manes, having retired to Arabia, were responsible for these
borrowings, by the opinions that they circulated there. But, it must be
frankly stated, this dogma, quite in its place in the Zend-Avesta, does
not appear so consistent in the Koran, for, of what use is it in a cult
where the predestination of men, necessitated by the Prescient and
All-Powerful Divine, delivers irresistibly the greatest part of them to
an eternal damnation, on account of the original stain imprinted upon
mankind by the sin of the first man? One cannot be prevented, in
reflecting upon this manifest contradiction, from believing that the
theosophical tradition pertaining to the free will of man, and the
influencing action of Providence operating the progressive augmentation
of good and the gradual diminution of evil, announced openly by
Zoroaster, must have acted secretly in the mind of the theocratic
legislator of Arabia. If it had not been thus, the prayers that he
ordered as one of the first and most essential duties of the religion,
would have been without object.

According to the doctrine of Pythagoras revealed by Hierocles, two
things agree in the efficacy of prayer: the voluntary movement of our
soul, and aid from heaven. The first of these things is that which seeks
goodness; and the other that which shows it. Prayer is a medium between
our quest and the celestial gift. One seeks, one prays in vain, if one
adds not prayer to research and research to prayer. Virtue is an
emanation from God; it is like a reflected image of the Divinity, the
resemblance of which alone constitutes the good and the beautiful. The
soul which is attached to this admirable type of all perfection is
aroused to prayer by its inclination to virtue, and it augments this
inclination by the effusion of the goodness which it receives by means
of prayer; so that it does precisely what it demands and demands what it
does. <span id="fr_574"></span>[a](#fn_573) Socrates was not far from
the doctrine of Pythagoras in this respect;

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

he added only, that prayer exacted much precaution and prudence, lest,
without perceiving it, one demand of God great evils, in thinking to ask
great blessings.

The sage \[he said\] knows what he ought to say or do; the fool is
ignorant of it; the one implores in prayer, what can be really useful to
him; the other desires often things which, being granted him, become for
him the source of greatest misfortunes. The prudent man \[he adds\],
however little he may doubt himself, ought to resign himself to
Providence who knows better than he, the consequences that things must
have.

This is why Socrates cited as a model of sense and reason this prayer of
an ancient poet:

Grant us good whether prayed for or unsought by us;  
But that which we ask amiss, do thou avert. <span
id="fr_575"></span>[a](#fn_574)

The prayer was, as I have said, one of the principal dogmas of the
religion of Zoroaster <span id="fr_576"></span>[b](#fn_575): the
Persians also had the greatest confidence therein. Like the Chaldeans,
they founded all magical power upon its efficacy. They still possess
today certain kinds of prayers for conjuring maladies and driving away
demons. These prayers, which they name *tavids*, are written upon strips
of paper and carried after the manner of talismans. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[c](#fn_576) It is quite well-known that the modern
Jews use them in the same way. In this they imitate, as in innumerable
other things, the ancient Egyptians whose secret doctrine Moses has
transmitted to them. <span id="fr_578"></span>[d](#fn_577) The early
Christians were inclined to theosophical ideas on this subject. Origen
explains it

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

clearly in speaking of the virtue attached to certain names invoked by
the Egyptian sages and the most enlightened of the magians of
Persia. <span id="fr_579"></span>[a](ogv38.htm#fn_578) Synesius, the
famous Bishop of Ptolemais, initiated into the mysteries, declares that
the science, by means of which one linked the intelligible essences to
sentient forms, by the invocation of spirits, was neither vain nor
criminal, but on the contrary quite innocent and founded upon the nature
of things. <span id="fr_580"></span>[b](ogv38.htm#fn_579) Pythagoras was
accused of magic. Ignorance and weakness of mind have always charged
science with this banal accusation. <span
id="fr_581"></span>[c](ogv38.htm#fn_580) This philosopher, rightly
placed in the rank of the ablest physicians of Greece, <span
id="fr_582"></span>[d](ogv38.htm#fn_581) was, according to his most
devoted disciples, neither of the number of the gods, nor even of those
of the divine heroes; he was a man whom virtue and wisdom had adorned
with a likeness to the gods, by the complete purifying of his
understanding which had been effected through contemplation and
prayer. <span id="fr_583"></span>[e](ogv38.htm#fn_582) This is what
Lysis expressed by the following lines:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_556"></span>[233:a](ogv37.htm#fr_557) Diogen. Laërt., l.
x., § 123; Cicero, *De Nat. Deor.*, l. i., c. 30.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[233:b](ogv37.htm#fr_558) Cicer., *ibid*., c. 8
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[234:a](ogv37.htm#fr_559) Cicer., *ut suprà*.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[235:a](ogv37.htm#fr_560) *Diogen. Laërt.*, l.
x., § 123.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[235:b](ogv37.htm#fr_561) *Dict. critiq.*, art.
EPICURE, rem. T

<span id="fn_561"></span>[237:a](ogv37.htm#fr_562) *Mém. concern. les
Chin.*, t. i., p. 102 et 138.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[237:b](ogv37.htm#fr_563) *Asiat. Research.*,
vol. vi., p. 215. *Voyez* les Pouranas intitulés, *Bhagavad-Vedam* et
*Bhagavad-Gita*, et conférez avec les *Recherches asiatiq.*, t. v., p.
350 *et suiv.*, et avec l’ouvrage de Holwell (Interest. Hist. Events),
ch. 4, § 5, etc.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[237:c](ogv37.htm#fr_564) Cicer., cité par S.
August., *Contr. Pelag.*, l. iv.; Pindar, *Olymp.*, ii., v. 122.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[238:a](ogv37.htm#fr_565) Meurs., *Eleus.*, c.
11; Dion. Chrysost., *Orat.* 12.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[238:b](ogv37.htm#fr_566) *Boun-Dehesh*, p.
347.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[238:c](ogv37.htm#fr_567) *Vendidad-Sadé*, 30e
M.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[238:d](ogv37.htm#fr_568) *Homil. Clement.*,
xix., § 4, p. 744.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[238:e](ogv37.htm#fr_569) *Ibid*., cité par
Beausobre, *Hist. du Manich.*, t. i., p. 38.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[239:a](ogv37.htm#fr_570) It is necessary
before all, to restore the language of Moses, lost, as I have said, for
more than twenty-four centuries; it must be restored with the aid of
Greek and Latin which chain it to the illusory versions; it is necessary
to go back to its original source and find its true roots: this enormous
work that I have undertaken, I have accomplished.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[239:b](ogv37.htm#fr_571) Fortun. *apud*
August., *Disput.*, ii.; August., *Contr. Faust.*, l. xxi., c. *ult*.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[239:c](ogv37.htm#fr_572) Origène, cité par
Beausobre, *Hist. du Manich.*, t. ii., v., ch. 6.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[239:d](ogv37.htm#fr_573) Beausobre, *ibid*.,
t. ii., p. 346.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[240:a](ogv37.htm#fr_574) Hierocl., *Aur.
Carmin.*, v. 49 et 50.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[241:a](ogv37.htm#fr_575) Plat., *In* II.
*Alcibiad.*

"Accordez-moi, grands Dieux, ce qui m’est nécessaire,  
 Soit que je pense ou non à vous le demander;  
 Et si de mes désirs l’objet m’était contraire,  
 Daignez, grands Dieux, daignez ne pas me l’accorder."

<span id="fn_575"></span>[241:b](ogv37.htm#fr_576) *Vendidad-Sadé*,
68<sup>e</sup> *hâ*, p. 242.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[241:c](ogv37.htm#fr_577) *Zend-Avesta,
Jeshts-Sadés*, p. 113.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[241:d](ogv37.htm#fr_578) Hermès, *In Asclep.*,
c. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. Know the Principle and End of All](ogv38)
