[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv44)  [Next](ogv46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 34. But no: ‘tis for the humans of a race divine, To discern Error, and to see the Truth.

Hierocles who, as I have said, has not concealed the difficulty which is
contained in these lines, has raised it, by making evident that it
depends upon the free will of man, and

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

by putting a limit upon the evils which he attracts to himself by his
own choice. His reasoning coinciding with mine can be reduced to these
few words. The sole remedy for evil, whatever may be the cause, is time.
Providence, minister of the Most High, employs this remedy; and by means
of perfectibility which results from it, brings back all to good. But
the aptitude of the maladies for receiving it acts in proportion to this
remedy. Time, always the same, and always *nihil* for the Divinity is,
however, shortened or lengthened for men, according as their will
coincides with the providential action or differs therefrom. They have
only to desire good, and time which fatigues them will be lightened. But
what if they desire evil always, will time therefore not be finished?
Will the evils therefore have no limit? Is it that the will of man is so
inflexible that God may not turn it towards the good? The will of man is
free beyond doubt; and its essence, immutable as the Divinity whence it
emanates, knows not how to be changed, but nothing is impossible for
God. The change which is effected in it, without which its immutability
may in no wise be altered, is the miracle of the All-Powerful. It is a
result of its own liberty, and if I dare to say it, takes place by the
coincidence of two movements, whose impulse is given by Providence; by
the first, it shows to the will, goodness; by the second, it puts it in
a fitting position to meet this same goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. Nature serves them](ogv46.md)
