[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv40)  [Next](ogv42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 30. Thou shalt see that the evils which devour men Are of their choice the fruit. . . .

Undoubtedly one of the most important things for man to understand is
the nearest cause of his evils, so that, ceasing from murmuring against
Providence, he may blame only himself for the misfortunes of which he is
the proper artisan. Ignorance, always weak and presumptuous, concealing
its own mistakes, holds responsible, with their consequences, the things
which are most foreign there: thus the child which hurts itself,
threatens with his voice and strikes with his hand the wall against
which he has stumbled. Of all errors this is the most common. Likewise
he acknowledges with as much difficulty his own wrongs as he accuses
with ease those of others. This baleful habit of imputing to Providence
the evils which afflict humanity has furnished, as we have seen, the
strongest arguments to the skeptics to attack its influence, and to
undermine thus in its foundation the very existence of the Divinity. All
peoples have been guilty of this <span id="fr_610"></span>[a](#fn_609);
but the moderns are, as I believe, the only ones who coldly and without
passion, in order to sustain certain opinions that they have embraced,
have raised systematically their ignorance concerning the cause of evil,
and made an irresistible fatality proceed from the All-Powerful and
divine Prescience, which drawing man on to vice and misfortune, damns
him by force; and by a consequence determined by the will of God,
delivers him to eternal

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

sufferings. <span id="fr_611"></span>[a](#fn_610) Such were those among
the Christians of the fifth century, who were named Predestinarians on
account of their terrible system. Their opinion, it is true, was
condemned by the councils of Arles and Lyon <span
id="fr_612"></span>[b](#fn_611); but they declared that the church fell
into inconsistency, since the sentiment in this respect, being exactly
conformable with that which Saint Augustine had advanced against the
Pelagians, this church could not condemn the one without condemning the
other and therefore, without deciding in favour of the opposed doctrine
which they had already condemned. It is certain that the Predestinarians
were right on this last point, as well as Gotescalc, Baius, and
Jansenius, who, with the book of Saint Augustine in hand, proved it
later on, by causing in this church, at different times, troubles more
or less violent on the subject.

This is the moment to complete the proofs of what I advanced in my
Seventh Examination, that the liberty of man can be established only by
the sole theosophical tradition, and the assent that all the sages of
the earth have given to it; and that there is no doctrine, which,
becoming separated, does not abandon the Universe to the irresistible
impulse of an absolute fatality. I have shown sufficiently the emptiness
of all the cosmogonical systems, whether their authors have founded them
upon a sole principle or upon two, upon spirit or upon matter; I have
sufficiently indicated the danger that would have ensued from divulging
the secret dogma of divine Unity, since this disclosure drew with it the
necessity of explaining the origin of Good and Evil, which was
impossible; I have cited the example of Moses, and I have demonstrated
as a decisive point in this matter that those of his followers who
rejected the oral tradition of this great man, to attach themselves to
the literal meaning only of his Sepher, fell into fatalism and were led
to make God himself the author of Evil; finally I have announced that
Christianity

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

and Islamism, issuing alike from the Mosaic doctrine, have not been able
to evade the dogma of predestination: this dogma, although often
repulsed by the Christian and Mussulman doctors, alarmed at its
consequences, is shown, none the less, from the facts. The Koran which
teaches it openly exempts me from other proofs in defence of the
Mussulmans. Let us turn to the Christians.

It is certain that one of the greatest men of the primitive church,
Origen, perceiving to what consequences the explanation of the origin of
Evil led, by the way in which it was vulgarly understood, according to
the literal translation of the Sepher of Moses, undertook to bring all
back to allegory, recalling Christianity being born to the theosophical
tradition pertaining to the free will of man <span
id="fr_613"></span>[a](#fn_612); but his books, wherein he exposed this
tradition according to the doctrine of Pythagoras and Plato, <span
id="fr_614"></span>[b](#fn_613) were burned as heretical, by the order
of Pope Gelasius. <span id="fr_615"></span>[c](#fn_614) The church at
that time paid little attention to the blow dealt by Origen, occupied as
it was with examining the principal dogmas of incarnation, of the
divinity of Jesus, of the consubstantiality of the Word, of the Unity of
its person and the duality of its nature; but when, following the
energetic expression of Plucquet, the flame of conflagration had passed
over all these opinions, and when the waves of blood had drenched the
ashes, it was necessary to offer new food for its activity. An English
monk named Pelagius, <span id="fr_616"></span>[d](#fn_615) born with an
ardent and impetuous mind, was the foremost to attack this thorny
question of the liberty of man, and, wishing to establish it, was led to
deny original sin.

Man \[he said\] is free to do good or evil: he who tries to lay the
blame of his vices on the weakness of nature, is unjust: for what is
sin, in general? Is it a thing that one may evade, or

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

not? If one cannot evade it, there is no evil in committing it and then
it does not exist: if one can evade it, it must be evil to commit it and
therefore it exists: its very existence is born of the free will, and
proves it. <span id="fr_617"></span>[a](#fn_616) The dogma of original
sin \[continued Pelagius\] is absurd and unjust to God; for a creature
which does not exist would not be an accomplice of a bad action; and it
outrages divine justice, to say that God punishes him as guilty of this
action. <span id="fr_618"></span>[b](#fn_617) Man \[added Pelagius\] has
therefore a real power of doing good and evil, and he is free in these
two respects. But the liberty of doing a thing supposes necessarily the
union of all causes and of all conditions requisite for doing that
thing; and one is not free regarding an effect, every time that one of
the causes or conditions naturally exigent for producing this effect is
lacking. Therefore, to have the liberty of seeing the subjects, it is
necessary not only that the sense of sight be well developed, but also
that the subjects be discriminated, and placed at an equitable
distance. <span id="fr_619"></span>[c](#fn_618)

This far, the doctrine of Pelagius was wholly similar to that of
Pythagoras, as explained by Hierocles <span
id="fr_620"></span>[d](#fn_619); but it differs from it afterwards, in
what the English monk asserted, that since man is born with the liberty
of doing good and evil, he receives from nature and unites in him all
the conditions and all the causes naturally necessary for good and evil;
which robs him of his most beautiful prerogative,—perfectibility;
whereas Pythagoras held, on the contrary, that these causes and these
effects were only accorded to those who, on their part, concurred in
acquiring them, and who, by the work that they have done for themselves
in seeking to know themselves, have succeeded in possessing them more
and more perfectly.

However mitigated the doctrine of Pelagius might be, it appeared still
to accord too much with free will and was condemned by the
ecclesiastical authorities, who declared,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

through the medium of several councils, that man can do nothing of
himself without the aid of grace. Saint Augustine, who had been the soul
of these councils, pressed by the disciple of Pelagius to explain the
nature of this grace and to say how God accorded it to one man rather
than to another without being induced by the difference of their merits,
replied that man being in the masse de perdition, and God having no need
of them, and being furthermore independent and all-powerful, he gave
grace to whom he willed, without the one to whom he did not give it
having the right to complain; everything coming to pass as a result of
his will, which had foreseen all and determined all. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[a](#fn_620) Assuredly one could not establish more
forcibly the necessity of all things, nor submit men to a sterner
fatality, since the want of grace deprived them, not only of virtue in
the fleeting course of this life, but delivered them without hope to the
torments of an eternal hell. But Saint Augustine, who obeyed a severe
and consistent reason, felt very well that he could not speak otherwise,
without renouncing the dogma of original sin and overthrowing the
foundation of Christianity. All the rigid Christians, all those who, at
different times, have undertaken to restore Christianity to its
constitutive principles, have thought as Saint Augustine, and although
the church, alarmed at the terrible inferences that were drawn from the
canonical doctrine, may have essayed to temper it, by condemning, as I
have said, the Predestinarians and by approving of the persecutions
directed against Gotescalc; and, at the time when Luther drew in his
reform a great part of Christendom toward the dogma of predestination,
this did not prevent Baius, who remained faithful to orthodoxy, from
preaching the same dogma; nor Calvin, soon after, from adding new lights
to what Luther had left doubtful, and Jansenius, finally, corroborating
what Baius had only outlined, from raising in the very midst of the

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

church that formidable faction which all the united efforts of the Pope
and the Jesuits have been unable to convict of erring in the doctrine of
Saint Augustine, which it has sustained with a force worthy of a better
cause.

According to Calvin, who of all of them expresses himself most clearly,
the soul of man, all of whose faculties are infected with sin, lacks
force to resist the temptation which lures him on toward evil. The
liberty of which he prides himself is a chimera; he confounds the free
with the voluntary, and believes that he chooses freely because there is
no constraint, and that he wills to do the evil that he does. <span
id="fr_622"></span>[a](#fn_621) Thus following the doctrine of this
reformer, man, dominated by his vicious passions, can produce of himself
only wicked actions; and it is to draw him from this state of corruption
and impotence that it was necessary that God should send his son upon
earth to redeem him and to atone for him; so that it is from the absence
of liberty in man that Calvin draws his strongest proofs of the coming
of Christ: "For," he said, "if man had been free, and if he had been
able to save himself, it would not have been needful that God should
offer up his Son in sacrifice." <span id="fr_623"></span>[b](#fn_622)

This last argument seems irresistible. Besides when the Jesuits had
accused Calvin and his followers of making God the author of sin, and of
destroying thus all idea of the Divinity <span
id="fr_624"></span>[c](#fn_623) they knew better than to say how it can
be otherwise accomplished. They would not have been able, without doing
a thing impossible for them—that is, without giving the origin of evil.
The difficulty of this explanation, which Moses, even as I have said,
has enveloped with a triple veil, has in no wise escaped the fathers of
the primitive church. They have well felt that it was the important
point whereon depended the solution of all other questions. But how can
one attempt even the explanation? The most

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

enlightened among them had agreed that it is an abyss of nature that one
would not know how to fathom. <span id="fr_625"></span>[a](#fn_624)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_609"></span>[253:a](ogv41.htm#fr_610) Homère, cité par
Maxime de Tyr.; Pline, l. ii., c. 7; BIBLE, psalm. 73 et 93; Job, c. 23;
Habacuc, c. 1; Malach., c. 3; Balzac, *Socrate chrétien*, p. 237.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[254:a](ogv41.htm#fr_611) Plucquet, *Dict. des
Hérés.*, art. PRÉDESTINATIENS.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[254:b](ogv41.htm#fr_612) Noris., *Hist.
pelag.*, l. ii., c. 15.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[255:a](ogv41.htm#fr_613) Origen, *Comment. in
Psalm.*, p. 38 et 39.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[255:b](ogv41.htm#fr_614) S. Léon., *Epist*.
Decret., ii.; Niceph., l. xvii., c. 27.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[255:c](ogv41.htm#fr_615) *Conc. Rom.*, Gelas.,
t. iii.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[255:d](ogv41.htm#fr_616) *Dict. des Hérés*.,
art. PÉLAGIENS.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[256:a](ogv41.htm#fr_617) Plucquet, *comme
ci-dessus*, t. ii., p. 454.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[256:b](ogv41.htm#fr_618) Pelag., *apud* S.
August., *De Nat. et Grat.*, l. iii., c. 9.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[256:c](ogv41.htm#fr_619) Pelag., *apud*
August., *De Grat. Christ.*, c. 4.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[256:d](ogv41.htm#fr_620) *Comment. in Aur.
Carm.*, v. 62.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[257:a](ogv41.htm#fr_621) S. August., *De Grat.
Christ.*, cité par Plucquet, *Dict. des Hérés.*, art. PÉLAGIENS.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[258:a](ogv41.htm#fr_622) Calvin, *Institut*.,
l. ii., c. 1 et 2.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[258:b](ogv41.htm#fr_623) *Ibid*., t. ii.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[258:c](ogv41.htm#fr_624) Maimbourg, *Hist. du
Calvinisme*, l. i., p. 73.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[259:a](ogv41.htm#fr_625) Origen., *Contr.
Cels.*, l. iv., p. 207.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Unfortunates Seek Afar the Goodness Whose Source Within They
Bear](ogv42)
