[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv45)  [Next](ogv47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 35. Nature serves them. . . .

Lysis expresses it thus: Nature, by the homogeneity which, as I have
stated, constitutes its essence, teaches men to see beyond the range of
their senses, transports them by analogy from one region to another and
develops their ideas. The perfectibility which is manifested through the
grace of time is called perfection; for the more a thing is perfected
the more perfect it becomes. The man who perceives this is struck by it,
and if he reflect he finds truth, as I have openly

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

stated, and to which Lysis was content with making allusion, on account
of the secret of the mysteries that he was forced to respect.

It is this perfectibility manifested in Nature, which gives the
affirmative proofs that I have promised, touching the way in which
Providence removes with time the evils which afflict men. These are the
proofs *de facto*. They cannot be challenged without absurdity. I know
well that there have been men who, studying Nature within four walls,
and considering its operations through the extremely narrow prism of
their ideas, have denied that anything might be perfectible, and have
asserted that the Universe was immobile because they have not seen it
move; but there does not exist today a genuine observer, a naturalist
whose learning is founded upon Nature, who does not invalidate the
decision of these pretended savants, and who does not put perfectibility
in the rank of the most rigorously demonstrated truths.

I shall not quote the ancients on a subject where their authority would
be challenged; I shall even limit myself, to evade prolixities, to a
small number of striking passages among the moderns. Leibnitz, who ought
less than any other to admit perfectibility, since he had founded his
system upon the existence of the best of worlds possible, has, however,
recognized it in Nature, in advancing that all the changes which are
operated there are the consequence of both; that everything tends toward
its improvement, and that therefore the present is already teeming with
the future. <span id="fr_652"></span>[a](#fn_651) Buffon, inclining
strongly toward the system of atoms, ought also to be much opposed, and
yet he has been unable to see that Nature, in general, tends far more
toward life than toward death, and that it seems to be seeking to
organize bodies as much as is possible. <span
id="fr_653"></span>[b](#fn_652) The school of Kant has pushed the system
of perfectibility as far as it

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

could go. Schelling, the disciple of most consequence of this celebrated
man, has followed the development of Nature with a force of thought
which has perhaps passed the mark. The former, has ventured to say that
Nature is a sort of Divinity in germ, which tends to apotheosis, and is
prepared for existence with God, by the reign of Chaos, and by that of
Providence. <span id="fr_654"></span>[a](#fn_653) But those are only
speculative opinions. Here are opinions founded upon facts.

As soon as one considers the Earth observingly, the naturalists say, one
perceives striking traces of the revolutions that it has sustained in
anterior times. <span id="fr_655"></span>[b](#fn_654)

The continents have not always been what they are today, the waters of
the globe have not always been distributed in the same manner. The ocean
changes insensibly its bed, undermines the lands, divides them, rushes
over some, and leaves others dry. The islands have not always been
islands. The continents have been peopled, with living and vegetating
beings, before the present disposition of the waters upon the
globe. <span id="fr_656"></span>[c](#fn_655)

These observations confirm what Pythagoras and the ancient sages have
taught upon this subject <span id="fr_657"></span>[d](#fn_656):

Besides \[these same naturalists continue\], the greater part of the
fossil bones that have been assembled and compared are those of animals
different from any of the species actually known; has the kingdom of
life therefore changed? This one cannot refuse to believe. <span
id="fr_658"></span>[e](#fn_657) As Nature proceeds unceasingly from the
simple to the composite, it is probable that the most imperfect animals
should have been created before the tribes, higher in the scale of life.
It even seems that each of the animal classes

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

indicates a sort of suspension in the creative power, an intermission,
an era of repose, during which Nature prepared in silence the germs of
life which should come to light in the course of the cycles. One might
thus enumerate the epochs of living Nature, epochs remote in the night
of ages and which have been obliged to precede the formation of mankind.
A time may have been when the insect, the shell, the unclean reptile,
did not recognize the master in the Universe and were placed at the head
of the organized bodies. <span id="fr_659"></span>[a](#fn_658)

These observers add:

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is certain that
most perfect beings come from less perfect, and that they are obliged to
be perfected in the sequence of generations. All animals tend towards
man; all vegetables aspire to animality; minerals seek to draw nearer to
the vegetable. . . . It is evident that Nature, having created a series
of plants and animals, and having stopped at man who forms the superior
extremity, has assembled in him all the vital faculties that it had
distributed among the inferior races. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[b](#fn_659)

These are the ideas of Leibnitz. This celebrated man had said: ''Men
hold to animals; these to plants, and those to fossils. It is necessary
that all the natural orders form only one sole chain, in which the
different classes hold strictly as if they were its links." <span
id="fr_661"></span>[c](#fn_660) Several philosophers have adopted
them, <span id="fr_662"></span>[d](#fn_661) but none have expressed them
with more order and energy than the author of the article Nature, in *Le
Nouveau Dictionnaire d’Histoire naturelle*.

All animals, all plants are only the modifications of an animal, of a
vegetable origin. . . . Man is the knot which unites the Divinity to
matter, which links heaven and earth. This ray of wisdom and
intelligence which shines in his thoughts is

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

reflected upon all Nature. It is the chain of communication between all
beings. All the series of animals \[he adds in another place\] present
only a long degradation from the proper nature of man. The monkey,
considered either in his exterior form or in his interior organization,
resembles only a degraded man; and the same suggestion of degradation is
observed in passing from monkeys to quadrupeds; so that the primitive
trend of the organization is recognized in all, and the principal
viscera, the principal members are identical there. <span
id="fr_663"></span>[a](#fn_662)

Who knows \[observes elsewhere the same writer\] who knows if in the
eternal night of time the sceptre of the world will not pass from the
hands of man into those of a being more worthy of bearing it and more
perfect? Perhaps the race of negroes, today secondary in the human
specie, has already been queen of the earth before the white race was
created. . . . If Nature has successively accorded the empire to the
species that it creates more and more perfect, why should she cease
today. . . . The negro, already king of animals, has fallen beneath the
yoke of the European; will the latter bow the head in his turn before a
race more powerful and more intelligent when it enters into the plans of
Nature to ordain his existence? Where will his creation stop? Who will
place the limits of his power? God alone raises it and it is His
all-powerful hand which governs. <span id="fr_664"></span>[b](#fn_663)

These striking passages full of forceful ideas, which appear new, and
which would merit being better known, contain only a small part of the
things taught in the ancient mysteries, as I shall perhaps demonstrate
later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_651"></span>[271:a](ogv46.htm#fr_652) Cité par De Gérando,
*Hist. des Systèmes*, t. ii., p. 100.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[271:b](ogv46.htm#fr_653) *Hist. des Animaux*,
*in*-4, p. 37.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[272:a](ogv46.htm#fr_654) *System des
transcendental Idalimus*, p. 441; *Zeitschrift für die speculative
Physick*.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[272:b](ogv46.htm#fr_655) Buffon, *Théorie de
la Terre;* Linné, *De Telluris habitab. Increment;* Burnet,
*Archæolog*., etc.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[272:c](ogv46.htm#fr_656) *Nouv. Dict. d’Hist*.
nat., art. QUADRUPÈDE.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[272:d](ogv46.htm#fr_657) Ovid., *Metamorph*.,
l. xv.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[272:e](ogv46.htm#fr_658) *Nouv. Dict. d’Hist*.
nat., art. QUADRUPÈDE.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[273:a](ogv46.htm#fr_659) *Nouv. Dict. d’Hist
nat.*, art. ANIMAL.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[273:b](ogv46.htm#fr_660) *Nouv. Dict.*, art.
NATURE.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[273:c](ogv46.htm#fr_661) Lettre à Hermann.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[273:d](ogv46.htm#fr_662) Charles Bonnet,
*Contempt. de la Nat.*, p. 16; Lecat., *Traité du Mouvement musculaire*,
p. 54, art. iii.; Robinet, *De la Nature*, t. iv., p. 17, etc.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[274:a](ogv46.htm#fr_663) *Nouv. Dict.*, art.
QUADRUPÉDE.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[274:b](ogv46.htm#fr_664) *Nouv. Dict.*, art.
ANIMAL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 36. Letting Intelligence O’er Thy Body Reign](ogv47)
