[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12004)  [Next](cc12006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>PSALM 122

<span id="vi-p2"></span>In this Psalm David congratulates himself and
the whole Church upon the fact, that a seat had at length been appointed
for the ark of the covenant, and that God had chosen a place where his
name should be continually called upon. Afterwards, to incite and
encourage the faithful to engage in the worship of the sanctuary, he
briefly declares, that the prosperous condition of the people depended
upon God’s having chosen the seat of royalty to be at Jerusalem, from
whence it was his purpose to defend, maintain, and assist his people.

<span id="vi-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees of David.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md)

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
122:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** I was glad when they said to me, We
will go into the house of Jehovah. **2.** Our feet shall be  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) standing within thy gates, O Jerusalem!
**3.** Jerusalem is built as a city, compact in itself together.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**1** *I was glad when they said to me.* God
had often told Moses, that his Sanctuary would one day have a certain
and fixed place of abode; yet from the time of Moses, for the space of
more than a thousand years, the Ark of the Covenant had been carried
about from place to place, as if it had been in a state of pilgrimage.
At length it was revealed to David, that mount Zion was the spot where
God would have his ark to be settled, and his temple built. Now, as
David himself received this revelation with exceeding great joy, so he
affirms that he was glad to find the whole people with one consent
agreeing thereto. This circumstance has not been duly considered, and
the consequence is, that interpreters have given the unhappy
translation—*I was glad with those that said to me.* Such a rendering,
however, only renders the sense a little obscure; but the translation of
the Septuagint and the Vulgate, which puts upon the second verb of the
verse a neuter signification, entirely vitiates the meaning, *I was glad
in the things which, were said to me.* I indeed admit that literally the
reading is—*I was* *glad in those who said to me;* but it is no uncommon
thing for the letter <span id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>ב*, beth,* which
commonly signifies *in,* to be resolved into the adverb of time *when;*
and here the scope of the text requires such a rendering. David
testifies that he felt in his heart a double joy on observing that the
whole people concurred in yielding obedience to the oracle which
declared mount Zion to be the place which God had chosen for his solemn
worship. By this example we are taught, that our joy, in like manner,
should be doubled, when God by his Holy Spirit not only frames each of
us to the obedience of his word, but also produces the same effect upon
others, that we may be united together in the same faith. So stubborn
and rebellious is human nature, that the great majority of mankind
invariably murmur against God whenever he speaks. We have, therefore, no
small ground for rejoicing when all harmoniously rank themselves with us
on the side of God. Such as translate, *with those who said to me,*
deduce this meaning: I take delight in the company of those who allure
me to the service of God, and offer themselves to me as companions, that
we may go to the sanctuary together. But from the second verse it will
be still more obvious, that the joy of which David speaks proceeded from
his seeing the people, with the ready obedience of faith, giving their
consent to the utterance of the heavenly oracle, respecting the spot
chosen to be the lawful and permanent scat of the ark of the covenant.
For it immediately follows —

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span><span id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**2.** *Our feet shall be standing within thy
gates, O Jerusalem!* In the Hebrew text the verb is indeed in the past
tense, which it would not be unsuitable to retain; but as it makes.
little *difference* as to the meaning whether the one reading or the
other is adopted, I have no difficulty in leaving my readers to their
own *choice.* David rehearses the language in which all the godly in
common expressed themselves — that they should at length stand with sure
footing in Jerusalem, because it was the will of God there to establish
his Sanctuary, which hitherto had often changed its lodgings, and had
been carried from place to place. By such a pilgrimage state of the ark,
God reminded the people that he had not without cause spoken by Moses
what I have a little ago adverted to. Thus, whenever the ark of the
covenant was conveyed from one place to another, God thereby stirred up
the hearts of his servants to desire and pray that a certain settled
place might be appointed to it. Moreover, this fixing of its seat was
not a matter of small moment. As while it was frequently changing its
abode, the faith of the people hung in suspense, so after God had chosen
for it a permanent residence, he by this testified more unequivocally
that he would be the ever, lasting and unchangeable protector of his
people. It is, therefore, not surprising to find the faithful gratefully
acknowledging that their feet, which had hitherto been wont to run from
place to place, should henceforth stand steadfast within the gates of
Jerusalem. The ark, it is true, dwelt a long time in Shiloh, (<span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>[1Sa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>,) but God having made no promise concerning that
place, it could not be the permanent abode of that symbol of the divine
presence. On the contrary, since, as we shall see on <span
id="vi.i-p9.3"></span>[Psalm
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.i-p9.3"></span>, it
was said of mount Zion — “This is my rest for ever,” the faithful,
depending upon that promise, confidently boast that their feet shall
hereafter be at rest and stand firm. Farther, as Christ,

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>“in whom dwelleth all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily,” (<span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>and who is our true Immanuel, (<span
id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>[Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>,) now resides amongst us, he has furnished us
with matter of more abundant joy. We are, therefore, ungrateful and
stupid, if that promise —

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>“Lo, I am wit you always, even unto the end
of the world,”  
(<span id="vi.i-p12.2"></span>[Mt
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p12.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>does not ravish us with exceeding joy, and
especially if we see it in any place received publicly and with common
consent. What I have just now quoted concerning the rest or repose of
the Lord, has been at length accomplished in the person of Christ, as is
evident from <span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>[Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span> —
“His rest shall be glorious;” where the Prophet does not speak of the
burial of Christ, as some interpreters erroneously suppose, but of the
future distinction of the Church.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span><span id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**3.** *Jerusalem is built as a city.* Here
David begins to celebrate the praises of Jerusalem*;* and he does this
with the design of encouraging the people to persevere with uniform
steadfastness in their obedience. It was of great importance for the
minds of the godly, instead of being drawn hither and thither, to be
kept constantly fixed on that city*,* which was the bond of a holy
unity. When the people came to be divided into two bodies, that was the
commencement of melancholy devastation. It is not surprising, then, to
find David commending with such earnestness the place which God had
chosen, knowing, as he did, that the prosperity of the Church depended
upon the children of Abraham worshipping God there in purity, according
to the appointed observances of the law; and next, upon their
acknowledging the royal seat which the same God had erected there by his
own authority, and had taken under his own protection When it is said
that *Jerusalem is built as a city,* it is not to be understood as
referring only to the walls, or towers, or ditches of that city, but
chiefly to the good order and holy polity by which it was distinguished,
although I allow that there is some allusion to its ancient state.
Salem, indeed, had been a noted town even from the beginning; but when
God selected it to be the head of the kingdom, it changed its
appearance, and in a manner its nature, so that then it began to deserve
the name of a well-regulated city. At first sight it may seem a poor
commendation to call Jerusalem a city; but it is to be observed that it
is here exhibited as it were standing alone in the whole world — taking
the precedence of all other cities, which will in vain attempt to equal
it. David, certainly, in thus speaking, does not intend to divest other
cities of the rank to which they may be entitled, but he raises
Jerusalem higher, that it may appear conspicuous above them all, even as
we find Isaiah, (<span id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p15.1"></span>,.md)
when speaking of mount Zion, asserting that it “shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and. shall be exalted above the hills.” In
that passage the Prophet, to magnify this little hill, brings down the
loftiest mountains of the world, that they may not obscure its glory. In
like manner David here affirms that Jerusalem is compacted as a city, to
induce the faithful, instead of gazing in all directions around them, to
rest contented with the city which God had chosen, since they would
nowhere find its equal. After having humbled all other cities, he shows,
in a few words, the excellence of Jerusalem, representing it as
regularly built, or fitly and neatly joined together in all its parts.
Some take these words as expressing literally and without figure, that
its citizens live together in peace and unity; but I see no impropriety
in supposing that they describe, metaphorically, the peaceable state of
a city. Thus the mutual concord which reigns among the citizens of a
city, and by which they are united to each other, is compared to
buildings, compacted together by a skillful and elegant workmanship, so
that there is nothing imperfect, in joined together, or rent, but
throughout a beautiful harmony’. By this David teaches us, that the
Church can only remain in a state of safety when unanimity prevails in
her, and when, being joined together by faith and charity, she
cultivates a holy unity.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
122:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Thither the tribes ascended, the
tribes of God, for a testimony to Israel,  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) to praise the name of Jehovah. **5.** For
there were set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span><span id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *Thither the tribes ascended.* David
here invests Jerusalem with two titles of honor, calling it the sacred
and regularly appointed place for calling upon the name of God; and
next, the royal sea, to which the whole people were to have recourse for
obtaining justice. All our salvation depends upon these two points;
first, that Christ has been given to us to be our priest; and, secondly,
that he has been established king to govern us. This God showed to his
ancient people under figures. The sanctuary erected on mount Zion was
intended to keep their faith fixed upon the spiritual priesthood of
Christ; and in like manner, by the kingdom of David, there was presented
to their view an image of the kingdom of Christ. The Psalmist,
therefore, says in the first place, that the tribes or families of God
shall come to Jerusalem; and then he immediately adds, that there the
seat of judgment is erected, on which he and his posterity will sit. The
reason why it was the will of God that there should be only one temple
and one altar was, that the people might not fall away to various
superstitions. David therefore here declares that this place was
appointed by God’s own mouth, that all the families of God, or the
twelve tribes, might there assemble from all quarters. To express more
plainly how important it was, for this form of God’s worship to be
preserved pure and complete, he says that it *was for a testimony* The
noun employed comes from the verb <span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>עוד,
*ud,* which signifies *to bear witness,* or *to covenant.* Now by the
word in this place is denoted a mutual declaration or agreement between
God and the people. When the tribes shall come thither, says the Prophet
substantially, it will not be at random, because their fancy thus leads
them, but because God by his own mouth invites them. The amount
therefore is, that the holy assemblies which shall be kept at Jerusalem
will not be vain and unprofitable, since God has made a covenant with
his people, determining and appointing that place for his service.
Whence we learn, that in judging of the true temple of God, it is
necessary to take into account the doctrine taught. With respect to the
time in which David lived, as God had adopted the Jewish people, and as
it was his will that they should be employed in the external worship of
his name, he prescribed to them a rule from which it was unlawful for
them to deviate. Thus when the faithful assembled on mount Zion, it was
not foolishness or inconsiderate zeal, or the impulse of their own
minds, which brought them thither, as if they resembled those men whom
we daily see inventing for themselves, out of their own heads,
numberless kinds of divine worship; but they were led thither by the
command of God, that they might worship him on mount Zion, by which word
the Prophet intimates, that all other temples are unholy, and all other
religions perverse and corrupt, because they do not correspond with the
rule laid down in God’s word. He next subjoins the end of this contract
or covenant, which was *that the name of God might be praised.* And,
indeed, as to yield to God the glory of all good things is the end of
our adoption, so it is the end of all our actions.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *For there were set thrones for
judgment.* He means, that the throne of the kingdom was fixed or
established at Jerusalem, or that there it had its permanent seat. Among
that people some order of judgments had always existed. these, however,
had formerly been in an unsettled state, and frequently changed, but God
at length ordained, in the person of David, a new government which
should flow in a continual course; for it was his will that the children
of David should succeed their father in this royal dignity from age to
age until the coming of Christ. The Prophet has a little before spoken
of the Temple and the priesthood; and now he affirms, that this kingdom,
which God had erected, will be firm and stable; in order to distinguish
it from all the other kingdoms of the world, which are not only
temporary, but also frail and subject to a variety of changes. This
everlastingness of the kingdom has been expressly confirmed by other
Prophets in various parts of their’ writings, and not without cause; for
the object was, to teach the faithful that God would be the guardian of
their welfare only upon the supposition of their remaining under the
protection and defense of David, and that, therefore, if they desired to
continue in safety and to prosper, they should not make for themselves
new kings at their own pleasure*,* but should live quietly under that
kind of government which God had set up among them. The repetition of
the word *throne* is emphatic. There, says the Psalmist, the throne of
judgment and equity is erected. Then he adds, *the throne of the house
of David;* for it was the will of God that the right and prerogative of
reigning should continue in David’s posterity, until the true
everlastingness of this kingdom should be manifested in the person of
Christ.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
122:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**6.** Pray ye for the peace of Jerusalem:
may those who love thee prosper **7.** Peace be within thy bulwarks
 <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) prosperity  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) within thy towers! **8.** For the sake of
my brethren and neighbors, I will now say, Peace be within thee! **9.**
Because of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek thy good.

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span><span id="vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>**6.** *Pray ye for the peace of Jerusalem.*
David now exhorts all the devout worshippers of God to make supplication
for the prosperity of the holy city. The more effectually to stir them
up to such exercise, he promises that, in this way the divine blessing
will descend upon them. The reason why he was so deeply concerned about
the prosperity of Jerusalem was, as we have formerly stated — and he
again repeats the same thing at the end of the Psalm—because the welfare
of the whole Church was inseparably connected with that kingdom and
priesthood. Now as each of us in particular, were the whole Church to be
involved in ruin, must *necessarily* perish miserably, it is not
surprising to find David *recommending to* all the children of God to
cultivate this anxious concern about the Church. If we would order our
prayers aright, let us always begin with pleading that the Lord would be
pleased to preserve this sacred community. Whoever*,* confining his
attention to his own personal advantage, is indifferent about the common
weal, he not only gives evidence that he is destitute of all true
feeling of godliness, but in vain desires his own prosperity, and will
profit nothing by his prayers, since he does not observe the due order.
 <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) Similar is the drift of the
promise which is added immediately after: *They shall prosper that love
thee;* which, however, may be read in the form of a wish, *May those who
love thee prosper* But the sense in either case is almost the same.
Farther, although the Hebrew verb <span id="vi.iii-p8.2"></span>שלה,
*shalah,* which the Prophet here uses, signifies *to live in quietness*
or *peace,* yet as the Hebrew noun for *peace,* from which it is
derived, is employed by him generally for a joyful and happy condition,
I have no doubt that he here announces in general to all the godly who
have the well being of the Church near their heart, that they shall
enjoy the blessing of God and a prosperous life. This sentence
frequently occurs in the Prophecies of Isaiah, from the 54th chapter to
the end of the book (<span id="vi.iii-p8.3"></span>[Isaiah
54](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii-p8.3"></span>-66.md).
Hence we learn that the curse of God rests upon all such as afflict the
Church, or plot and endeavor by any kind of mischief to accomplish its
destruction.

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span><span id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>**7.** *Peace be within thy bulwarks,* etc.
The two clauses express the same sentiment, and, therefore, the meaning
of the first is gathered from the second. The term *peace* signifies
nothing else than prosperity. The noun <span
id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>שלוה, *shalvah,* in the second clause,
sometimes signifies *rest,* but it is more frequently taken for
*abundance* or *prosperity* On this. account I have translated the noun
<span id="vi.iii-p10.2"></span>בחילך*, bechelech, within thy bulwark*
 <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) I do not find fault with others
who have translated it *a ditch* or *outward wall;* but the word
*bulwark* agrees better with the word *towers,* which occurs at the
close of the verse. The amount is, that David prays for the prosperity
of the Church through its whole extent. Moreover, it is to be noticed,
that when he offers supplication for its external prosperity, it is not
to be understood as implying that he was unconcerned about its internal
state or spiritual well being; but under the similitude of *walls,*
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) he wishes that on all sides the
blessing of God may environ and fortify the holy city.

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span><span id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>**8.** *For the sake of my brethren and
neighbors.* He specifies two causes on account of which he felt a care
about the Church, for the purpose of stirring up, by his example, all
the faithful to exercise the same care. These words, however, seem to
contain a tacit contrast. Among the wicked and malicious he might be the
object of suspicion, or, at least, he was in danger of being slandered;
as if, in commending Jerusalem, he had rather an eye to his own
particular advantage than to the public welfare. In order, therefore, to
remove all ground for objecting, that in thus speaking he was craftily
endeavoring to establish his own kingdom, he protests, that he is not
influenced by personal considerations, but by a concern for the whole
Church, which he embraced with a sincere affection of heart. I will
speak, says he, O Jerusalem! of thy peace, not because it will be
profitable for me or mine, but because thy prosperity shall extend
itself to all the children of God; for under the term *brethren* he
doubtless comprehends all believers that he did so, because the worship
of God so far from remaining entire would go to ruin unless Jerusalem
continued standing. If then the salvation of our brethren is regarded by
us as an object of importance, if religion is with us a matter of
heart-work, we ought, at the same time, as much as in us lies, to *take*
an interest in the prosperity of the Church. Whence it follows, that
such as are indifferent about her condition, are no less cruel than
impious; for if she is “the pillar and foundation of truth,” the
inevitable consequence of her destruction must be the extinction of true
piety. And if the body is destroyed, how can each of the members fail to
be involved in destruction? Farther, this passage teaches us, that the
Church is not an empty title, but must be sought for where the true
religion prevails. Whence it appears, how foolish the Papists are, who,
notwithstanding their having rejected and overthrown the doctrine of the
Gospel, yet mightily boast of the name of the Church.

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span><span id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span>**9.** *Because of the house of Jehovah our
God, etc*. In this verse he adds a second reason why he cared for the
Church — that he did so, because the worship of God so far from
remaining entire would go to ruin unless Jerusalem continued standing.
If then the salvation of our brethren is regarded by us as an object of
importance, if religion is with us a matter of heart-work, we ought, at
the same time, as much as in us lies, to take an interest in the
prosperity of the Church. Whence it follows, that such are indifferent
about her condition, are no less cruel than impious; for if she is “the
pillar and foundation of truth,” the inevitable consequence of her
destruction must be the extinction of true piety. And if the body is
destroyed, how can each of the members fail to be involved in
destruction? Farther, this passage teaches us that the Church is not an
empty title, but must be sought for where the true religion prevails.
Whence it appears, how foolish the Papists are, who, notwithstanding
their having rejected and overthrown the doctrine of the Gospel, yet
mightily boast of the name of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc12005.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi-p4"></span> “The burden of the Psalm,” says Jebb, “is <span
id="vi-p4.1"></span>שלום ‘peace.’ The play upon the words is very
remarkable: <span id="vi-p4.2"></span>שם, ‘there,’ and <span
id="vi-p4.3"></span>שם, ‘the name,’ lines 5 and 6; <span
id="vi-p4.4"></span>שבטים, ‘tribes,’ line 5 <span
id="vi-p4.5"></span>משפט, line 7. Then in line 9, and those. which
follow: <span id="vi-p4.6"></span>שאלו, ‘pray;’ <span
id="vi-p4.7"></span>שלום, ‘peace;’ <span id="vi-p4.8"></span>ירושלם,
‘Jerusalem;’ <span id="vi-p4.9"></span>ישליו, ‘shall prosper;’ <span
id="vi-p4.10"></span>שלוה ‘prosperity.’” — *Jebb’s* *Literal Translation
of the Psalters, with Dissertations,* volume 1. Speaking in reference to
the author of the Psalm, and to the opinion held by some critics, that
it was composed about the time or’ the restoration of the Jews from
Babylon, he says —”The extraordinary play upon words already noticed
might argue a later period of composition: \[than the time of David\].
Still I cannot but think that the title assigning the Psalm to him is
borne out by internal evidence of a stronger kind. The fond mention of
Jerusalem, David’s beloved city; the thrones of the house of David; and
the recurrence of peace, which was so emphatically promised to David, as
the blessing about to be conferred on his son Solomon, are all
circumstances, which, taken in connection, stamp this song with a
character evidently belonging to the reign of the royal Psalmist ” —
*Ibid.,* volume 2.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc12005.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, ont este. —
*Fr. marg.* “Or, have been.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc12005.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="vi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> Literally, Jerusalem built as a city, that is
joined to itself together’, i.e. the several parts of which are
connected with each other, so as to form one compact whole. Before
David’s time, Zion was not a part of Jerusalem, neither it seems was
Millo: but he added them to the city, and enclosed them within its wall.
(<span id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>[2 Sam.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>; <span
id="vi.i-p4.2"></span>[1 Chr. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p4.2"></span>..md)
Solomon afterwards added the hill of Moria, on which his temple was
built, to Jerusalem.” — *Cresswell.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc12005.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> Walford translates —”According to the
institution of Israel.” Phillips adopts a similar rendering, which he
supports by the following: note: — “<span id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>עדות,
*testimony,* and thence *a statute* or *law.* Amyraldus says — ‘<span
id="vi.ii-p3.2"></span>Quacunque re Deus voluntatem suam significet, id
Dei testimonium solet appellari.’ The particle <span
id="vi.ii-p3.3"></span>כ should be understood as prefixed to this word.
The statute spoken of here is that which is found in <span
id="vi.ii-p3.4"></span>[Ex 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.ii-p3.4"></span>, and <span id="vi.ii-p3.5"></span>[De
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.ii-p3.5"></span>,
enjoining the tribes of Israel to assemble together before the Lord at
the three great feasts. The place of their assembling was that which God
chose for the residence of the ark, which was first at Shiloh, and
afterwards at Jerusalem.” Bishop Horne, and French and Skinner read —
“According to the testimony given unto Israel,” which brings out exactly
the same meaning — testimony denoting, as they explain it, the
injunction given to the Israelites in that passage in Deuteronomy quoted
above.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc12005.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> “*Within thy walls.* Josephus tells us,
that there were at Jerusalem *three* ranges of walls surrounding the
city. The sense of the passage is, ‘May no enemy approach even to thy
out-works to disturb thy prosperity’” — *Warner.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc12005.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou,
abondance.” — *Fr* *marg.* “Or, abundance.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc12005.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>Et ne
proufiter arien par ses prieres, d’autant qu’il n’observe point l’ordre
legitime ” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc12005.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span> Calvin’s meaning is, that as the nouns
*peace* and *prosperity* have a corresponding signification, he was of
opinion, that there existed a similar correspondence between the other
two nouns.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc12005.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span> The Latin copy here reads, “<span
id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>sed ad mores alludens;” but <span
id="vi.iii-p12.2"></span>*mores* is evidently a typographical error for
<span id="vi.iii-p12.3"></span>*muros* The French version has “<span
id="vi.iii-p12.4"></span>mais sous ceste similitude *des murs* ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 123](cc12006.md)
