[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12006)  [Next](cc12008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>PSALM 124

<span id="viii-p2"></span>The Church having been providentially
delivered from extreme peril, David exhorts true believers to
thanksgiving, and teaches them by this memorable example, that their
safety depends solely upon the grace and power of God.

<span id="viii-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees of David.

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
124:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** But for Jehovah, who was on our side,
may Israel now say; **2.** But for Jehovah who was on our side, when men
rose up against us; **3.** They had then swallowed us up alive, when
their wrath was kindled against us; **4.** The waters had then
overwhelmed us, the torrent had gone over our soul: **5.** The proud
waters  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) had then gone over our
soul.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span><span id="viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *But for Jehovah, who was on our
side.* Some expositors think that this Psalm describes the very sad and
calamitous condition of the Church when the, residue of the people were
carried away into Babylon. This opinion is, however, without any good
foundation for the complaints made, apply with equal propriety to the
persecutions which the Church suffered under the tyranny of Antiochus
Epiphanes. It is another objection to this interpretation, that the
Psalm bears in its inscription the name of David, and historically
recounts the deliverance which the people had obtained from extreme
danger by the power of God. To get quit of this difficulty they observe,
that what had not yet come to pass is described prophetically; but this
is a forced conjecture, for the Prophets usually speak of things to come
in a different manner. It is more probable that David here sets forth a
known history, and exhorts the faithful to reflect upon the divine
succor which they had already actually experienced. I dare not, however,
limit what is here spoken to David’s time. It is indeed true that the
heathen nations often waged war against the people of God, armed with
such power as to come rushing upon them with the impetuosity of a
deluge; but as David does not specify any particular instance, he is
not, I conceive, to be understood as celebrating only some one
deliverance, but in general all the instances in which God had succoured
his Church. The heathen at many different times, as is well known, rose
up against the Church, with such mighty hosts, that she was brought
almost to the verge of destruction. David then represents as in a mirror
the uncertain and changeable condition of the Church, just such as it
had been from the beginning, to teach the faithful that its stability
had not been owing to its own intrinsic strength, but that it had been
preserved by the wonderful grace of God; and to habituate them to call
upon God in the midst of dangers.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span><span id="viii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**2.** *But for Jehovah who was on our
side.* It is not without cause that he twice repeats the same sentence.
So long as we are in danger our fear is immoderate; but no sooner are we
delivered than we lessen the greatness of our calamity, and Satan,
deceiving us by this artifice, leads us to obscure the grace of God.
Since then, after having been wonderfully preserved by the Lord, we for
the most part devise all sorts of imaginary circumstances, in order to
efface from our minds the remembrance of his grace, David, by
introducing the people as struck with amazement, purposely dwells upon
the amplification of the danger. In these words a bridle is put upon us,
to keep us meditating upon our dangers, lest the sense of God’s grace
should vanish from our minds. The common translation, *Had not the Lord
been on our side,* does not sufficiently express David’s meaning; for he
affirms that the deliverance and the salvation of the people proceeded
from nothing else than God’s succor, and at the same time shows that
this succor was both certain and evident. Two things then are here to be
distinctly noticed; first, that the Lord had been at hand to afford aid
to his servants, and had taken their part; and secondly, that being
already in a desperate condition, they could not by help from any other
quarter, or in another manner, have escaped from danger. Thus we are
taught, that men then only ascribe the glory of their preservation to
God, when they are persuaded of his being so favourably inclined towards
them as to defend them and maintain them safe. In the second clause
there is extolled in high terms the infinite power of God, of which he
had given abundant proof in delivering the people, to teach us that such
a manner of preserving does not belong to man. By the noun <span
id="viii.i-p8.1"></span>אדם*, adam,* which when it is collective
signifies men in general, David seems to denote a vast number of
enemies. The people of God, as if he had said, had not to contend merely
against a few men, or against one nation, but were assailed by almost
the whole world; it being abundantly manifest that all mankind were the
enemies of the Jews.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span><span id="viii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>When he says, (<span
id="viii.i-p10.1"></span>[Ps
124:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#003)<span id="viii.i-p10.1"></span>,)
*They had swallowed us up alive,*  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)
he not only expresses barbarous cruelty, but also disproportion of
strength. He describes then in the first place how violent was the onset
of the enemy, and secondly, how feeble and inadequate the Jews were to
withstand them, since these cruel beasts had no need of swords for
slaughter, but without a battle or an effort of strength, could easily
devour that unwarlike and defenceless flock.

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span><span id="viii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**4.** *The waters had then overwhelmed
us.* He embellishes by an elegant metaphor the preceding sentiment,
comparing the dreadful impetuosity of the enemies of the Jews to an
inundation, which swallows up whatever it meets with in its overflowing
course. And he continues to preserve the character of a man affrighted.
He names *the waters,* next *the torrent,* thirdly, *the proud* or
*impetuous waters.* He says, *over us,* and *over our soul,* as if, by
presenting the thing to the eye, he intended to strike terror into the
people. And certainly this impassioned language ought to have all the
effect of a graphic representation, that the faithful might the better
feel from what a profound gulf they had been rescued by the hand of God.
He only truly attributes his deliverance to God, who acknowledges
himself to have been lost before he was delivered. The adverb *them* is
here either demonstrative, as if the Psalmist had pointed to the thing
with the finger, or it is taken for *long ago.* The former signification
is, however, more suitable to the present passage.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
124:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Blessed be Jehovah! who gave us not
for a prey to their teeth  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) **7.**
Our soul has been rescued as a bird from the snare of the fowlers; the
snare has been broken, and we have been delivered  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) **8.** Our help is in the name of
Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span><span id="viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** *Blessed be Jehovah!* The Psalmist
now exhorts the godly to a grateful acknowledgment of the divine
goodness, and as it were puts words into their mouth. Here also he shows
by another similitude, that it would have been all over with them had
not God succoured them; affirming that they were delivered not otherwise
than if some one had plucked *the prey from the teeth* of a wild and
cruel beast. Of the same import is the third similitude, That they were
on all sides entrapped and entangled in the snares of their enemies,
even as *little birds* caught in the net lie stretched under the hand of
the fowler; and that when they were delivered, it was just as if one
should set at liberty birds which had been taken. The amount is, that
the people of God, feeble, without counsel, and destitute of aid, had
not only to deal with blood-thirsty and furious beasts, but were also
ensnared by bird-nets and stratagems, so that being greatly inferior to
their enemies as well in policy as in open force, they were besieged by
many deaths. From this it may be easily gathered that they were
miraculously preserved.

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span><span id="viii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** *Our help is in the name of
Jehovah.* David here extends to the state of the Church in all ages that
which the faithful had already experienced. As I interpret the verse, he
not only gives thanks to God for one benefit, but affirms that the
Church cannot continue safe except in so far as she is protected by the
hand of God. His object is to animate the children of God with the
assured hope, that their life is in perfect safety under the divine
guardianship. The contrast between the help of God, and other resources
in which the world vainly confides, as we have seen in <span
id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ps 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span
id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>*,*

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>“Some trust in chariots, and some in
horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God*,*”

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>is to be noticed, that the faithful,
purged from all false confidence, may betake themselves exclusively to
his succor, and depending upon it, may fearlessly despise whatever Satan
and the world may plot against them. The *name of God* is nothing else
than God himself; yet it tacitly conveys a significant idea, implying
that as he has disclosed to us his grace by his word, we have ready
access to him, so that in seeking him we need not go to a distance, or
follow long circuitous paths. Nor is it without cause that the Psalmist
again honors God with the title of Creator. We know with what
disquietude our minds are agitated till they have raised the power of
God to its appropriate elevation, that, the whole world being put under,
it alone may be pre-eminent; which cannot be the case unless we are
persuaded that all things are subject to his will. He did not show once
and in a moment his power in the creation of the world and then withdraw
it, but he continually demonstrates it in the government of the world.
Moreover, although all men freely and loudly confess that God is the
Creator of heaven and of earth, so that even the most wicked are ashamed
to withhold from him the honor of this title, yet no sooner does any
terror present itself to us than we are convicted of unbelief in hardly
setting any value whatever upon the help which he has to bestow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc12007.htm#fr_76) <span
id="viii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span> *“*<span id="viii.i-p3.1"></span>Alors les
eaux enfiees et impetueuses fussent,” etc. — *Fr.* “*The* swollen and
impetuous waters had then,” etc. The epithet *proud* is applied to the
waves of the sea in <span id="viii.i-p3.2"></span>[Job
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#011)<span id="viii.i-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc12007.htm#fr_77) <span
id="viii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span> “The metaphor may be taken from famished
wild beasts attacking and devouring men, (Comp. 5:5,) or the reference
may ‘be to the case of a man shut up alive in a sepulcher, (<span
id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>[Pr 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>,) and \]left there to perish, or (<span
id="viii.i-p11.2"></span>[Nu
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#030)<span id="viii.i-p11.2"></span>)
swallowed up by an earthquake ” — *Cresswell.* “A figurative expression
to intimate the savageness of the adversaries, alluding to the practice
of many predatory animals of swallowing their victims alive. Such is the
well-known habit of many of the predatory kinds of fish.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc12007.htm#fr_78) <span
id="viii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span> The Church’s escape, be it observed, as
appears from verse third, is likened to a rescue from the jaws of a
ferocious animal, *which swallows its prey quick,* or *alive.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc12007.htm#fr_79) <span
id="viii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span> The reader will perceive, that as the
imagery goes on it becomes the more beautiful. Pleasing and tender ideas
are associated with the escape of an innocent bird from the snares which
the art and cruelty of man had contrived, to deprive it of life, or rob
it of liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 125](cc12008)
