[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12009)  [Next](cc12011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>PSALM 127

<span id="xi-p2"></span>This Psalm shows that the order of society, both
political and domestic, is maintained solely by the blessing of God, and
not by the policy, diligence, or wisdom of men; and that the procreating
of children is his peculiar gift.

<span id="xi-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees of Solomon.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
127:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.**  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md)
Except Jehovah build the house, those who build it labor in vain except
Jehovah keep the city the watchman watcheth in vain. **2.** It is in
vain for you in hastening to rise early, to. go late to rest, to eat the
bread of sorrows: for  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) thus will he
give sleep to his beloved.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span><span id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Except Jehovah build the house.* There
is no reason why the Jews should deny that this Psalm was composed by
Solomon. They think that the letter <span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>ל,
*lamed,* which we translate of, is equivalent to, *in behalf of
Solomon;* which is at variance with common usage, for such a title in
all cases designates the author. Accordingly, they absurdly devise a new
sense, for which there is no necessity, it being very suitable for
Solomon, who was endued with the spirit of wisdom hi the affairs of
government, to discourse of things which he knew and had experience
about. In affirming that God governs the world and the life of man, he
does so for two reasons: First, whatever prosperous event may fall out
to men, their ingratitude is instantly manifested by their ascribing it
wholly to themselves; and thus God is defrauded of the honor which is
his due. Solomon, to correct such a perverse error, declares, that
nothing happens prosperously to us except in so far as God blesses our
proceedings. Secondly, his purpose was to beat down the foolish
presumption of men, who, setting God aside, are not afraid to undertake
to do anything, whatever it may be, in exclusive reliance upon their own
wisdom and strength. Stripping them, therefore, of that which they
groundlessly arrogate to themselves, he exhorts them to modesty and the
invocation of God. He does not, however, reject either the labor, the
enterprises, or the counsels of men; for it is a praiseworthy virtue
diligently to discharge the duties of our office. It is not the will of
the Lord that we should be like blocks of wood, or that we should keep
our arms folded without doing anything;  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) but that we should apply to use all the
talents and advantages which he has conferred upon us. It is indeed true
that the greatest part of our labors proceeds from the curse of God; and
yet although men had still retained the integrity of their primitive
state, God would have had us to be employed, even as we see how Adam was
placed in the garden of Eden to dress it. (<span
id="xi.i-p8.2"></span>[Ge 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015.md)<span
id="xi.i-p8.2"></span>.) Solomon, therefore, does not condemn
watchfulness, a thing which God approves; nor yet men’s labor, by which
when they undertake it willingly, according to the commandment of God,
they offer to him all acceptable sacrifice; but lest, blinded by
presumption, they should forcibly appropriate to themselves that which
belongs to God, he admonishes them that their being busily occupied will
profit them nothing, except in so far as God blesses their exertions. By
the word *house* he means not only a building of wood or stone, but he
comprehends the whole domestic order and government of a family, even as
a little after by the word *city* he denotes not only the buildings or
enclosure of the walls, but also the general state of the whole
commonwealth. There is likewise a synecdoche in the words *builder* and
*keeper;* for he intends to say in general that whatever labor,
foresight, and skill men may employ in maintaining a family, or in
preserving a city, will be to no purpose unless God grant from heaven a
prosperous issue to the whole.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>It behoves us to remember what I have just now
touched upon, that since the minds of men are commonly possessed with
such headstrong arrogance as leads them to despise God, and to magnify
beyond measure their own means and advantages, nothing is of more
importance than to humble them, in order to their being made to perceive
that whatever they undertake it shall dissolve into smoke, unless God in
the exercise of pure grace cause it to prosper. When philosophers argue
concerning the political affairs of a state they ingeniously gather
together whatever seems to them to answer their purpose — they acutely
point out the means of erecting a commonwealth, and on the other hand
the vices by which a well-regulated state is commonly corrupted; in
short, they discourse with consummate skill upon everything that is
necessary to be known on this subject, except that they omit the
principal point — which is, that men, however much they may excel in
wisdom and virtue, and whatever may be the undertakings in which they
may engage, can effect nothing, unless in so far as God stretches forth
his hand to them, or rather makes use of them as his instruments. Which
of the philosophers ever acknowledged that a politician is nothing else
but an instrument guided by the hand of God? Yea, rather they held that
good management on the part of man constituted the chief cause of the
happiness of the social body. Now, since mortal men thus rise up with
profane boldness to build cities, and to order the state of the whole
world, the Holy Spirit justly reproves such madness. Let us then so
occupy ourselves, each according to the measure of his ability and the
nature of his office, as that at the same time the praise of the success
attending our exertions may remain exclusively with God. The partition
which many devise — that he who has behaved himself valiantly, while he
leaves the half of the praise to God, may take the other half to
himself, is deserving of all condemnation. The blessing of God should
have the whole share and exclusively hold the throne.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>Now, if our terrestrial condition depends.
entirely upon the good pleasure of God, with what wings shall we fly up
into heaven? When a house is planned, or a certain manner of life is
chosen — yea, even when laws are enacted and justice administered, all
this is nothing else than to creep upon the earth; and yet the Holy
Spirit declares, that all our endeavors in this way are fruitless and of
no value. So much the less to be borne with, then, is the folly of those
who strive to penetrate even into heaven by their own power. Farther, we
may gather from this doctrine, that it is not wonderful to find in the
present day the state of the world so troubled and confused as it
actually is — justice put to flight in cities, the husband and the wife
mutually accusing each other, fathers and mothers complaining of their
children — in short, all bewailing their own condition. For how few are
to be found who, in their vocation, turn to God, and who, being rather
inflated with arrogance, do not wickedly exalt themselves? God then
justly renders this sad reward to ungrateful men when he is defrauded of
his honor. But were all men humbly to submit themselves to the
providence of God, there is no doubt that this blessing which Solomon
here commends would shed its lustre on all parts of our life, both
public and private.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>The verb <span id="xi.i-p11.1"></span>עמל,
*amal,* which we have translated *to labor,* signifies not only to
employ one’s self in something or other, but also to busy one’s self
even to lassitude and distress. I have said that by the word *keepers*
is to be understood not only those who are appointed to keep watch, but
all magistrates and judges. If they are characterized by vigilance, it
is the gift of God. There is, however, need of another vigilance — that
of God; for unless he keep watch out of heaven no perspicacity of men
will be sufficient to guard against dangers.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span><span id="xi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**2.** *It is vain for you in hastening to
rise early.* Solomon now expresses more plainly that men in vain wear
themselves out with toiling, and waste themselves by fasting to acquire
riches, since these also are a benefit bestowed only by God. The more
effectually to move them, he addresses himself to every man in
particular*. It is,* says he, *in vain for you* He particularizes two
means which are thought to contribute in an eminent degree to the
amassing of riches. It is not surprising to find those growing rich in a
short time who spare no exertion, but consume night and day in plying
their occupations, and allow themselves only scanty fare from the
product of their labor. Solomon, however, affirms that neither living at
a small expense, nor diligence in business will by themselves profit
anything at all. Not that he forbids us to practice temperance in our
diet and to rise early to engage in our worldly business; but to;stir us
up to prayer, and to calling upon God, and also to recommend gratitude
for the divine blessings, he brings to nought whatever would obscure the
grace of God. Consequently, we shall then enter upon our worldly
avocations in a right way when our hope depends exclusively upon God,
and our success in that case will correspond to our wishes. But if a
man, taking no account of God, eagerly makes haste, he will bring ruin
upon himself by his too precipitate course. It is not, therefore, the
design of the Prophet to encourage men *to* give way to sloth, so that
they should think upon nothing all their life long, but fall asleep and
abandon themselves to idleness- his meaning rather is, that, in
executing what God has enjoined upon them, they should always begin with
prayer and calling upon his name, offering to him their labors that he
may bless them. The expression, *the bread of sorrows,* may be explained
in two ways, either as denoting what is acquired by hard and anxious
toil, or what is eaten with disquietude of mind; just as we see
parsimonious and close-handed persons, when they have scarcely tasted a
bit of bread, pulling back their hand from their mouth. It is of no
great importance which of these senses is adopted; for we are simply
taught that parsimonious men profit nothing — no not even when through
their own niggardliness they grudge to eat as much as nature requires.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>*For thus will he give sleep to his beloved.*
The inspired writer intimates that the blessing of God, of which he has
spoken, is actually seen in his children and servants. It will not
suffice to believe this doctrine — that whatever, men attempt is to no
purpose; it is necessary that the promise be added, in order to their
being led with assured hope to perform their duty. The sentence may be
read either — *he will give sleep to his beloved,* or, *he will give in
sleeping;* that is, he will give them those things which unbelievers
labor to acquire by their own industry. The particle, <span
id="xi.i-p14.1"></span>כן*, ken, thus,* is put to express certainty;
 <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) for with the view of producing a
more undoubted persuasion of the truth — 4hat God gives food to his
people without any great care on their part — which seems incredible,
and a fiction, Solomon points to the thing as it were with the finger.
He indeed speaks as if God nourished the slothfulness of his servants by
his gentle treatment; but as we know that men are created with the
design of their being occupied, and as in the subsequent Psalm we shall
find that the servants of God are accounted happy when they eat the
labor of their hands, it is certain that the word *sleep* is not to be
understood as implying slothfulness, but a placid labor, to which true
believers subject themselves by the obedience of faith. Whence proceeds
this so great ardor in the unbelieving, that they move not a finger
without a tumult or bustle, in other words, without tormenting
themselves with superfluous cares, but because they attribute nothing to
the providence of God! The faithful, on the other hand, although they
lead a laborious life, yet follow their vocations with composed and
tranquil minds. Thus their hands are not idle, but their minds repose in
the stillness of faith, as if they were asleep. If it is again objected,
that God’s people are often agitated with distressing cares, and that,
oppressed with pinching poverty, and destitute of all resources, they
are anxiously concerned about the morrow, I answer, that if faith and
love to God were perfect in his servants, his blessing, of which the
Prophet makes mention, would be manifest. Whenever they are tormented
above measure, this happens through their own default, in not resting
entirely upon the providence of God. I farther add, that God punishes
them more severely than unbelievers, because it is profitable for them
to be agitated by disquietude for a season, that at length they may
attain to this peaceful sleep. In the meantime, however, God’s grace
prevails, and always shines forth in the midst of darkness, in respect
of his cherishing his children as it were by sleep.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
127:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Lo! children are the heritage of
Jehovah: the fruit of the womb is the reward which he bestows.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) **4.** As arrows in, the hand of a
strong man so are the children of youth.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) **5.** Blessed is the man who shall
have filled his quiver with them; for  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) they shall not be ashamed when they
speak with their enemies in the gate.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span><span id="xi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>**3.** *Lo! children are the heritage of
Jehovah.* Solomon here adduces one instance in which, in a particular
manner, he would have us to recognize the truth which he has hitherto
asserted generally — that the life of men is governed by God. Nothing
seems more natural than for men to be produced of men. The majority of
mankind dream, that after God had once ordained this at the beginning,
children were thenceforth begotten solely by a secret instinct of
nature, God ceasing to interfere in the matter; and even those who are
endued with some sense of piety, although they may not deny that He is
the Father and Creator of the human race, yet do not acknowledge that
his providential care descends to this particular case, but rather think
that men are created by a certain universal motion. With the view of
correcting this preposterous error, Solomon calls children *the heritage
of God,* and the fruit of the womb *his gift;* for the Hebrew word <span
id="xi.ii-p8.1"></span>שכר*, sachar,* translated *reward,* signifies
whatever benefits God bestows upon men, as is plainly manifest from many
passages of Scripture. The meaning then is, that, children are not the
fruit of chance, but that God, as it seems good to him, distributes to
every man his share of them. Moreover, as the Prophet repeats the same
thing twice, *heritage* and *reward* are to be understood as equivalent;
for both these terms are set in opposition to fortune, or the strength
of men. The stronger a man is he seems so much the better fitted for
procreation. Solomon declares on the contrary, that those become fathers
to whom God vouchsafes that honor.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>As the majority of children are not always a
source of joy to their parents, a second favor of God is added, which is
his forming the minds of children, and adorning them with an excellent
disposition, and all kinds of virtues. Aristotle in his Politics very
properly discusses the question whether <span
id="xi.ii-p9.1"></span>πολυτεκνια*,* that is, the having of many
children, ought to be accounted among good things or no; and he decides
it in the negative, unless there is added <span
id="xi.ii-p9.2"></span>εὐγενεια*,* that is, generosity or goodness of
nature in the children themselves. And assuredly it would be a far
happier lot for many to be without children, or barren, than to have a
numerous offspring, proving to them only the cause of tears and groans.
In order, then, to set forth this blessing of God — the having offspring
— in a clear light, Solomon commends a virtuous and generous disposition
in children. The similitude introduced for this purpose is, that as an
archer is armed ‘with a well-furnished bow, so men are defended by their
children, as it were with a bow and all arrow. This similitude might
seem, at first sight, a little too harsh; but if it is examined somewhat
more closely, its elegance will be readily admitted. The Prophet means
that those who are without children are in a manner unarmed; for what
else is it to be childless but to be solitary? It is no small gift of
God for a man to be renewed in his posterity; for God then gives him new
strength, that he who otherwise would straightway decay, may begin as it
were to live a second time.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>The knowledge of this doctrine is highly
useful. The fruitfulness even of the lower animals is expressly ascribed
to God alone; and if He would have it to be *accounted* his benefit that
kine, and sheep, and mares *conceive,* how inexcusable will be the
impiety of men, if when he adorns them with the honorable title of
fathers, they account this favor as nothing. It is also to be added,
that unless men regard their children as the gift of God, they are
careless and reluctant in providing for their support, just as on the
other hand this knowledge contributes in a very eminent degree to
encourage them in bringing up their offspring. Farther, he who thus
reflects upon the goodness of God in giving him children, will readily
and with a settled mind look for the continuance of God’s grace; and
although he may have but a small inheritance to leave them, he will not
be unduly careful on that account.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span><span id="xi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *They shall not be ashamed when they
speak with their enemies in the gate.* Here Solomon describes such
children as, distinguished by uprightness and integrity, have no
hesitation in rendering an account of their life, that they may shut the
mouths of the malevolent and of calumniators. In ancient times, as is
well known, judicial assemblies  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md)
were held at the gates of cities. He therefore here speaks of the gate,
as if in the present day one should speak of the bench, or the courts,
or the senate. Let it be observed that what is chiefly praised in
children is innocence, that fathers may estimate this grace at its true
value. In the preceding clause he had compared children endued with
virtue and excellence of nature to arrows. Now, that no man may put a
violent construction upon this comparison, as if it were intended to
give children leave, like robbers, to rush upon doing mischief to such
as come in their way, reckless of right and wrong, he expressly
represents virtue and moral integrity as constituting the protection
which they ought to afford to their fathers. He teaches us, then, that
the children which we ought to wish for, are not such as may violently
oppress the wretched and suffering, or overreach others by craft and
deceit, or accumulate great riches by unlawful means, or acquire for
themselves tyrannical authority, but such as will practice uprightness,
and be willing to live in obedience to the laws, and prepared to render
an account of their life. Farther, although fathers ought diligently to
form their children under a system of holy discipline, yet let them
remember that they will never succeed in attaining the object aimed at,
save by the pure and special grace of God. Solomon also tacitly
intimates that however zealously we may be devoted to the practice of
integrity, we shall never be without detractors and slanderers; for if
integrity of life were exempt from all calumny, we would have no quarrel
with our enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc12010.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="xi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> “Augustine beautifully applies the language
of this Psalm to Christian ministers and pastors, as God’s builders and
watchmen of his Church. How vain their labors without the grace and
power of God!” — Fry.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc12010.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="xi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> *For* is supplied from the French version.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc12010.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="xi.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>Ou que nous
demeurions les bras eroisez sans rien faire.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc12010.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="xi.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span> Walford reads — “He truly granteth sleep to
his beloved;” and observes that the sentence is enfeebled by the word
“so” in the vulgar translation. “It most likely means,” he adds, “‘in
truth,’ *i.e.,* truly; and the sense will be, though all exertion is
vain without God, yet he truly bestows refreshing sleep, free from
anxiety and excessive exertion, upon those who are the objects of his
love, inasmuch as they combine all their endearours with due regard to
him.” Cresswell adopts the rendering of the Septuagint, which is “since
he giveth his beloved sleep.”

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc12010.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>*Fructus.*
Merces, fructus ventris ” — *Lat.* “<span id="xi.ii-p3.2"></span>Le
fruict du ventre *est* loyer *qu’il donne* ” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc12010.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> <span id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>בני הנעורים,
*sons of youth,* words which may signify children begotten by the father
in his youth, as <span id="xi.ii-p4.2"></span>בז-זקנים, is a son
begotten by a parent in his old age, (<span id="xi.ii-p4.3"></span>[Ge
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003)<span id="xi.ii-p4.3"></span>;.md) or
the expression may denote youths, as <span id="xi.ii-p4.4"></span>בני
נכר mean *strangers,* (<span id="xi.ii-p4.5"></span>[Ps
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)<span id="xi.ii-p4.5"></span>..md)
Either rendering, I apprehend, will be suitable on this occasion; for
the object of the verse is doubtless to show, that a numerous progeny is
a great blessing to a man, and an important addition to his strength and
safety; that they will be a defence to him in a time of danger, and
serve him to repel an enemy, as arrows do in the hand of a mighty man.”
— *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc12010.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>*Car* ” —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc12010.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.ii-p13.1"></span>Legitimos
conventus.” — *Lat.* “<span id="xi.ii-p13.2"></span>Les assemblees
Judiciales.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 128](cc12011.md)
