[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12023)  [Next](cc12025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>PSALM 141

<span id="xxv-p2"></span>Whatever may have been the immediate cause
pressing David to pray in the manner he does in this Psalm,  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) it is plain that his desire is through
divine grace to check and bridle his spirit, under injuries of a
causeless and unprovoked description, so as not to break out into
retaliation and revenge, and return evil for evil. Having attained to
the exercise of forbearance, he seeks that God would judge between him
and his enemies.

<span id="xxv-p4"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
141:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! I have cried unto thee,
make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice when I cry unto thee. **2.**
Let my prayer be directed as incense before thy face; the lifting up of
my hands, as  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) the evening
sacrifice. **3.** Set a watch, O Jehovah! upon my mouth, keep a guard
upon the door of my lips. **4.** Incline not my heart to an evil thing,
to practice wicked works with men that work iniquity, and that I may not
eat of their dainties.

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span><span id="xxv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span>**1.** *O Jehovah! I have cried unto thee*.
From such an exordium and manner of praying, it is evident that David
was laboring under no small trial, as he repeats his requests, and
insists upon receiving help. Without venturing to say anything definite
upon the point, we would not disapprove of the conjecture that this
Psalm was written by David with reference to the persecutions he
suffered from Saul. He teaches us by his example to make application
immediately to God, and not be tempted, as wicked men are, to renounce
prayer, and rely on other resources. He says that he cried to God, not
to heaven or earth, to men or to fortune, and other vain objects, which
are made mention of, in the first place at least, in such cases by the
ungodly. If they do address themselves to God, it is with murmurs and
complaints, howling rather than praying.

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span><span id="xxv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span>In the second verse the allusion is evidently
to the legal ceremonies.  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) At
that time the prayers of God’s people were according to his own
appointment sanctified through the offering up of incense and
sacrifices, and David depended upon this promise.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) As to the conjecture some have made,
that he was at this time an exile, and cut off from the privileges of
the religious assembly, nothing certain can be said upon that point;
their idea being that there is a tacit antithesis in the verse — that
though prevented from continuing with God’s worshippers into the
sanctuary, or using incense and sacrifice, he desired God would accept
his prayers notwithstanding. But as there seems no reason to adopt this
restricted sense, it is enough to understand the general truth, that as
these symbols taught the Lord’s people to consider their prayers equally
acceptable to God with the sweetest incense, and most excellent
sacrifice, David derived confirmation to his faith from the
circumstance. Although the view of the fathers was not confined entirely
to the external ceremonies, David was bound to avail himself of such
helps. As he considered, therefore, that it was not in vain the incense
was burned daily on the altar by God’s commandment, and the evening
offering presented, he speaks of his prayers in connection with this
ceremonial worship. *The lifting up of the hands,* evidently means
prayer, for those who translate <span id="xxv.i-p10.2"></span>משאת,
*masath*, *a gift*, obscure and pervert the meaning of the Psalmist. As
the word, which is derived from <span id="xxv.i-p10.3"></span>נשא,
*nasa*, means *lifting up* in the Hebrew, the natural inference is, that
prayer is meant, in allusion to the outward action practiced in it. And
we can easily suppose that David here as elsewhere repeats the same
thing twice. As to the reason which has led to the universal practice
amongst all nations of lifting up the hand in prayer, I have taken
notice of it elsewhere.

<span id="xxv.i-p11"></span><span id="xxv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Set a watch, O Jehovah! upon my
mouth*. As David was liable to be hurt at the unbridled and unprincipled
rage of his enemies, so as to be tempted to act in a manner that might
not be justifiable, he prays for divine direction, and not that he might
be kept back from manual violence merely, but that his tongue might be
restrained from venting reproach, or words of complaint. Even persons of
the most self-possessed temper, if unwarrantably injured, will some —
times proceed to make retaliation, through their resenting the
unbecoming conduct of their enemies. David prays accordingly that his
tongue might be restrained by the Lord from uttering any word which was
out of joint. Next he seeks that his heart be kept back from every
mischievous device that might issue in revenge. The words added — *that
I may not eat of their delicacies*, are to be understood figuratively,
as a petition that he might not be tempted by the prosperity which they
enjoyed in sin to imitate their conduct. The three things mentioned in
the context are to be connected; and it may be advisable to consider
each of them more particularly. Nothing being more difficult than for
the victims of unjust persecution to bridle their speech, and submit
silently and without complaint to injuries, David needed to pray that
his mouth might be closed and guarded — that the door of his mouth might
be kept shut by God, as one who keeps the gate watches the ingress and
egress — <span id="xxv.i-p12.1"></span>נצרה, *nitsrah*, being the
imperative of the verb, rather than a noun. He next subjoins *that God
would not incline his heart to an evil thing*; for <span
id="xxv.i-p12.2"></span>דבר, *dabar*, is here, as in many other places,
used to signify *a thing*. Immediately after he explains himself to
mean, that he would not desire to strive with them in wickedness, and
thus make himself like his enemies. Had that monk of whom Eusebius makes
mention duly reflected upon this resolution of David, he would not have
fallen into the silly fallacy of imagining that he had shown himself the
perfect scholar by observing silence for a whole term of seven years.
Hearing that the regulation of the tongue was a rare virtue, he betook
himself to a distant solitude, from which he did not return to his
master for seven years; and being asked the cause of his long absence,
replied that he had been meditating upon what he had learned from this
verse. It would have been proper to have asked him at the same time,
whether during the interim he had thought none, as well as spoken none.
For the two things stand connected the being silent, and the being free
from the charge of evil thoughts. It is very possible that although he
observed silence, he had many ungodly thoughts, and these are worse than
vain words. We have simply alluded in passing to this foolish notion, as
what may convince the reader of the possibility of persons running away
with a word torn from its connection, and overlooking the scope of the
writer. In committing himself to the guidance of God, both as to
thoughts and words, David acknowledges the need of the influence of the
Spirit for the regulation of his tongue and of his mind, particularly
when tempted to be exasperated by the insolence of opposition. If, on
the one hand, the tongue be liable to slip and too fast of utterance,
unless continually watched and guarded by God; on the other, there are
disorderly affections of an inward kind which require to be restrained.
What a busy workshop is the heart of man, and what a host of devices is
there manufactured every moment! If God do not watch over our heart and
tongue, there will confessedly be no bounds to words and thoughts of a
sinful kind, — so rare a gift of the Spirit is moderation in language,
while Satan is ever making suggestions which will be readily and easily
complied with, unless God prevent. It need not seem absurd to speak of
God inclining our hearts to evil, since these are in his hand, to turn
them whithersoever he willeth at his pleasure. Not that he himself
prompts them to evil desires, but as according to his secret judgments
he surrenders and effectually gives over the wicked to Satan’s tyranny,
he is properly said to blind and harden them. The blame of their sins
rests with men themselves, and the lust which is in them; and, as they
are carried out to good or evil by a natural desire, it is not from any
external impulse that they incline to what is evil, but spontaneously
and of their own corruption. I have read — *to work the works of
iniquity;* others read — *to think the thoughts of iniquity*. The
meaning is the same, and it is needless to insist upon the preference to
be given. By <span id="xxv.i-p12.3"></span>מנעמים, *manammim*,
translated *delicacies*, is meant the satisfaction felt by the ungodly
when their sins are connived at through the divine forbearance. While
their insolence in such a case becomes more presumptuous, even the
Lord’s people are in danger of being deceived by the prosperity they see
enjoying, and to take liberties themselves. David had reason therefore
to pray for the secret restraints of the Holy Spirit, that he might be
kept from *feasting on their delicacies*; that is, being intoxicated
into license or sinful pleasure through anything debasing, flattering,
or agreeable in outward circumstances.  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236)

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
141:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Let the righteous smite me, a
kindness; and let him chastise. me, a precious oil, it shall not break
my head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities. **6.**
Their judges have been thrown down upon stony places; and they shall
hear my words, for they are sweet. **7.** As one who breaketh and
cutteth  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) on the earth, our bones
have been, scattered at the mouth of the grave.

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *Let the righteous smite me*, *etc*.
While Satan tempts the wicked by his allurements, they, at the same
time, deceive one another by flattery, which leads David to declare,
that he would much rather be awakened to his duty by the severe rod of
reproof, than be seduced through pleasing falsehoods. Among those who
hold religion in contempt no reproof is administered to one who has
contracted any sin, and, therefore, if we have any concern for our
spiritual safety we will connect ourselves with good men, who restore
such as have fallen by upright admonition, and bring back those who have
erred to the right way. It is not agreeable to corrupt nature to be
reproved when we sin, but, David had brought himself to that degree of
docility and self-denial which led him to consider no reproof
distasteful which he knew to proceed from the spirit of kindness. As
there is some ambiguity in the words, we may see to ascertain the proper
meaning of them. The noun <span id="xxv.ii-p6.1"></span>חסד, *chesed*,
can very well be resolved into the adverb — *the righteous shall smite
me mercifully*, or in *mercy*, supplying the preposition. And this is
the meaning adopted by most interpreters, that David reckoned as the
best ointment such reproofs as breathed charity and kindness, or
proceeded from a kind and dispassionate spirit. Should this reading be
preferred it is to be remembered, that David refers, not so much to the
outward manner in which the reproof is to be administered, as to the
frame of the heart. However how good men may be, and whatever severity
of language they may employ in admonishing those who have erred, they
are still actuated by the force of brotherly affection. My, the very
severity is, in fact, occasioned by their holy anxiety and fear of their
brother’s safety. The righteous act mercifully under all this apparent
sharpness and severity — as the wicked, on the other hand, act cruelly
who censure only in a very gentle manner. By noticing this feature in
reproof, David besides would distinguish that kind of it which takes its
rise in sincere affection, from invectives which proceed from hatred or
private animosity, as Solomon says. (<span id="xxv.ii-p6.2"></span>[Pr
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span id="xxv.ii-p6.2"></span>.)
The other rendering of the words, however, which I have adopted, is
equally suitable —

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span>Let the righteous censure me, it shall be
mercy, or, I will reckon it a benefit, let him reprove me, this shall be
precious ointment that will not hurt my head.

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span>The last clause some interpret in another
way — *the oil of the head let it not break my head*, that is, let not
the wicked seduce me to destruction by their pleasing flatteries.  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) By the *oil* they understand the
pernicious adulations by which the wicked would ruin us, and plunge us
deeper and deeper in destruction, while they seem to administer
pleasure. This would make the passage convey a fuller meaning, That
while David was pliable and yielding in the matter of reproof, he fled
from flattery as from the fatal songs of the Sirens. However sweet
praise may be to the taste at first, every one who lends an ear to
flattery, drinks in a poison which will presently diffuse itself through
the whole heart. Let us learn by David’s example to reject all
flatteries, prone as we are naturally to receive them, and to renounce
waywardness and obstinacy, lest we should put away from us those
corrections which are wholesome remedies for our vices. For such is the
infatuated love men have to their own destruction, that even when forced
to condemn themselves they wish to have the approbation of the world.
And why? that by superinducing torpor of conscience, they may, by their
own spontaneous act, devote themselves to ruin.

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span>*For yet my prayer*, *etc*. Three
explanations of this clause have been suggested. According to some the
meaning of it is, that, as we are ever ready to be corrupted by bad
example, David here prays, that he might not decline to their evils, or
the evils which they practiced. The second sense assigned is, that
David, recognizing their mischievous devices, prays that he may be kept
by the Lord from their wickedness. The third sense, that recognizing
them as reduced to desperate calamities, he prays that the just
vengeance of God might be executed upon them according to their deserts.
The very opposite meaning might seem the more suitable, that David was
not prevented by their obstinacy in wickedness from praying for their
welfare. For there is the adverb yet emphatically inserted. Or, what if
David is to be considered as predicting their unfortunate end,
intimating, that though the ungodly now riot in excess, they shall
shortly be arrested, and that before long his compassion would be
exercised towards them? The way in which the words stand connected
favors this view; for he does not say — *yet my prayer shall be in their
calamities*, but rather separately, “*yet*, or, *yet a little while*,
and then my power shall be in their calamities.” As David was in danger
of being tempted to yield to similarly vain courses with them, he very
properly suggests a sustaining motive to his soul, why he should retain
his integrity, that erelong they would be overtaken with so awful a
destruction as to entreat compassion from him and others of the people
of God.

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *Their judges have been thrown down
upon stony places*  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) Almost all
interpreters agree, that the tense of the verb should be changed from
the preterit to the future, and then resolve it into the optative — *let
them be thrown down*. It appears to me that the sense of David would be
made very plain by reading, *When their judges have been cast down from
the rock, or upon stony places, they shall hear my words*. David, on
perceiving the rage which the common people expressed towards him, as
carried away through the influence of error and misrepresentation, lays
the blame upon their leaders. When their power should be taken away, he
is confident that the simple, who had been misled, would be brought to a
right mind. *Casting from the rocks, or upon stony places,* is a
metaphorical expression in reference to the high and dignified position
in which they were placed. Although not without blame in following evil
counselors so as to persecute unjustly a good and godly man, yet he had
reason to entertain more hope of their repentance, that they would
return to consideration when God executed vengeance upon those who were
at their head. We see how ready the common people are to judge by
impulse rather than deliberation, and to be hurried into most
condemnable proceedings by blind prejudice, while afterwards upon being
admonished they retrace their steps with equal precipitation. So that,
granting cruelty must always be sinful, and simplicity no excuse, we are
taught by David’s example to pray that sound counsel may be sent to such
as are in error, with a view to enabling them to hear the truth and the
right with patience.

<span id="xxv.ii-p16"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p17"></span>**7.** *As one who breaketh*, *etc*. Here
David complains that his enemies were not satisfied with inflicting upon
him one death — death of a common description — but must first mangle
him, and those associated with him, and then cast them into the grave.
The common robber on the highway throws the body of his murdered victim
whole into the ditch; David tells us, that he and those with him were
treated more barbarously, their Bones being dispersed, as one cleaves
wood or stones into fragments, or digs the earth. From this it appears,
that David, like Paul, (<span id="xxv.ii-p17.1"></span>[2Co
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="xxv.ii-p17.1"></span>,)
was delivered from deaths oft;  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)
and we may learn the duty of continuing to cherish hope of life and
deliverance even when the expression may apply to us, that our bones
have been broken and scattered.

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
141:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**8.** Because to thee, O Jehovah! My Lord,
are my eyes; in thee have I hoped: leave mot my soul destitute. **9.**
Keep we from the hands of the snare which they have spread for me, from
the nets of the workers of iniquity. **10.** Let the wicked fall
together into his nets; I always shall pass by.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span>**8.** *Because to thee, O Jehovah*! *etc*.
If we reflect upon what was comprehended under the previous figure of
their bones being broken, his praying in such circumstances is just as
if the torn fragments of a mangled corpse should cry unto God. This may
give us some idea of the heroical courage of David, who could continue
to direct his eyes to God even under such overwhelming difficulties;
this being the very part faith ought to discharge, in making us
collected and composed when our senses would otherwise be confounded.
 <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) Great a miracle as it would
have been for God to have preserved them in life, when their bones were
scattered abroad, it was a double miracle to support their minds in the
firm persuasion of their not perishing.

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span>**9.** *Keep me*, *etc*. He owns himself to
be shut up in the snares of his enemies, unless set free by a higher
hand. In praying to God under the straits to which he was reduced, he
proves what a high estimate he formed of what his mercy could effect, as
elsewhere he says, that the issues from death belong to him. (<span
id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)<span id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>.)
God often delays interposing, that the deliverance may be the more
signal; and afterwards he makes the devices of the wicked to recoil upon
their own heads. It seems absurd to refer the pronoun *his* to Saul, as
if the sense were that Doeg and others of that character would fall into
the snares of Saul. It would seem to be God who is intended. First, he
had spoken of being preserved by God from the toils of the wicked, and
now to these snares which the wicked spread for the upright he opposes
the snares with which God catches the crafty in their own devices. And
as the number of his enemies was great, he uses the expression, *let
them fall together*, for escape would have been impossible, had he not
been persuaded that it was easy for God to overthrow any combined force
and array of men. What follows admits of two meanings. Many read, *I
shall always pass*. But we may suppose order of the words changed and
read, *until I pass*. It prays that his enemies should be held in the
snare till he got off safe,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc12024.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv-p3"></span> Many commentators are strongly of opinion,
that this Psalm was written as a memorial of that very interesting scene
in the life of David, recorded in <span id="xxv-p3.1"></span>[1Sa
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#000)<span id="xxv-p3.1"></span>,
relating to his generous treatment of Saul. Though he had an opportunity
of putting that his cruel persecutor to death in the cave of En-gedi,
yet he spared his life, only cutting off his skirt, and not suffering
his followers to touch him; and when Saul had gone out of the cave,
David going out after him, remonstrated with him from some distance in
the gentlest and most respectful language in regard to the injustice of
his conduct towards him. It is thought that the sixth verse contains so
express a reference to this very remarkable occurrence in David’s
history, as to leave little doubt that it was the occasion on which the
Psalm was composed.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc12024.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xxv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span> *As*, here and in the preceding clause, is a
supplement, very properly made by our author; a word signifying *like*,
or *in the stead of*, being frequently understood in the Hebrew text of
the Psalms.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc12024.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xxv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span> The allusion, according to the opinion of
most commentators, is to the morning and evening sacrifices, of which
see an account in <span id="xxv.i-p9.1"></span>[Ex
29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)<span id="xxv.i-p9.1"></span>.
In the phraseology of the verse it. is supposed that there is a
reference to the commencing and concluding acts of the daily public
worship among the Jews. Every morning and evening the priests offered
incense upon the incense-altar which stood in the holy place, while the
people prayed without. But in the morning the incense was offered
*before* the sacrifice was laid upon the altar of burnt-offering;
whereas in the evening (at the ninth hour) it was offered after the
sacrifice was laid upon the altar; and thus in the evening the sacrifice
and the incense were offered at the same time. See Lightfoot’s Temple
Service, chapter 9: section 5. Dr. Adam Clarke, however, thinks that
David does not refer to any *sacrifice*; “for,” says he, “he uses not
<span id="xxv.i-p9.2"></span>זבח, *zebach*, which is almost universally
used for a *slaughtered* *animal*, <span id="xxv.i-p9.3"></span>מנחת,
*minchath*, which is generally taken for a *gratitude offering*, or an
*unbloody* sacrifice.” He translates the last two words “the evening
oblation.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc12024.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xxv.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p10.1"></span>Car pource
que lors Dieu vouloit que les prieres des fideles fussent sanctifiees
par encensement et par sacrifices, David s’appuye sur ceste promesse.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc12024.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xxv.i-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p13.1"></span>C’est a dire
qu’il ne s’enyure de la vaine douceur qu’ils out en se desbordant a mal,
et qu’ainsi il ne s’esgaye en pechez.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc12024.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xxv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span> “*As one cutting and slitting*. Many
persons understand <span id="xxv.ii-p3.1"></span>עצים, *wood*, after
these participles, supposing the comparison of scattering the bones to
be made with the scattering of wood after it has been cleft. But it is
more probable that what the Psalmist intended to say was in substance as
follows: ‘Our bones lie scattered at the edge of the grave, just as one
cutting and cleaving the earth in making a grave often throws up bones,
which may be seen scattered here and there with the earth lying at its
sides.’ The verse is poetical, and the figure indicates great distress.”
— *Phillips*

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc12024.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xxv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxv.ii-p9.1"></span>Que l’huile
de la teste ne rompe point ma teste, c’est a dire, que les meschans ne
m’amadouent point par leurs flatteries a ma perdition et ruine.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc12024.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xxv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p13"></span> Those who understand this verse as
containing an allusion to the generous manner in which David acted
towards Saul in the cave of En-gedi, and to his mild expostulation after
they had both left the cave, translate thus: —

<span id="xxv.ii-p14"></span>*“Their princes on the sides of the rock
were dismissed,  
*or *let go* in safety*; And they heard my words that they were
pleasant.”*

<span id="xxv.ii-p15"></span>This exactly corresponds with the
occurrences referred to. In correspondence with the first line, it, is
said in <span id="xxv.ii-p15.1"></span>[1Sa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002)<span id="xxv.ii-p15.1"></span>,
that Saul and his chosen men went to seek David upon the *rocks* of the
wild goats; and the terms in which David expostulated with Saul, were so
gentle, dutiful and affecting, as for the time to melt into tenderness
and contrition the heart of Saul, and to impress the minds of all who
heard them.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc12024.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xxv.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p18"></span> If David here refers to the treatment he
and his followers met with at the hands of Saul, this exhibits in dark
colors the extreme inhumanity of that monarch. “We are not sufficiently
informed,” says Walford, “respecting the cruelties which were
perpetrated against David and those who adhered to him, to enable us to
point out the instances to which he here alludes; but the murder of
Abimelech, and of the priests who were with him, furnishes a pregnant
proof of the atrocities which Saul and his agents were capable of
perpetrating. (See <span id="xxv.ii-p18.1"></span>[1Sa
22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#000)<span id="xxv.ii-p18.1"></span>) It
appears from the language of this verse that such enormities were not
confined to a few cases, but must have been numerous, to give occasion
to the image which is employed to describe them.” How striking the
contrast between David’s treatment of Saul, and that which Saul adopted
towards him! Mr. Peters in his Dissertations on Job, gives an exposition
of this 7th verse which is ingenious, and which Archbishop Secker calls
“admirable, though not quite unexceptionable.” Understanding the verse
as referring to the slaughter of the priests at Nob, just now adverted
to, he renders the words <span id="xxv.ii-p18.2"></span>שאול לפי, (which
Calvin translates, *at the grave’s mouth*,) *at the mouth*, that is, *at
the command of Saul*. In. support of this translation he produces
similar expressions, <span id="xxv.ii-p18.3"></span>על פי פרעה, *at the
command of Pharaoh*, (<span id="xxv.ii-p18.4"></span>[Ge
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#021)<span id="xxv.ii-p18.4"></span>,)
and <span id="xxv.ii-p18.5"></span>על פיך, *at thy command*. (<span
id="xxv.ii-p18.6"></span>[Job
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017)<span id="xxv.ii-p18.6"></span>.)
To this rendering there is, however, this strong objection, that we do
not find David ever mentioning Saul by name in any of the Psalms.
Peters, indeed, states that this objection was offered to him against
his view, and he endeavors to remove it, though, as we think, with
indifferent success.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc12024.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xxv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p3.1"></span>Jusques a
ce que je passe.” — *Fr*. “Until I pass.”

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc12024.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xxv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p7.1"></span>C’est le
propre de la foy de rassembler lessens de la personne dispersez, lequels
autrement s’esvanouiroyent a chacun coup.” —*Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 142](cc12025)
