[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12025)  [Next](cc12027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvii"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p1"></span>PSALM 143

<span id="xxvii-p2"></span>Although the enemies with whom David had to
contend were wicked, and their persecution as unjust as it was cruel,
David recognized the just judgment of God in it all, and seeks to
conciliate his favor by humbly supplicating pardon. Having complained of
the cruelty of his enemies, and declared that amidst all his affliction
he still remembered God, he prays for restoration, and the guidance of
God’s Spirit, that the remainder of his life might be devoted to his
fear.

<span id="xxvii-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247)

<span id="xxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
143:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#001)<span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear my prayer, O Jehovah! give ear
to my supplication, in thy truth answer me, in thy righteousness. **2.**
And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. **3.** For the enemy hath persecuted my soul;
he hath prostrated my life on the ground: he hath set me in dark places,
as the dead of an age.

<span id="xxvii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Hear my prayer, O Jehovah*! It is
evident that the oppression of his enemies must have been extreme, when
David laments his case in such earnest and pathetic terms. The
introductory words show that the grief he felt was great. His reason for
speaking of the justice and faithfulness of God in connection we have
shown elsewhere. Under the term *justice*, or *righteousness*, we are
not to suppose that he speaks of merit, or hire, as some ignorantly
imagine, but of that goodness of God which leads him to defend his
people. To the same effect does he speak of God’s *truth* or
*faithfulness*; for the best proof he can give of his faithfulness is in
not forsaking those whom he has promised to help. In helping his people
he shows himself to be a just and true God, both in not frustrating
their expectation, and in so far as he shows in this extension of mercy
what his nature is, that David very properly encourages himself in
prayer by making mention of both.

<span id="xxvii.i-p6"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p7"></span>**2.** *And enter not into judgment*,
 <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) *etc*. I have hinted already
why he proceeds to pray for pardon. When overtaken by adversity, we are
ever to conclude that it is a rod of correction sent by God to stir us
up to pray. Although he is far from taking pleasure in our trials, it is
certain that our sins are the cause of his dealing towards us with this
severity. While those to whom David was opposed were wicked men, and he
was perfectly conscious of the rectitude of his cause as regarded them,
he freely acknowledged his sin before God as a condemned suppliant. We
are to hold this as a general rule in seeking to conciliate God, that we
must pray for the pardon of our sins. If David found refuge nowhere else
than in prayer for pardon, who is there amongst us who would presume to
come before God trusting in his own righteousness and integrity? Nor
does David here merely set an example before God’s people how they ought
to pray, but declares that there is none amongst men who could be just
before God were he called to plead his cause. The passage is one fraught
with much instruction, teaching us, as I have just hinted, that God can
only show favor to us in our approaches by throwing aside the character
of a judge, and reconciling us to himself in a gratuitous remission of
our sins. All human righteousnesses, accordingly, go for nothing, when
we come to his tribunal. This is a truth which is universally
acknowledged in words, but which very few are seriously impressed with.
As there is an indulgence which is mutually extended to one another
amongst men, they all come confidently before God for judgment, as if it
were as easy to satisfy him as to gain man’s approval. In order to
obtain a proper view of the whole matter, we are first to note what is
meant by being justified. The passage before us clearly proves that the
man who is justified, is he who is judged and reckoned just before God,
or whom the heavenly Judge himself acquits as innocent. Now, in denying
that any amongst men can claim this innocence, David intimates that any
righteousness which the saints have is not perfect enough to abide God’s
scrutiny, and thus he declares that all are guilty before God, and can
only be absolved in the way of acknowledging they might justly be
condemned. Had perfection been a thing to be found in the world, he
certainly of all others was the man who might justly have boasted of it;
and the righteousness of Abraham and the holy fathers was not unknown to
him; but he spares neither them nor himself, but lays it down as the one
universal rule of conciliating God, that we must cast ourselves upon his
mercy. This may give us some idea of the satanic infatuation which has
taken hold of those who speak so much of perfection in holiness, with a
view to supersede remission of sins. Such a degree of pride could never
be evinced by them, were they not secretly influenced by a brutish
contempt of God. They speak in high and magnificent terms of
regeneration, as if the whole kingdom of Christ consisted in purity of
life. But in doing away with the principal blessing of the everlasting
covenant — gratuitous reconciliation — which God’s people are commanded
to seek daily, and in puffing up both themselves and others with a vain
pride, they show what spirit they are of. Let us hold them in
detestation, since they scruple not to put open contempt upon God. This
of itself, however, which we have stated, is not enough; for the Papists
themselves acknowledge that were God to enter upon an examination of
men’s lives as a judge, all would lie obnoxious to just condemnation.
And in this respect they are sounder, more moderate and sober, than
those Cyclopses and monsters in heresy of whom we have just spoken. But
though not arrogating to themselves righteousness in the whole extent of
it, they show, by obtruding their merits and satisfactions, that they
are very far from following the example of David. They are always ready
to acknowledge some defect in their works, and so, in seeking God’s
favor, they plead for the assistance of his mercy. But there is nothing
intermediate between these two things, which are represented in
Scripture as opposites — being justified by faith and justified by
works. It is absurd for the Papists to invent a third species of
righteousness, which is partly wrought out by works of their own, and
partly imputed to them by God in his mercy. Without all doubt, when he
affirmed that no man could stand before God were his works brought to
judgment, David had no idea of this complex or twofold righteousness,
but would shut us up at once to the conclusion that God is only
favorable upon the ground of his mercy, since any reputed righteousness
of man has no significance before him.

<span id="xxvii.i-p9"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p10"></span>**3.** *For the enemy hath persecuted my
soul*. Having acknowledged that he only suffered the just punishment of
his sins, David comes now to speak of his enemies; for to have begun by
speaking of them would have been a preposterous order. Their cruelty was
shown in their not resting satisfied but with the destruction of one who
was a saint of God; he declares that he must even now perish unless God
should help him speedily. The comparison is not merely to a dead man,
but a putrid corpse; for by *the dead of an age*  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) are meant those who have been long
removed from the world. Such language intimates that he not only trusted
in God as he who could heal him of a deadly disease, but considered that
though his life should be buried, as it were, and long out of mind, God
could raise it again, and restore his very ashes.

<span id="xxvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
143:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#004)<span
id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** And my spirit is perplexed within
me, my heart within me is astonished. **5.** I remembered the days of
old, I meditated upon all thy works; I meditated upon the work of thy
hands. **6.** I spread out my hands to thee, my soul is to thee as the
earth without water.  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) Selah.
**7.** Hasten, answer me, O Jehovah! my spirit faileth: hide not thy
face from me, because I shall be like to those descending into the pit.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *And my spirit*, etc. Hitherto he
has spoken of the troubles that were without, now he acknowledges the
feebleness of his spirits, from which it is evident that his strength,
vas not like that of the rock, imperturbable or without feeling, but
that, while overwhelmed with grief as to the feeling of the flesh, he
owed his support entirely to faith and the grace of the Spirit,. We are
taught by his example not to throw up the conflict in despair, however
much we may be weakened, and even exanimated by afflictions, as God will
enable us to surmount them, if we only rise to him with our hearts
amidst all our anxieties.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p7"></span>In the next verse David mentions that he
had diligently sought means whereby to mitigate his grief. It is not to
be wondered at, that many who spontaneously give themselves up to
inaction, should sink under their trials, not using means to invigorate
themselves by calling to remembrance the grace of God. Sometimes, it is
true, our trials are only more keenly felt when we recall the former
kindness which God may have shown to us, the comparison tending to
awaken our feelings, and render them more acute; but David proposed a
different end than this to himself, and gathered confidence from the
past mercies of God. The very best method in order to obtain relief in
trouble, when we are about to faint under it, is to call to mind the
former loving-kindness of the Lord. Nor does David mean such as he had
experienced from childhood, as some have thought, adopting in my
judgment too restricted a sense; for the word <span
id="xxvii.ii-p7.1"></span>קדם, *kedem*, has a more extensive
signification. I have no doubt, therefore, that he includes past
history, as well as his own personal experience, it being easy to
discover proofs there of God’s continued goodness to his people. We
should ourselves learn by his example, in reflecting upon personal
favors received from God, to remember also how often he has assisted
those that served him, and improve the truth for our own benefit. Should
this not immediately or at once abate the bitterness of our grief, yet
the advantage of it will afterwards appear. In the passage before us,
David complains that he did not get relief from his anxieties and cares
from this consolatory source, but he prosecuted his meditations in
expectation of finding the good result in due time. The verb <span
id="xxvii.ii-p7.2"></span>שוה, *suach*, I have elsewhere observed, may
mean either *to declare with the tongue*, or *to revolve in the mind*.
Some accordingly read — “I have discoursed of thy works.” But as the
verb <span id="xxvii.ii-p7.3"></span>הגה, *hagah*, means to *meditate*,
I consider that the Psalmist repeats the same thing twice, and this in
token of earnestness. We will often upon a slight exercise of the
thoughts upon God’s works, start aside from them almost immediately; nor
is it matter of surprise, that, in this case, there results no solid
comfort. That our knowledge may be abiding we must call in the aid of
constant attention.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *I have stretched forth my hands to
thee*. Here appears the good effect of meditation, that it stirred David
up to pray; for if we reflect seriously upon the acting’s of God towards
his people, and towards ourselves in our own experience, this will
necessarily lead out our minds to seek after him, under the alluring
influence of his goodness. Prayer, indeed, springs from faith; but as
practical proofs of the favor and mercy confirm this faith, they are
means evidently fitted for dissipating languor. He makes use of a
striking figure to set forth the ardor of his affection, comparing *his
soul to the parched earth.* In great heats we see that the earth is
cleft, and opens, as it were, its mouth to heaven for moisture. David
therefore intimates, he drew near to God with vehement desire, as if the
very sap of life failed him, as he shows more fully in the verse which
follows. In this he gives another proof of his extraordinary faith.
Feeling himself weak, and ready to sink into the very grave, he does not
vacillate between this and the other hope of relief, but fixes his sole
dependence upon God. And heavy as the struggle was that he underwent
with his own felt weakness, the fainting of spirit he speaks of was a
better stimulant to prayer than any stoical obstinacy he might have
shown in suppressing fear, grief, or anxiety. We must not overlook the
fact, how in order to induce himself to depend exclusively upon God, he
dismisses all other hopes from his mind, and makes a chariot to himself
of the extreme necessity of his case, in which he ascends upwards to
God.

<span id="xxvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
143:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#008)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p2"></span>**8.** Cause me to hear thy
loving-kindness in the morning, for in thee have I hoped; show me the
way in which I may walk, for I have lifted up my soul to thee. **9.**
Deliver me, O Jehovah! from my enemies; I have hidden with thee. **10.**
Teach me that I may do thy will, for thou art my God; let thy good
Spirit lead me into the right land. **11.** For thy name’s sake, O Lord!
thou wilt quicken me: in thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble.
**12.** And in thy mercy thou wilt scatter my enemies, and thou wilt
destroy  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) all them that afflict
my soul, for I am thy servant.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p6"></span>**8.** *Cause me to hear thy
loving-kindness*. In this verse he again prays that God would show him
his favor visibly and effectually. The expression cause me to hear, may
seem not very proper, as the goodness of God is rather felt than heard;
but as the mere perception of God’s benefits, without a believing
apprehension and improvement of them, would do us little good, David
very properly begins with hearing. We see how wicked men riot in the
abundance of them, while yet they have no sense of the Lord’s goodness,
through want of attention to the word, and a believing apprehension of
God as a father. The adverb in the morning some confine to a reference
to sacrifices — which is a meager interpretation — in allusion to the
well-known fact that sacrifices used to be offered twice, in the morning
and in the evening. Others give a more strained sense, understanding
that when God deals in a more favorable way with his people, he is said
to form a new day.  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) Others
consider it to be a metaphor for a prosperous and happy condition, as an
afflicted and calamitous time is often denoted by darkness. I wonder
that there should be such a search after extraneous meanings for this
word, by which he is simply to be considered as repeating his former
prayer to God — make haste. In the morning means the same with speedily
or seasonably. He founds a reason here, as elsewhere, upon his having
hoped in God, this being something by which, in a sense, we lay God
under obligation to us, for in making a liberal offer of himself to us,
and promising to sustain the relationship of a father, he gives what men
would call a pledge. This, accordingly, is a species of obligation. But
so far is this from implying any worthiness or merit on our part, that
the hope we entertain rather proves our nothingness and helplessness.
His prayer that a way might be opened up for him to walk in, refers to
the anxieties which perplexed him. He intimates that he was dismayed,
and brought to a stand, unable to move a step, if God did not open a
way, by his divine power; that all the desires of his soul terminated
upon him; and that he looked for counsel from him to procure relief in
his perplexity.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p9"></span>**9.** *Deliver me, O Jehovah! from my
enemies*. This prayer is to the same effect, his enemies being so
earnestly bent upon his destruction as to leave no outgate for him. The
verb <span id="xxvii.iii-p9.1"></span>כסיתי, *chisithi*, some render *to
hope*: the proper meaning is *to cover*, and I am unwilling to depart
from it. The explanation some give is, that David upon perceiving the
imminent danger to which he was exposed, betook himself to the covert of
God’s shadow, and concealed himself under the protection of it. This
seems a very natural rendering, at least I prefer it to another which
has recommended itself to some as being ingenious — that David, instead
of having recourse to various quarters for relief, was satisfied to have
God cognizant of his case, and called upon him in a hidden manner and
apart.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p11"></span>**10.** *Teach me that I may do thy
will*. He now rises to something higher, praying not merely for
deliverance from outward troubles, but, what is of still greater
importance, for the guidance of God’s Spirit, that he might not decline
to the right hand or to the left, but be kept in the path of rectitude.
This is a request which should never be forgotten when temptations
assail us with great severity, as it is peculiarly difficult to submit
to God without resorting to unwarrantable methods of relief. As anxiety,
fear, disease, languor, or pain, often tempt persons to particular
steps, David’s example should bad us to pray for divine restraint, and
that we may not be hurried, through impulses of feeling, into
unjustifiable courses. We are to mark carefully his way of expressing
himself, for what he asks is not simply to be taught what the will of
God is, but to be taught and brought to the observance, and doing of it.
The former kind of teaching is of less avail, as upon God’s showing us
our duty we by no means necessarily follow it, and it is necessary that
he should draw out our affections to himself. God therefore must be
master and teacher to us not only in the dead letter, but by the inward
motions of his Spirit; indeed there are three ways in which he acts the
part of our teacher, instructing us by his word, enlightening our minds
by the Spirit, and engraving instruction upon our hearts, so as to bring
us observe it with a true and cordial consent. The mere hearing of the
word would serve no purpose, nor is it enough that we understand it;
there must be besides the willing’ obedience of the heart. Nor does he
merely say, Teach me that I may be capable of doing, as the deluded
Papists imagine that the grace of God does no more than make us flexible
to what is good, but he seeks something to be actually and presently
done.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p12"></span>He insists upon the same thing in the
next clause, when he says, *Let thy good Spirit lead me*, *etc*., for he
desires the guidance of the Spirit not merely as he enlightens our
minds, but as he effectually influences the consent of our hearts, and
as it were leads us by the hand. The passage in its connection warns us
of the necessity of being sedulously on our guard against yielding to
inordinate passions in any contests we may have with wicked persons, and
as we have no sufficient wisdom or power of our own by which to check
and restrain these passions, that we should always seek the guidance of
God’s Spirit, to keep them in moderation. More generally, the passage
teaches us what we are to think of free will; for David here denies the
will to have the power of judging rightly, till our hearts be formed to
a holy obedience by the Spirit of God. The term leading, which I have
already adverted to, proves also that David did not hold that middle
species of grace which Papists talk so much about, and which leaves man
in a state of suspension or indecision, but asserts something much more
effectual, agreeably to what Paul says, (<span
id="xxvii.iii-p12.1"></span>[Php
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p12.1"></span>,) that

<span id="xxvii.iii-p13"></span>“it is God who works in us both to will
and to do  
of his good pleasure.”

<span id="xxvii.iii-p14"></span>By the words *right hand*, I understand,
figuratively, *uprightness*; David’s meaning being, that we are drawn
into error whenever we decline from what is agreeable to the will of
God. The term *Spirit* is tacitly opposed to that corruption which is
natural to us; what he says being tantamount to this, that all men’s
thoughts are polluted and perverted, till reduced to right rule by the
grace of the Spirit. It follows that nothing which is dictated by the
judgment of the flesh is good or sound. I grant that wicked men are led
away by an evil spirit sent from God, for he executes his judgments by
the agency of devils,  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) (<span
id="xxvii.iii-p15.2"></span>[1Sa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p15.2"></span>;) but when David in this place speaks of
God’s *good Spirit*, I do not imagine that he has any such strained
allusion, but rather that he takes here to himself the charge of
corruption, and assigns the praise of whatever is good, upright, or
true, to the Spirit of God. When he says, *Because thou art my God,* he
shows that his confidence of obtaining his request was founded entirely
upon the free favor and promises of God. It is not a matter lying within
our own power to make him our God, but it rests with his free preventing
grace.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p16"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p17"></span>**11.** *For thy name’s sake, O
Jehovah!* *etc*. By this expression he makes it still more clear that it
was entirely of God’s free mercy that he looked for deliverance; for,
had he brought forward anything of his own, the cause would not have
been in God, and only in God. He is said to help us *for his own name’s
sake,* when, although he discovers nothing in us to conciliate his
favor, he is induced to interpose of his mere goodness. To the same
effect is the term *righteousness*; for God, as I have said elsewhere,
has made the deliverance of his people a means of illustrating his
righteousness. He at the same time repeats what he had said as to the
extraordinary extent of his afflictions: in seeking to be quickened or
made alive, he declares himself to be exanimated, and that he must
remain under the power of death, if the God who has the issues of life
did not recover him by a species of resurrection.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p19"></span>**12.** *And in thy mercy*, *etc*. In
this verse he repeats for the fifth or sixth time that he looked for
life only of God’s free mercy. Whatever severity may appear on the part
of God when he destroys the wicked, David affirms that the vengeance
taken upon them would be a proof of fatherly mercy to him. Indeed these
two things often meet together — the severity and the goodness of God;
for in stretching out his hand to deliver his own people, he directs the
thunder of his indignation against their enemies. In short, he comes
forth armed for the deliverance of his people, as he says in Isaiah,

<span id="xxvii.iii-p20"></span>“The day of vengeance is in mine
heart,  
and this is the year of my redemption.” (<span
id="xxvii.iii-p20.2"></span>[Isa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#004)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxvii.iii-p21"></span>In calling himself *The servant of God,*
he by no means boasts of his services, but rather commends the grace of
God, to whom he owed this privilege. This is not an honor to be got by
our own struggles or exertions — to be reckoned among God’s servants; it
depends upon his free choice, by which he condescends before we are born
to take us into the number and rank of his followers, as David elsewhere
declares still more explicitly —

<span id="xxvii.iii-p22"></span>“I am thy servant, truly I am thy
servant,  
and the son of thine handmaid.” (<span id="xxvii.iii-p22.2"></span>[Ps
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxvii.iii-p23"></span>This is equivalent to making himself
God’s client, and committing his life to his protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc12026.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p4"></span> To the title “A Psalm of David,” some copies
of the Septuagint and the Vulgate add — “when his son Absalom pursued
him,” (see <span id="xxvii-p4.1"></span>[2 Sam.
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025)<span id="xxvii-p4.1"></span>;) and
interpreters in general agree that this is the most probable occasion on
which it was penned.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc12026.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xxvii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p8"></span> Walford thinks there is probably here a
reference to the great transgression, the consequences of which followed
David all his days. “As he would not fail to be reminded of it,” says
that writer, “by the sorrows which had now come upon him, from Absalom’s
misconduct, and as his purpose was, notwithstanding, to implore divine
support and deliverance, he deprecates God’s righteous judgment, since
if no man could be just with God, certainly he, who had so greatly
transgressed, could have no claim to such a state. The consciousness of
his guilt, though he had reason to believe it was forgiven, induced him
thus to abase himself before God, when he was about to offer earnest
entreaties for deliverance from dangers which threatened his dignity and
life; while he still maintained his hope, that God looked upon him as
his servant, whom he had pledged himself to protect.”

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc12026.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xxvii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p11"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p11.1"></span>כמתי
עולם. These words are differently rendered in the ancient versions. The
Septuagint has <span id="xxvii.i-p11.2"></span>ὡς νεκροὺς αἰωνος, *as
the dead of the age*; the Syriac, *forever*; the Chaldee, *as they that
lie down of that age*. The real sense of the expression is, *as they who
have been dead a long time*. The Psalmist employs hyperbolical language
in this verse; he says, the enemy hath beaten his life to the ground,
hath made him dwell in dark places, and for such a length of time, that
there remained no remembrance of him, and that he had become like those
persons who had long since been in their graves. The design of all this
is to express emphatically great sorrow and oppression.” — Phillips.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc12026.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xxvii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p3"></span> In the Book of Common Prayer it is — “My
soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty land.” Mant translates similarly.
The word *gaspeth* is a supplement, but it may convey the precise
meaning; and according to this view the allusion is to the cracking of
the lands of the east, in consequence of the extreme drought of the
summer months. These dry lands, as has been noticed by travelers, have
often chinks too deep for a person to see to the bottom of. This may be
observed in the Indies more than anywhere, a little before the autumnal
rains fall, and, wherever the lands are rich and hard. See <span
id="xxvii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Jer
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#004)<span id="xxvii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc12026.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p3"></span> In our English Bible the verbs
“quicken,” “scatter,” and “destroy,” are in the imperative mood; but
Calvin renders them in the future tense. In this he is followed by Dr.
Hammond and Bishop Horne; “and then,” as this last commentator remarks,
“the Psalm will end as usual, with an act of faith and assurance that
all those mercies which have been asked shall be obtained.”

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc12026.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxvii.iii-p7.1"></span>Que
Dieu quand il commence a traitter ses serviteurs plus doucement, fait
(par maniere de dire) luire un jour nouveau.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc12026.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="xxvii.iii-p15.1"></span>Je
confesse bien que le mauvais esprit de Dieu agite et transporte les
reprouvez, (car Dieu execute ses jugemens par les diables,)” etc. —
*Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 144](cc12027)
