[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12005)  [Next](cc12007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>PSALM 123

<span id="vii-p2"></span>In this Psalm, the faithful oppressed with the
cruel tyranny of their enemies, beseech God to deliver them, there being
no other source of hope left for them except in his protection.

<span id="vii-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
123:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** I lift up my eyes to thee, who
dwellest in the heavens. **2.** Behold! as the eyes of servants look
 <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) to the hand of their roadsters; as
the eyes of a handmaid look to the hand of her mistress, so do our eyes
to Jehovah our God, until he have mercy upon us. **3.** Have mercy upon
us O Jehovah have mercy upon us; for we are greatly cloyed with
reproach. **4.** Our soul is in itself greatly cloyed with the mockery
of men who are rich, and with the contempt of the proud.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span><span id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *I lift my eyes to thee, who dwellest
in the heavens.* It is uncertain at what time, or even by what Prophet,
this Psalm was composed. I do not think it probable that David was its
author; because, when he bewails the persecutions which he suffered in
the time of Saul, it is usual with him to inter-pose some particular
references to himself. My opinion, then, rather is, that this form of
prayer was composed for all the godly by some Prophet, either when the
Jews were captives in Babylon, or when Antiochus Epiphanes exercised
towards them the most relentless cruelty. Be this as it may, the Holy
Spirit, by whose inspiration the Prophet delivered it to the people,
calls upon us to have recourse to God, when — ever wicked men
unrighteously and proudly persecute, not one or two of the faithful
only, but the whole body of the Church. Moreover, God is here expressly
called *the God who dwelleth in the heavens,* not simply to teach his
people to estimate the divine power as it deserves, but also that, when
no hope of aid is left for them on earth, yea rather, when their
condition is desperate, just as if they were laid in the grave, or as if
they were lost in a labyrinth, they should then remember that the power
of God remains in heaven in unimpaired and infinite perfection. Thus
these words seem to contain a tacit contrast between the troubled and
confused state of this world and God’s heavenly kingdom, from whence he
so manages and governs all things, that whenever it pleases him, he
calms all the agitations of the world, comes to the rescue of the
desperate and the despairing, restores light by dispelling darkness, and
raises up such as were cast down and laid prostrate on the ground. This
the Prophet confirms by the verb *lift up;* which intimates, that
although all worldly resources fail us, we must raise our eyes upward to
heaven, where God remains unchangeably the same, despite the mad
impetuosity of men in turning all things here below upside down.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span><span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**2.** *Behold as the eyes of servants look
to the hand of their masters.* This similitude is very suitable to the
present case. It implies that without the protection of God true
believers have no comfort, are completely disarmed and exposed to all
manner of wrongs, have neither strength nor courage to resist; in short,
that their safety depends entirely upon aid derived from another. We
know how shamefully servants were treated in ancient times, and what
reproaches might be cast upon them, whilst yet they durst not move a
finger to repel the outrage. Being therefore deprived of all means of
defending themselves, the only thing which remained for them to do was,
what is here stated, to crave the protection of their masters. The same
explanation is equally applicable to the case of *handmaids* Their
condition was indeed shameful and degrading; but there is no reason why
we should be ashamed of, or offended at being compared to slaves,
provided God is our defender, and takes our life under his guardianship;
God, I say, who purposely disarms us and strips us of all worldly aid,
that we may learn to rely upon his grace, and to be contented ‘with it
alone. It having been anciently a capital crime for bond-men to carry a
sword or any other weapon about them, and as they were exposed to
injuries of every description, their masters were wont to defend them
with so much the more spirit, when any one causelessly did them
violence. Nor can it be doubted that God, when he sees us placing an
exclusive dependence upon his protection, and renouncing all confidence
in our own resources, will as our defender encounter, and shield us from
all the molestation that shall be offered to us. It is, however, certain
that we have here properly the description of a period in which the
people of God were reduced to a state of extreme necessity, and brought
even to the brink of despair. As to the word *hand,* it is very well
known to be put for *help.*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md)

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span><span id="vii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Have mercy upon us, O Jehovah!*
*etc*. The Psalmist prosecutes and confirms the preceding doctrine. He
had said that the godly, finding themselves utterly broken in spirit and
cast down, intently directed their eyes to the hand of God: now he adds
that they are filled with reproach. From this we learn that the wicked
not only assaulted them by such ways of violence as suggested themselves
to their minds, but that by their mockery they as it were trampled under
foot the children of God. The repetition of the prayer, *Have mercy upon
us,* which is a sign of vehement and ardent desire, indicates that they
were reduced to the last degree of misery. When insult is added to
wrongs, there is nothing which inflicts a deeper wound upon well
constituted minds. The Prophet therefore complains chiefly of that, as
if it were the consummation of all calamities. He says that *rich and
proud men* treated the Church with insolent triumph; for it commonly
happens that those who are elevated hi the world, look down with
contempt upon the people of God. The lustre of their he. hour and power
dazzles their eyes, so that they make no account of God’s spiritual
kingdom: yea, the more the wicked prosper and are smiled on by fortune,
to the greater extent does their pride swell, and the more violently
does it throw off its foam. This passage teaches us, that it is no new
thing for the Church to be held in contempt by the children of this
world who abound in riches. The epithet *proud* is justly applied to the
same persons who are described as *rich;* for wealth engenders pride of
heart. Farther, as we see that in old time the Church of God was covered
with reproaches, and pointed at with the finger of scorn, we ought not
to be discouraged if the world despise us, nor should we allow our faith
to be shaken by the wicked when they assault us with their scoffs, yea,
even defame us with their injurious and insulting language. We must
always bear in mind what is here recorded, that the heart not of one man
only, or of a few, but of the whole Church, was filled not merely with
the violence, cruelty, craft, and other evil doings of the wicked, but
also with reproaches and mockery. It is also to be remembered, that all
the loftiness and pride existing in the world are here represented as in
opposition to the Church, so that she is accounted as nothing better
than “the filth of the world and the offscouring of all things,” as the
Apostle Paul declares in <span id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>[1 Corinthians.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>.
When the same thing happens to us at the present day, let us leave the
wicked to swell with their pride until they burst; and let it suffice us
to know, that we are notwithstanding precious in the sight of God. By
the verb *cloy,* especially as it is emphatically repeated, the Prophet
intended to express a long continued oppression, which filled the hearts
of the godly with weariness and sorrow. How necessary the lesson taught
in this text is in our own day, it requires no lengthened discussion to
demonstrate. We see the Church destitute of all worldly protection, and
lying under the feet of her enemies, who abound in riches, and are armed
with dreadful power. We see the Papists boldly rising up, and with all
their might pouring forth their mockeries against us and the whole
service of God. On the other hand, there are mingled amongst us, and
flying about everywhere, Epicureans, who deride our simplicity. There
are also many giants, who overwhelm us with reproaches; and this
baseness has lasted from the time that the Gospel began to emerge from
the corruption’s of Popery even to the present day. What then remains to
be done, but that, finding ourselves environed with darkness on all
sides, we seek the light of life in heaven? and that our soul, although
it may be filled to satiety with all kinds of reproaches, breathe forth
prayers to God for deliverance with the importunity of the famished?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc12006.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> “Look” is a supplement taken from the French
version.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc12006.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="vii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span> “Unto *the hand of their masters* — if we
retain the word *hand,* it must be taken in the well-known sense which
it sometimes bears of *side* or *quarter:* and the original word is used
(<span id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ex
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)<span id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>.md) in
the same sense. The phrase will then simply mean, that the eyes of
servants look towards their masters, and this agrees with — so *our eyes
wait upon the Lord.* But the Hebrew word also signifies *power,* (as in
<span id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>[De
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036)<span id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>,.md)
which may very well be substituted for. *hand* in this place, the notion
being that servants when they are in danger or in distress look to the
power of their masters for assistance; and in general expect from them
subsistence and *defense.*” — *Cresswell.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 124](cc12007.md)
