[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12029)  [Next](cc12031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxi"></span>

<span id="xxxi-p1"></span>PSALM 147

<span id="xxxi-p2"></span>This Psalm also incites the people of God to
praise him upon two accounts; first, for the display of his power,
goodness, wisdom, and other perfections in the common government of the
world, and the several parts of it, the heavens and the earth, but more
particularly for his special goodness in cherishing and defending the
Church which he has chosen of his free grace, in restoring it when
fallen down, and gathering it when dispersed.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288)

<span id="xxxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
147:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)<span id="xxxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye God; for it is good to sing
praises unto our God, for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. **2.**
Jehovah building up Jerusalem, will gather the dispersed of Israel:
**3.** Healing the contrite in heart, and binding up their griefs:
**4.** Numbering the multitude of the stars, giving names to each of
them. **5.** Great is our Lord, and plenteous in power, there is no
figure for his understanding. **6.** Jehovah raiseth up the miserable,
and casteth the wicked down to the ground.

<span id="xxxi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.i-p4"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p5"></span>*Praise ye God,* *etc*. Though the benefits
he speaks of are such as God extends to all men indiscriminately, it is
plain that he addresses more especially God’s people, who alone behold
his works in an enlightened manner, whereas stupidity and blindness of
mind deprive others of their understanding. Nor is his subject confined
to the common benefits of God, but the main thing which he celebrates is
his mercy, as shown to his chosen people. That the Church may address
itself to the praises of God with more alacrity, he states that this
kind of exercise is good, delightful, and pleasant, by which he
indirectly censures a sin which is all but universal of becoming wearied
at the very mention of God, and counting it our highest pleasure to
forget both God and ourselves, that we may give way to unrestrained
indulgence. To teach men to take a delight in this religious exercise,
the Psalmist reminds them that praise is *comely,* or *desirable.* For
the term <span id="xxxi.i-p5.1"></span>נאוה, *navah,* may be rendered
either way.

<span id="xxxi.i-p6"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p7"></span>**2.** *Jehovah building up,* *etc*. He
begins with the special mercy of God towards his Church and people, in
choosing to adopt one nation out of all others, and selecting a fixed
place where his name might be called upon. When he is here called the
builder of Jerusalem, the allusion is not so much to the outward form
and structure, as to the spiritual worship of God. It is a common figure
in treating of the Church to speak of it as a building or temple. The
meaning is, that the Church was not of human erection, but formed by the
supernatural power of God; for it was from no dignity of the place
itself that Jerusalem became the only habitation of God in our world,
nor did it come to this honor by counsel, industry, effort or power of
man, but because God was pleased to consecrate it to himself. He
employed the labor and instrumentality of men indeed in erecting his
sanctuary there, but this ought never to take from his grace, which
alone distinguished the holy city from all others. In calling God the
former and architect of the Church, his object is to make us aware that
by his power it remains in a firm condition, or is restored when in
ruins. Hence he infers that it is in his power and arbitrament to gather
those who have been dispersed. Here the Psalmist would comfort those
miserable exiles who had been scattered in various quarters, with the
hope of being recovered from their dispersion, as God had not adopted
them without a definite purpose into one body. As he had ordered his
temple and altar to be erected at Jerusalem, and had fixed his seat
there, the Psalmist would encourage the Jews who were exiles from their
native country, to entertain good hope of a return, intimating that it
was no less properly God’s work to raise up his Church when ruined and
fallen down, than to found it at first. It was not, therefore, the
Psalmist’s object directly to celebrate the free mercy of God in the
first institution of the Church, but to argue from its original, that
God would not suffer his Church altogether to fall, having once founded
it with the design of preserving it for ever; for he forsakes not the
work of his own hands. This comfort ought to be improved by ourselves at
the present period, when we see the Church on every side so miserably
rent asunder, leading us to hope that all the elect who have been
adjoined to Christ’s body, will be gathered unto the unity of the faith,
although now scattered like members torn from one another, and that the
mutilated body of the Church, which is daily distracted, will be
restored to its entireness; for God will not suffer his work to fail.

<span id="xxxi.i-p8"></span>In the following verse he insists upon the
same truth, the figure suggesting that though the Church labor under,
and be oppressed by many diseases, God will speedily and easily recover
it from all its wounds. The same truth, therefore, is evidently
conveyed, under a different form of expression — that the Church, though
it may not always be in a flourishing condition, is ever safe and
secure, and that God will miraculously heal it, as though it were a
diseased body.

<span id="xxxi.i-p9"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p10"></span>**4.** *Numbering the multitude,* *etc*. As
the gathering together of the people of whom the Psalmist spoke might
appear to be an impossibility, there seems some ground for the opinion
of those who think that he confirms it in this verse. The connection
they give to the Psalmist’s words is this — that as it is at least not
more difficult to gather men together who are outcast and scattered,
than to number the stars, there was no reason why the wandering exile
Israelites should despair of their return, provided they should resort
with one consent to God as their only head. There is some probability,
too, in the conjecture that the Psalmist may allude to that promise —

<span id="xxxi.i-p11"></span>“Look now towards the stars of heaven, if
thou canst tell them,  
so shall thy seed be.” (<span id="xxxi.i-p11.2"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)<span id="xxxi.i-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxxi.i-p12"></span>But as the Psalmist immediately afterwards
treats of the order of things in nature generally, the simplest
rendering, I think, is to understand this verse with reference to the
admirable work of God to be seen in the heavens, where we behold his
matchless wisdom, in regulating, without one degree of aberration, the
manifold, complex, winding courses of the stars. To each of them he
assigns its fixed and distinct office, and in all the multitude there is
no confusion. He therefore exclaims immediately — *Great is God, and
boundless, both in power and understanding.* We learn from this that
there cannot be greater folly than to make our judgment the measure of
God’s works, displaying in these, as he often does, his incomprehensible
power and wisdom.

<span id="xxxi.i-p13"></span><span id="xxxi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.i-p14"></span>**6.** *Raising up,* *etc*. The ascription
of this to God fitly tends to confirm our hope under affliction, and
prevent our souls from fainting under the cross. From this we may infer
that although our fathers who lived under the Law were more gently dealt
with, they knew something at least of that warfare with which God daily
exercises us, in order to make us seek our true rest elsewhere than in
this world. Should a doubt steal upon the minds of those who have been
brought under heavy afflictions, as to the forthcoming of that help
which God has promised to extend, let the truth recur to our
remembrance, that we are brought low that God may lift us up again. And
if upon seeing the prosperity of the wicked we are smitten and inflamed
with envy, let the words of the Psalmist come into our mind, That they
are lifted up that they may be cast down into destruction. When he
speaks of their being *cast down even to the earth,* there can be no
doubt that he passes an indirect censure upon their pride which leads
them to exalt themselves on high, as if they belonged to some superior
order of beings.

<span id="xxxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
147:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007)<span
id="xxxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Sing to Jehovah in thanksgiving,
sing psalms to our God upon the harp.  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) **8.** Who covereth the heavens with
clouds, prepareth rain for the earth, maketh grass to germinate on the
mountains.  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) **9.** Who giveth to
the cattle their food, to the young ones of the ravens which cry to him.
**10.** Not in the strength of the horse will he take pleasure, nor in
the legs of man will he delight. **11.** Jehovah delighteth in those who
fear him, who hope in his mercy.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p7"></span>**7.** *Sing to Jehovah in thanksgiving*
Again he exhorts to sing the praises of God, intimating at the same time
that abundant matter was not wanting, since new proofs still meet our
eyes of his power, goodness, and wisdom. First he tells us that *he
covers the heavens with clouds,* and this change would awaken our
attention, were we not chargeable with so much thoughtlessness. Various
as are the marvels to be seen in the heavens above us, were the same
serenity always to continue, we would not have so wonderful a display of
his power as when he suddenly veils them with clouds, withdrawing the
light of the sun, and setting a new face as it were upon the world. He
afterwards hints that in this way provision is made for all living
creatures, for thus the herbs germinate, and the earth is supplied with
the moisture which makes it fertile. Thus in connection with the proofs
of his power God sets before our eyes those of his mercy and fatherly
consideration for the human family; nay, he shows that he does not
overlook even the wild beasts and cattle. Philosophers discover the
origin of rain in the elements, and it is not denied that clouds are
formed from the gross vapors which are exhaled from the earth and sea,
but second causes should not prevent us from recognizing the providence
of God in furnishing the earth with the moisture needed for
fructification. As the earth chapped with heat shows its thirst by
opening its mouth, so God on his part in sending rain distills drink for
it. He might in other ways of a more secret kind give it strength to
preserve it from failing, but this irrigation is something which passes
before our eyes to image forth the continual care which he has over us.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p9"></span>**9.** *Who gives to the cattle their food*
By giving an instance he explains more clearly what he had said, of
God’s providing food for every living creature. When he speaks of the
cattle and the ravens being fed, and not of men, this is to give more
emphasis to his argument. We know that it was for man’s sake the world
was made at all, and endued with fertility and plenty; and in proportion
as we are nearer in the scale of existence to God, he shows us the more
of his goodness. But if he condescends to notice the brute creation, it
is plain that to us he will be a nurse and a father. For the same reason
he names *the ravens,* the most contemptible of all birds, to teach us
that the goodness of God extends to every part of the world. When he
says that their young *cry unto God,* he no doubt refers to their
natural cry, but hints at the same time that they own that they must be
in want unless God give them meat from heaven. As to the Jewish fable
that the ravens desert their young ones as soon as put forth, and that
worms are bred in the barks of the trees to feed them, this is one of
their customary stories, never scrupling as they do, nor being ashamed,
to invent anything, however unfounded, when a difficulty comes in the
way.  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) It is enough for us to
know that the whole system of nature is so regulated by God, that not
even the young ravens want their food, when with hoarse outcry they
confess that they are in need, and that they cannot have it supplied
except by God.

<span id="xxxi.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxxi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p12"></span>**10.** *Not in the strength of the
horse*, *etc*. After the Psalmist has shown that there is proof of the
divine goodness in every part of the world, he takes particular notice
that men have no strength but what is given them from above, and this he
adds with the express purpose of checking the pride by which almost all
men are inflamed, and which leads them to trust in their own strength.
The meaning of the passage is, that let man come in the preparation of
his own strength, and with all the assistance’s that seem to him most
prevalent, this will only issue in smoke and vanity; nay, that in
arrogating the very least to himself, this will only be a hindrance in
the way of the mercy of God, by which alone we stand. *The strength of
the horse* is mentioned by synecdoche to denote any kind of protection.
Not that God is displeased with those things in themselves considered
which he has given us as helps, but it is necessary that we be withdrawn
from a false confidence in them, for very commonly when any resource is
at hand, we are foolishly intoxicated and lifted up with pride. He
opposes the fear of God therefore to the strength both of men and of
horses, and places his hope in his mercy, intimating that it is highly
incumbent upon us to show our moderation in worshipping God with
reverence and holiness, and depending upon his grace. Hence we learn
that he only condemns that strength which would take from God the honor
due to him.

<span id="xxxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
147:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012)<span
id="xxxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p2"></span>**12.** Celebrate Jehovah, O Jerusalem!
praise thy God, O Zion! **13.** For he strengthens the bars of thy
gates, he blesses thy children in the midst of thee. **14.** Who maketh
thy borders peace; with the fatness of the corn he satifieth thee.

<span id="xxxi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxxi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *Celebrate Jehovah, O Jerusalem!*
Having spoken in general of the mercies of God, he again addresses his
discourse to the Lord’s people, who alone, as we have remarked already,
can appreciate them, calling upon them to recognize with thanksgiving
the blessings which others riot upon without acknowledgment. Under the
name of *Jerusalem,* he comprises the whole Church, for in that place
the faithful then held their religious assemblies, and flowed together
as it were to the standard of the Lord. Although he will take occasion
afterwards again to speak of the government of the world at large, he
here commemorates the goodness of God as manifested to his own people,
in protecting his own Church, bountifully cherishing it, enriching it
abundantly with all blessings, and preserving it in peace and safety
from all harm. When he says that *the bars of the gates are strengthened
by God,* he means that the holy city was perfectly guarded by him from
all fear of hostile attack. To the same effect is the other expression
which comes after — that *all its bounds were made peace* Enemies were
under divine restraint so as to cause no disturbance or confusions. Not
that the Church is always in a state of peace throughout its whole
extent, and exempt from attack, but that God in a visible manner
stretches forth his hand to repel these assaults, and it can securely
survey the whole array of its enemies. A more extensive meaning indeed
may be given to the term *peace*, which is often taken to signify a
happy and prosperous condition. But as mention is made of *bounds*, the
former sense seems most appropriate. The blessing of God enjoyed within
is next spoken of, consisting in this, that the citizens dwell
prosperously and happily in it, and are fed bountifully, even to
satiety; which does not mean that the children of God always wallow in
abundance. This might be the means of corrupting them, prone as our
nature is to wantonness; but it suggests that they recognize the
liberality of God in their daily food more clearly than others who want
faith, and whom either abundance renders blind, or poverty vexes with
deplorable anxiety, or covetousness inflames with a desire that never
can be satisfied. God’s paternal favor was shown more particularly to
our fathers under the law in the abundance of temporal provision, it
being necessary to lead them forward to something higher by what was
elementary.

<span id="xxxi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
147:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015)<span
id="xxxi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p2"></span>**15.** While he sends forth his word to
the earth, his word runneth very swiftly. **16.** Who giveth snow like
wool,  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) and scattereth the hoar
frost as ashes. **17.** He casteth forth his ice like morsels:  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) before his cold who can stand?  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) **18.** He shall send his word, and
shall melt them: his breath shall blow, the waters shall flow. **19.**
He announces his words to Jacob, his edicts and his judgments to Israel.
**20.** He hath not done so to every nation, and his judgments he hath
not showed them. Hallelujah.

<span id="xxxi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxxi.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxxi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p8"></span>**15.** *While he sends forth*, *etc*. He
again touches upon some instances of the operation of God, everywhere to
be seen in the system of nature. And as the changes which take place in
the air, and upon the earth, and which should be considered evidences of
his power, may perhaps be regarded by the world as the effect of chance,
the Psalmist, before proceeding to speak of the snow, hoar frost, and
ice, expressly declares, that earth is governed by his power and
control. The *sending forth of his word* is nothing else than the secret
influence by which he regulates and governs all things, for without his
orders and appointment no movement could take place among the elements,
nor could they be borne, now one way and now another, upon their own
spontaneous impulse without his foregoing secret decree. He says, that
*his word runneth quickly,* because, when once God has intimated his
will, all things concur to carry it into effect. If we do not hold fast
by this principle, however acutely we may investigate second causes, all
our perspicacity will come to nothing. It is thus that Aristotle, for
example, has shown such ingenuity upon the subject of meteors, that he
discusses their natural causes most exactly, while he omits the main
point of all, upon which the merest child, at least having any religion,
has the superiority over him. He must have little discernment who, in
the sudden snows and hoar-frosts, does not perceive how quickly the word
of God runs. If, then, we would avoid a senseless natural philosophy, we
must always start with this principle, that everything in nature depends
upon the will of God, and that the whole course of nature is only the
prompt carrying into effect of his orders. When the waters congeal, when
the hail spreads through the air, and hoar frosts darken the sky, surely
we have proof how effectual his word is. But if all these wonders
produce no effect upon most men, at least the piercing cold which
benumbs our bodies, should force us to recognize the power of God. When
the heat of the sun scorches us in summer, and again, upon the
succession of winter, all things are bound up, such a change as this,
which must have appeared incredible had we not been accustomed to it,
cries out loudly that there is a being who reigns above.

<span id="xxxi.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxxi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p10"></span>**19.** *He announces his words to Jacob,*
*etc*. Here it is another word that is spoken of than what was formerly
mentioned; for God speaks in a different way to the insensate works of
his hands, which he silently subordinates to his will by secret laws
impressed upon them, than he does to men who are endued with
understanding, for these he teaches with articulate language, that they
may obey him intelligently and with consent. Although the blessings
formerly mentioned are not to be depreciated, they fall far short of
this, that he has condescended to be the teacher of his chosen people,
by communicating to them that religious doctrine which is a treasure of
everlasting salvation. How little would it avail the Church that it were
filled with the perishing enjoyments of time, and protected from hostile
violence, did not its hope extend beyond this world. This, accordingly,
is the grand proof of his love, that he has set before us in his word
the light of eternal life. On this account it is appropriately mentioned
here as the crowning part of true solid happiness. And let us learn from
this, that we should not only receive the doctrine of God with
reverential and holy obedience, but embrace it with affection, for we
can conceive of nothing more delightful and desirable than that God
should undertake our salvation, and give testimony of this by stretching
out his hand to bring us to himself. For this is the design with which
the doctrine has been given to us, that amidst the thick darkness of
this world, and the devious errors into which Satan misleads the
children of men, the great Father of us all may by it cast a foregoing
light upon our path before gathering us to the inheritance of heaven. We
are to notice, that the part which was sustained by Moses and the
Prophets according to divine appointment is here ascribed to God
himself, for we only put due honor upon the doctrine of religion, and
estimate it at its proper worth when we rise to the consideration of
God, who, in using the instrumentality of men, still claims to be
considered our chief and only teacher. Thus its due majesty is assigned
to the word from the person of its author. Again, he enhances the mercy
shown by stating a comparison, intimating *that this had not been done
for other nations* For if it be asked why God preferred one people to
others, this pre-eminence will certainly lead us to gratuitous election
as its source, since we will find that the children of Israel did not
differ from others in any excellency attaching to themselves, but
because God passed by others and condescended to adopt them into his
favor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc12030.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi-p3"></span> In the Hebrew text, and in the Chaldee and
Vulgate versions, this Psalm is without a title, but in the Septuagint
it is assigned to the days of Haggai and Zephaniah, the title being —
<span id="xxxi-p3.1"></span>Αλλελουια Αγγαιου και Ζαχαριου; and this may
be regarded as a probable reference. In <span id="xxxi-p3.2"></span>[Ps
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)<span id="xxxi-p3.2"></span> and
<span id="xxxi-p3.3"></span>[Ps
147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013)<span id="xxxi-p3.3"></span>
there seems to be an allusion to the rebuilding of Jerusalem. Bishop
Horsley entitles it — “Thanksgiving of the returned captives. Perhaps
composed for a Pentecost or Feast of Trumpets, after the Restoration.”
“Eben Ezra, and other Jewish writers, think that it foretells the future
rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the restoration of the Jews from their
present captivity, and refer it to the times of Messiah.” — *Dr. Gill.*

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc12030.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p3"></span> The Hebrew word here is <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.1"></span>כנור, *kinnor.* It is uniformly translated
“harp” by Calvin, and also by the translators of our English Bible. But
as is supposed by Calmet and others, it more probably corresponded with
the *lyre* of Egypt, Greece, and Rome. In the Septuagint it is usually
either thrown into the Greek form <span id="xxxi.ii-p3.2"></span>κινυρα,
*cinyra,* or rendered <span id="xxxi.ii-p3.3"></span>κιθαρα, *cithara,*
one of the various names by which the principal varieties of the ancient
lyres were distinguished. And where these are not the words by which it
is rendered in that version, it is rendered by other names which the
Greeks gave to different forms of the lyre. From this it is evident that
the translators of the Greek version believed that <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.4"></span>כנור *kinnor,* denoted *the lyre,* although
from their translating it by different words, each signifying a
particular variety of that instrument, they were uncertain as to the
particular species of lyre. “The brief intimations in Scripture are in
full accordance with this statement; for it is not described as such an
instrument — large, heavy, and resting on the ground when played — as
the word ‘harp’ suggests to our minds; but as a light portable
instrument, which the player carried in his hand or on his arm, and
might walk or dance the while. In fact, Scripture describes the *kinnor*
as being used in such a manner and on such occasions as we know the lyre
to have been by the ancients, who indeed had not, so far as we know, any
harps large and resting on the ground like ours. We speak only of the
Greeks and Romans, however, for the Egyptians had large standing harps;
from which we shall in a future note take occasion to conclude that such
were also known to the Hebrews, while we retain our impression that the
lyre is denoted by the *kinnor*.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon the
Bible*. The *kinnor* is an instrument of the highest antiquity, being
one of those two invented by Jubal before the flood. <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.5"></span>[Ge 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021)<span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.5"></span>. It was used at an early period on festal
occasions, as appears from the next instance in which it is mentioned in
Scripture, six hundred years after the deluge, namely, in Laban’s words
to Jacob, as recorded in <span id="xxxi.ii-p3.6"></span>[Ge
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.6"></span>.
It was also used by the prophets in their sacred music, as we learn from
the next instance in which it is noticed — in the time of Samuel, <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.7"></span>[1Sa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.7"></span>.
The notes of the *kinnor* might be mournful, (<span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.8"></span>[Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.8"></span>;)
but they were also cheerful, (<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.9"></span>[Job
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#002)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.9"></span>;
<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.10"></span>[Job
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.10"></span>;
<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.11"></span>[1Sa
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.11"></span>;
<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.12"></span>[Ps
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)<span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.12"></span>.) This musical instrument was constructed of
wood, <span id="xxxi.ii-p3.13"></span>[1Ki
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#012)<span id="xxxi.ii-p3.13"></span>;
and it no doubt was to be found among the Hebrews of different forms and
power, and varying in the number of strings. The ancient lyres were
either played with the fingers, or struck with a *plectrum,* an
instrument which appears generally to have consisted of a piece of
ivory, polished wood, or metal, in the form of a quill.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc12030.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p3.14"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p4"></span> “After this clause the Vulgate, the
Septuagint, AEthiopic, Arabic, and Anglo-Saxon add, ‘and herb for the
service of man.’ It appears that a hemistich or half line has been lost
from the Hebrew text, which, according to the above version, must have
stood as in <span id="xxxi.ii-p4.1"></span>[Ps
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)<span
id="xxxi.ii-p4.1"></span>.” — *Dr. Adam Clarke.*

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc12030.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xxxi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxi.ii-p10.1"></span>Car
quant a la fable que les Juifs racontent, que les corbeaux laissent leur
petits si tost qu’ils sont esclos,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc12030.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xxxi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p3"></span> We learn from Chardin in a manuscript note
on this passage, as quoted by Harmer in his Observations, that towards
the Black Sea, in Iberia and Armenia, and therefore he imagines in other
countries also, “the snow falls in flakes as big as walnuts; but not
being either hard or very compact, it does no other harm than presently
to cover and overwhelm the traveller.” The inspired writer had probably
seen flakes of equal size on the mountains of Judea; and this would
suggest to his mind the strikingly appropriate figure, “He giveth his
snow like wool.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc12030.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xxxi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p4"></span> Walford translates, “He casteth down his
ice in hail-stones.” “The expression, ‘like morsels,’” says he, “is a
literal version of the Hebrew, but it gives so imperfect and obscure a
representation of the meaning, as to induce the substitution which is
here found. There can be no doubt but that hail is the thing intended:
in this the critics are unanimous. It is most likely that the Hebrew
term, which is translated ‘morsels,’ means small pieces of some
substance, which we cannot now determine.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc12030.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xxxi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxi.iv-p5"></span> “The cold is sometimes extremely severe
and even mortal in Palestine and the neighboring countries. Fulchirius
Carnotensis, as cited by Mr. Harmer, ‘saw the cold prove deadly to many.
Jacobus de Vitriaco informs us, that the same thing happened to many of
the poorer people, engaged in an expedition in which he himself was
concerned, against Mount Tabor: they had suffered severely the preceding
days by cold; but on the 24th of December it was so sharp that many of
the poor people, and of the beasts of burden, actually died. Albertus
Acquensis tells us the same thing happened to thirty of the people that
attended King Baldwin I., in the mountainous districts of Arabia by the
Dead Sea, where they had to conflict with horrible hail, with ice, and
unheard of snow and rain.’ These citations, as Harmer appositely
remarks, may remove our wonder at such passages as that here commented
on, in a hymn composed in those warmer climates.” — *Mant*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 148](cc12031)
