[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12026)  [Next](cc12028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p1"></span>PSALM 144

<span id="xxviii-p2"></span>This Psalm contains a mixture of praise trod
prayer; for David, while he extols in very high terms the great mercies
which God had bestowed upon him, is led at the same time, either from a
consideration of the many trials to be met with in the whole course of
human life, or from the connection he still had with wicked men, to pray
that God would continue to show this favor to the end. There is this
difference between it and <span id="xxviii-p2.1"></span>[Psalm
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000.md)<span id="xxviii-p2.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md) that the latter is triumphant
throughout, the kingdom having been thoroughly subdued, and affairs
going forward prosperously, whereas in the present he mixes up one or
two things which are indicative of fear and anxiety, there being some
remaining enemies to cause him apprehension.  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md)

<span id="xxviii-p5"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
144:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Blessed be Jehovah, my strength,
who teaches my hands for battle, my fingers for war. **2.** My goodness,
and my munition, my citadel, and my deliverer, my shield, and in him I
have hoped, who subdues my people under me. **3.** O Jehovah! what is
man that thou acknowledgest him? the son of man that thou thinkest of
him? **4.** Man is like to vanity: his deeds are as a shadow passing
away.

<span id="xxviii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Blessed be Jehovah, my strength*
 <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md) It is very evident that David,
since he celebrates the favor of God in such high terms, had not only
obtained the kingdom, but gained signal victories. When he calls God
*his strength*, he acknowledges that any courage he had was given him
from above, not only because he had been made from a country shepherd a
mighty warrior, but because the constancy and perseverance he had shown
was signally a gift from God. This term answers better than were we to
translate it rock; for, by way of explanation, he adds immediately
afterwards, that he had been formed under God’s teaching for war. The
words certainly imply an acknowledgment, that though of a warlike
spirit, he was not born for warlike enterprises but needed to undergo a
change. What kind of a commencement, for example, did he show in the
case of Goliah? That attempt would have been preposterous on any other
supposition than his being upheld by secret divine support, so as to be
independent of mere human help. (<span id="xxviii.i-p6.2"></span>[1Sa
17:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#040.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxviii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p8"></span>**2.** *My goodness*, *etc*. This way of
using the word in a passive sense, as in the Hebrew, sounds harsh in
Latin; just as elsewhere (<span id="xxviii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ps
18:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#050)<span id="xxviii.i-p8.1"></span>.md)
he calls himself “God’s king,” not in the sense of his having dominion
over God, but being made and appointed king by him. Having experienced
God’s kindness in so many ways, he calls him “his goodness,” meaning
that whatever good he possessed flowed from him. The accumulation of
terms, one upon another, which follows, may appear unnecessary, yet it
tends greatly to strengthen faith. We know how unstable men’s minds are,
and especially how soon faith wavers, when they are assailed by some
trial of more than usual severity. It is not enough, if God would
sustain us under such weakness, to promise us his help in individual or
single expressions; and, even however many aids he supplies us with, we
are subject to very great vacillations, and a forgetfulness of his mercy
creeps in upon us which almost overwhelms our minds. We are to remember
that it is not merely in token of his gratitude that David heaps
together so many terms in declaring the goodness of God, but to fortify
God’s people against all attacks of the world, and of the evil one. He
had a reason for reckoning it among the chiefest of God’s mercies, that
he controlled the people under his government. For <span
id="xxviii.i-p8.2"></span>עמי, *ami*, *my people*, some read, <span
id="xxviii.i-p8.3"></span>עמים, *amim*, *peoples*;  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md) and it is surprising they should
prefer such a forced rendering, as David means simply that the settled
state of the kingdom was owing not to any counsel, valor, or authority
of his own, but to God’s secret favor. The verb <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.12"></span>רדד, *radad*, is used appropriately,
signifying *to spread out*. The idea some have, that by a people spread
out is meant a people set down at ease in a prosperous and happy
condition, is farfetched. I have as great objections to the idea of
others, that he means a people laid prostrate, so as that they may be
trodden under foot; for a violent domination like this would not have
been desirable over the chosen people, and sacred inheritance of the
Lord. When a people yields a cordial and willing obedience to the laws,
all subordinating themselves to their own place peaceably, this signally
proves the divine blessing. And in such a settlement as this, where
there is no turbulence, nor confusion, the people are appropriately
represented, according to what we have said above, as being *spread
out*. David accordingly having ascribed the victories lie had gained
over foreign enemies to God, thanks him at the same time for the settled
state of the kingdom. Raised indeed as he was from an obscure station,
and exposed to hatred from calumnious charges, it was scarcely to have
been believed that he would ever obtain a peaceable reign. The people
had suddenly and beyond expectation submitted to him, and so surprising
a change was eminently God’s work.

<span id="xxviii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *O Jehovah! what is man*, *etc*.
He amplifies the goodness shown by God by instituting a comparison.
Having declared how singularly he had been dealt with, he turns his eyes
inward, and asks, “Who am I, that God should show me such condescension?
“He speaks of man in general; only the circumstance is noticeable that
he commends the mercy of God, by considering his lowly and abject
condition. In other places he mentions grounds of humiliation of a more
personal or private nature, — here he confines himself to what has
reference to our common nature; and though even in discussing the nature
of man there are other reasons he might have specified why he is
unworthy of the regard and love of God, he briefly adverts to his being
like the smoke, and as a *shadow.*  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md) We are left to infer that the riches
of the divine goodness are extended to objects altogether unworthy in
themselves. We are warned, when apt at any time to forget ourselves, and
think we are something when we are nothing, that the simple fact of the
shortness of our life should put down all arrogance and pride. The
Scriptures, in speaking of the frailty of man, comprehend whatever is
necessarily connected with it. And, indeed, if our life vanish in a
moment, what is there stable about us? We taught this truth also — that
we cannot properly estimate the divine goodness, unless we take into
consideration what we are as to our condition, as we can only ascribe to
God what is due unto him, by acknowledging that his goodness is bestowed
upon undeserving creatures. The reader may seek for further information
upon this point in the eighth Psalm, where nearly the same truth is
insisted upon.

<span id="xxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
144:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** O Jehovah! bow thy heavens,  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259.md) and descend:  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md) touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke. **6.** Thunder forth thunderings, and scatter them;  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md) shoot out thine arrows, and destroy
them. **7.** Send thy hand from above, rid me and deliver me out of
great waters, from the hand of the sons of the stranger. **8.** For
their mouth hath spoken falsehood; and their right hand is a right hand
of deceit.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *O Jehovah! bow thy heavens*.
After extolling, as was due, the great goodness of God, he requests him
to furnish such help for the preservation of the kingdom as was
necessary in the present exigency. As formerly we saw that he had
gloried in God with a heroical courage, so here he makes use of the same
lofty terms in his prayers, That he would bow the heavens — that he
would make the mountains to smoke — disturb the air with thunderings —
and shoot forth arrows; forms of speech by which, doubtless, he would
put away from him all the obstacles which stand between us and a
believing apprehension of the omnipotence of God, and from which we find
it so difficult to emerge. He employs almost the same phraseology in the
eighteenth Psalm, but it is in praising God for help already extended,
and to signify that he had been preserved from above in a wonderful and
unusual manner. For although such signs as he mentions might not always
occur when God interposed in his behalf, he had good ground to celebrate
what had happened to him of an unexpected kind, by reference to
extraordinary phenomena. In the passage before us his purpose is
different. Threatened by destruction of various kinds, which might
overwhelm his mind with despair, he would realize the wonderful power of
God, before which all obstacles of a worldly kind must necessarily give
way. We may be certain at least that he indulged in this figurative
phraseology for a good reason, that he might not confine deliverance to
human remedies; for nothing could be more preposterous at such a time
than to measure divine power by ordinary rules.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p10"></span>**7.** *Send thy hand*, etc. In one word
we are now made to see what was meant by the figures formerly used —
that in the absence of all earthly help, God would put forth his hand
from above, the greatness of the exigency making extraordinary help
necessary. Accordingly he compares his enemies to great and deep waters.
He calls them strangers, not in respect of generic origin, but character
and disposition. It were a mistake to refer the term to the
uncircumcision, for David rather animadverts upon degenerate Jews who
gloried in the flesh; and shortly afterwards he hints that he had to do
with internal foes rather than a foreign enemy, who would openly assault
him with violence and arms. By the right hand of falsehood some
understand rash attempts, which David hoped would be frustrated. Others
limit the phrase to the solemn ceremony of taking an oath, as if he said
they were perjured;  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md) while
others explain it as meaning that they not only lied with the tongue,
but executed wicked devices with the hand.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md) But as it was customary in making
promises to join hands, as Solomon says, (<span
id="xxviii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Pr
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p12.1"></span>; <span id="xxviii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Pr
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p12.2"></span>,) I have no doubt David’s reference here is
to false, treacherous, and perfidious persons. The two things go
naturally together in the verse — the lying tongue and the deceitful
hand, meaning upon the matter that nothing was to be looked for from any
of their promises, since it was only to deceive that they flattered with
their mouth and gave the hand.

<span id="xxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
144:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** O God! I will sing a new song to
thee: upon the nablum, upon the psaltery,  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) I will sing psalms to thee. **10.**
Giving salvation to kings, delivering David his servant from the hurtful
sword. **11.** Deliver me, and rescue me from the hand of the sons of
the stranger, whose mouth hath spoken falsehood, and their right hand is
a right hand of deceit.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p6"></span>**9.** *O God! I will sing a new song to
thee*. He again sets himself, with self-possession, to the exercise of
praising God, not doubting but he would continue those mercies which he
had once bestowed. I have taken notice in another place that by a *new
song* is meant one of a singular or uncommon kind; and we are left from
this to infer that David’s expectations stretched beyond the conclusions
of man’s judgment; for, with a view to the greatness of the help to be
extended, he promises a song of praise unprecedented in its nature, and
distinguished, by the title here applied to it, from ordinary
thanksgiving’s. As to the *nablum* and *psaltery*, I have elsewhere
observed that they formed part of that system of training under the law
to which the Church was subjected in its infancy. But the chief thing to
be noticed is the subject of his songs that God, who is the preserver of
kings, had kept — and even rescued from the sword — David, whom he had
made and anointed king by his authoritative decree. As to the idea of
there being implied in the term *kings* an opposition to the commonalty,
David meaning that not only the common class of people are indebted to
divine preservation, but the more influential, and such as appear to
have sufficient and abundant strength of their own, I question whether
it be well founded. His meaning seems to me rather to be different from
this, That while God preserves all men without exception, his care is
peculiarly extended to the maintenance of political order, which is the
foundation of the common safety of all. It is in effect as if he called
him the guardian and defender of kingdoms; for as the very mention of
government is an odious thing, and none willingly obeys another, and
nothing is more contrary to natural inclination than servitude, men
would seek to throw off the yoke, and subvert the thrones of kings, were
these not hedged round by a hidden divine presidency. David, however,
distinguishes himself from other kings, as elsewhere he is called “the
firstborn of kings,” (<span id="xxviii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p6.1"></span>;) at least he speaks of the goodness of God
as having been preeminently shown to him, representing himself as
holding the highest place, on account of the holy anointing which had
been more eminently bestowed upon him. As a title of distinction, he
claims the special name of *God’s servant*; for although all kings are
God’s servants, and Cyrus has the name applied to him by Isaiah
emphatically, (<span id="xxviii.iii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p6.2"></span>,) yet as no heathen prince ever recognized
himself as called of God, and David alone of all others in the world was
invested with legitimate authority, and had a warrant to reign which
faith could rest upon with certainty, it was not without reason that
this mark of distinction is applied to him. By *the hurtful sword*, are
doubtless meant all the dangers he had passed through for a series of
years, which were such that he might be truly said to have come to the
throne by deaths oft, and to have been settled upon the throne in the
midst of them.

<span id="xxviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
144:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012.md)<span
id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Because our sons are as plants
which have grown up in their youth, our daughters as corners polished
after the similitude of a palace.  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265.md) **13.** Our recesses \[or corners\]
full, going out,  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md) from kind to
kind; our sheep brining forth to thousands, to ten thousands,  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md) in our streets.  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) **14.** Our oxen accustomed  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) to the burden, no breach, nor going
out, nor cry in our streets. **15.** Happy the people to whom it is so!
happy the people whose God is Jehovah!

<span id="xxviii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p10"></span>**12.** *Because our sons*, *etc*. These
three concluding verses some consider as being a wish or a prayer.
 <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) Others think that David
congratulates himself, and all the people, that through the divine
blessing every species of mercy was showered down prosperously upon
them. I have no doubt that David commemorates, by way of thanksgiving,
the liberality which God had shown to his people. But it consists very
well with this, to suppose that he prays at the same time for the
continuance or preservation of those divine benefits which must
well-nigh be cut off altogether by wicked men and domestic foes, unless
God should interpose, in the troubles and confusions which prevailed.
The end he has in view therefore is, that God would not suffer the
signal blessings with which he had loaded his people to fail and depart.
He begins by making mention of the children, comparing the male portion
of them, by way of commendation of their excellency, *to plants which
have grown up in their youth*; for trees rarely come to any height if
they do not grow large early, and when yet tender. He speaks of the
girls as being like *corners skillfully and ingeniously cut out*, to
make the building beautiful; as if he would say that they adorned the
house by their comeliness and elegance. It is not surprising that he
should reckon a noble and well trained offspring to be the very first of
God’s earthly blessings, a point of which I have spoken elsewhere more
at large. As David speaks in the name of the whole people, and of his
own condition as mixed up with that of the community, we may infer from
this that he was not exclusively occupied with his own private
interests.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p13"></span>**13.** *Our recesses full*, *etc*. Some
read *storehouses*,  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) and I would
not reject this meaning. But as the word comes from the same root with
<span id="xxviii.iv-p14.3"></span>זוה, *zavah*, which is rendered corner
in the previous verse, it seems more agreeable to the etymology to
translate the words as I have done — “that the recesses or corners were
full.” The participle <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.4"></span>מפיקים,
*mephikim*, some take transitively, and read *producing*, but the
meaning comes to the same thing, that abundance of every blessing flowed
from all the corners, expression <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.5"></span>מזן
אל-זן, *mizan el-zan*,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md) seems to
me to denote the variety and manifold nature of the blessings, rather
than, as some interpreters think, so abundant a produce as would issue
in the different species being mixed, and forming a confused heap owing
to the unmanageable plenty. We have no need to have recourse to this
strained hyperbole, and the words as they stand evidently do not favor
that sense, for had a confused heap been meant, it would have read
simply <span id="xxviii.iv-p15.1"></span>זן זן, *zan*. The meaning in
short is, that there prevailed amongst the people such plenty, not only
of wheat, but all kinds of produce, that every corner was filled to
sufficiency with every variety.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p16"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p17"></span>**14.** *Our oxen*, *etc*. The Hebrew
word <span id="xxviii.iv-p17.1"></span>סבל, *sabal*, is properly to
carry. Accordingly some understand <span
id="xxviii.iv-p17.2"></span>מסובלים, *mesubbalim*, to mean robust,
 <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) as unless they were strong oxen
they would not be fit for carriage, or bearing burdens. Others think
they are spoken of as laden with fat. There is no need for insisting
upon this point, as it does not affect the main scope of the passage. It
may be more important to notice, that God’s fatherly care of his people
is celebrated on the account that he condescends to attend to every the
smallest matter which concerns their advantage. As in the verse before
he had ascribed the fruitfulness of the herds and flocks to God’s
goodness, so now the fattening of their oxen, to show that there is
nothing relating to us here which he overlooks. As it would signify
little to have abundance of everything unless we could enjoy it, he
takes notice of it as another part of the Lord’s kindness that the
people were peaceable and quiet. By *breach* I have no doubt that he
alludes to hostile incursions, that there was no enemy to break in upon
them through demolished gates or walls. By *goings out* it is surprising
that any should understand exile, that the people were not torn away
from the bounds of their native country. All he means simply is, in my
opinion, that there was no necessity of sallying out to repel an enemy,
none offering violence or molestation. To the same effect is the
expression, as to any crying in the streets, the effect of a sudden
tumult. The meaning is, accordingly, that there was no disturbance in
the cities, because God kept enemies at a distance.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p20"></span>**15.** *Happy the people*, *etc*. He
thus concludes that the divine favor had been sufficiently shown and
manifested to his people. Should any object that it breathed altogether
a gross and worldly spirit to estimate man’s happiness by benefits of a
transitory description, I would say in reply that we must read the two
things in connection, that those are happy who recognize the favor of
God in the abundance they enjoy, and have such a sense of it from these
transitory blessings as leads them through a persuasion of his fatherly
love to aspire after the true inheritance. There is no impropriety in
calling those happy whom God blesses in this world, provided they do not
show themselves blinded in the improvement and use which they make of
their mercies, or foolishly and supinely overlook the author of them.
The kind providence of God in not suffering us to want any of the means
of life is surely a striking illustration of his wonderful love. What
more desirable than to be the objects of God’s care, especially if we
have sufficient understanding to conclude from the liberality with which
he supports us he is our Father? For everything is to be viewed with a
reference to this point. Better it were at once to perish for want than
have a mere brute satisfaction, and forget the main thing of all, that
they and they only are happy whom God has chosen for his people. We are
to observe this, that while God in giving us meat and drink admits us to
the enjoyment of a certain measure of happiness, it does not follow that
those believers are miserable who struggle through life in want and
poverty, for this want, whatever it be, God can counterbalance by better
consolations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc12027.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p3"></span> The ideas and the phraseology of a
considerable part of this Psalm appear to be borrowed from the
eighteenth.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc12027.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p4"></span> The occasion on which this Psalm was
written can only be conjectured. The Septuagint, Vulgate, Aethiopic, and
Arabic versions entitle it “A Psalm of David against Goliah;” and that
the Chaldee paraphrast took this to be the subject of the Psalm is
evident from his reading in verse 10th, “the sword of Goliah.” Judging,
however, from internal evidence, the enemies referred to seem rather to
be those of David and his kingdom, after he ascended the throne. Some
refer the Psalm to David’s war with the Ammonites and Syrians, recorded
in <span id="xxviii-p4.1"></span>[2Sa
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#000.md)<span id="xxviii-p4.1"></span>; and
it may have been composed by him when about to encounter these hostile
powers.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc12027.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p6.1"></span>Ou, mon
rocher.” — *Fr.* *marg*. “Or, my rock.”

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc12027.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p9"></span> Those who conjecture that <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.1"></span>עמים, *amim*, is the correct reading, refer to
the parallel passage in <span id="xxviii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps
18:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#047.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p9.2"></span>,
where the word is in the plural. They also observe in support of their
opinion, that this reading is actually found in a great number of MSS.
examined by Kennieott and De Rossi; and they account for <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.3"></span>עמי, *ami*, having got into the text by
supposing that it was written in the first instance as a contraction for
<span id="xxviii.i-p9.4"></span>עמים, *amim*. Rosenmuller supposes, but
with less probability, that the original word was <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.5"></span>עם, and that the letter <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.6"></span>י, *yod*, is paragogic, that is, has been
annexed to improve the sound; <span id="xxviii.i-p9.7"></span>עם, *am*,
being taken collectively. The Masorets have noticed that <span
id="xxviii.i-p9.8"></span>עם, which the translators of our English Bible
took to be <span id="xxviii.i-p9.9"></span>עם, with its possessive affix
here, in <span id="xxviii.i-p9.10"></span>[2Sa
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044.md)<span
id="xxviii.i-p9.10"></span>, and <span id="xxviii.i-p9.11"></span>[La
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014.md)<span id="xxviii.i-p9.11"></span>,
and consequently rendered by *my people*, is to be taken as the plural
number of that noun.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc12027.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="xxviii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p12.1"></span>Et
mesmes combion qu’en espluchant la nature des hommes il eust peu toucher
d’autres choses, pour lesquelles ils sont indignes. — neantmoins,” etc.
— *Fr.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc12027.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p3"></span> “*Bow thy heavens*. This expression is
derived from the appearance of the clouds during a tempest: they hang
low, so as to obscure the hills and mountains, and seem to mingle heaven
and earth together. Such an appearance is figuratively used to depict
the coming of God, to execute vengeance upon the enemies of his people.
See <span id="xxviii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p3.1"></span>, and other instances.” — *Walford*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc12027.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p4"></span> The verbs in this and the two following
verses are in the imperative mood, whereas in the corresponding passages
in the eighteenth Psalm they are in the past tense. This difference is
best accounted for by supposing, with Calvin, that these verses are the
language of prayer, uttered by David in a time of threatened danger from
the enemies of his kingdom and people; whilst those of the eighteenth
Psalm were spoken after some signal deliverance or deliverances had been
vouchsafed.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc12027.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p5"></span> “Scatter them. The antecedent of ‘them’
is ‘peoples’ in verse second.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc12027.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p11"></span> “In taking an oath the right hand was
lifted up. The enemies of David profaned their oaths by violating the
covenants into which they entered, and breaking their solemn
engagements.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc12027.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p12"></span> “The meaning is, the hands with which
they confirm their treaties of peace and leagues of friendship are
immediately lifted up against the lives and liberties of their allies.”
— *Warner*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc12027.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p3"></span> In the French version it is — “Upon the
psaltery, and upon an instrument of ten strings.” It is evident that
Calvin supposed two instruments to be here mentioned. This, however, has
been doubted. The rendering in the Hebrew text is — <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.1"></span>בנבל עשור, *benebel asor*, “with a nobel (or
psaltery, as the term is translated in our English Bible) ten
(*stringed*).” Thus only one musical instrument may be indicated — “the
psaltery of. ten strings.” In <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.2"></span>[Ps
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.2"></span>, we read similarly, <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.3"></span>בנבל עשור, *benebel asor*, “with the
psaltery ten (*stringed*).” In <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.4"></span>[Ps
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.4"></span>, however, nebel and *asor* are represented
as two distinct musical instruments. We there read, <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.5"></span>עליא-עשור ועלי-נבל, *ale-asor veale-nabel*,
“upon the *asor* or *ten* (*stringed instrument*), and upon the nebel
*or* psaltery.” But whatever inference may be drawn from the independent
exhibition of *asor* in that text, yet in the passage before us, and in
<span id="xxviii.iii-p3.6"></span>[Ps
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.6"></span>, if we may judge from the construction, it
seems rather to represent the number of strings of the common nebel or
psaltery, or a particular variety of that instrument, than to be a
distinct musical instrument. With respect to the Hebrew nebel from which
comes the <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.7"></span>ναβλος; of the Greeks, and
the <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.8"></span>*nablum* of the Latins, our
information is very limited and indistinct. It is supposed to have been
a stringed instrument of the harp or lyre kind, and appears to have been
of the triangular form. As it is not noticed in Scripture earlier than
the days of David, it is not considered of equal antiquity with some
other musical instruments. It was formed of precious wood, as we learn
from <span id="xxviii.iii-p3.9"></span>[1Ki
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#012.md)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.9"></span>, and ultimately, according to Josephus, of
that species of precious mixed metal called *electrum*. From its being
never mentioned in the Sacred Writings, except in connection with the
worship of the sanctuary, it has been conjectured that it was not used
in private, and that it was probably larger, and more costly, than other
instruments of a similar kind. Josephus says that it was played upon
with the fingers, and had twelve strings. The number of strings may,
however, have varied according to circumstances.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc12027.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p3"></span> “The paraphrase of Bishop Patrick,
doubtless, conveys the real meaning: ‘Tall and beautiful, like those
polished pillars which are the ornaments of a palace.’” — *Illustrated*
*Commentary upon the Bible*. “*The polished corners of the Temple* —
rather*, the sculptured angles*, the ornament of a palace. Great care
and much ornament were bestowed by the ancients upon the angles of their
splendid edifices. It is remarkable that the Greeks made use of
pilasters, called Caryatides, (carved after the figure of a woman
dressed in long robes,) to support the entablatures of their buildings.”
— Cresswell.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc12027.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iv-p4.1"></span>Ou,
produisans, fournissans.” — *Fr*, *marg*. “Or, producing, providing.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc12027.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p5"></span> In the East sheep are remarkably
fruitful, bringing forth, as Boehart shows, not only two at a time,
(<span id="xxviii.iv-p5.1"></span>[So
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)<span id="xxviii.iv-p5.1"></span>,.md)
but sometimes three or four, and that twice a year. This accounts for
the prodigious number of sheep which whitened the extensive pastures of
Syria and Canaan. See <span id="xxviii.iv-p5.2"></span>[2 Kings
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004.md), [1 Chr.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#021.md), [2 Chr.
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007.md)<span id="xxviii.iv-p5.2"></span>;
<span id="xxviii.iv-p5.3"></span>[Psalm
65:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#014.md)<span id="xxviii.iv-p5.3"></span>
\[*sic*\].

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc12027.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p6"></span> “*In our streets*. Streets are not
proper places for sheep. The word <span
id="xxviii.iv-p6.1"></span>חוצות, *chutzoth*, is different from that
properly rendered ‘streets’ in the ensuing verse, and is the same that
is translated ‘fields’ in <span id="xxviii.iv-p6.2"></span>[Job
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010.md)<span id="xxviii.iv-p6.2"></span>.
The word literally means ‘outplaces,’ and as such is susceptible of
various applications; in the present text it probably denotes the
outpastures in the commons and deserts.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon
the Bible*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc12027.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iv-p7.1"></span>Ou,
gras.” — *Fr. marg*. “Or, fat.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc12027.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p11"></span> “Grant that our sons may be as plants,”
etc. Such is the view taken by the Translators of the English Bible.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc12027.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p14"></span> <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.1"></span>מזוינו, *Our garners*. This word is to be
found in Scripture only once, but it has most probably the same root as
<span id="xxviii.iv-p14.2"></span>זוית, and it may denote primarily *our
corners*, and then our *garners*; because garners or storehouses were
usually at the ends or corners of edifices.” — *Phillips*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc12027.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.6"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p15"></span> Literally, “from kind to kind.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc12027.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p18"></span> <span
id="xxviii.iv-p18.1"></span>מסבלים, *burdened*, viz. with flesh,
according to Pagninus, who has *onusti carne*. The root is <span
id="xxviii.iv-p18.2"></span>סכל, and the form is the pual participle,
which occurs only in this place. Compensis has paraphrased it: <span
id="xxviii.iv-p18.3"></span>santi et ferendis *oneribus apti*. Perhaps
burdened oxen may be a phrase equivalent to our *beasts of burden* such
as are strong and adapted to carry burdens; and here the prayer of the
Psalmist is, that they may be *eminently* fitted for this service.” —
*Phillips*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 145](cc12028.md)
