[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12012)  [Next](cc12014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>PSALM 130

<span id="xiv-p2"></span>Whether the Prophet in this Psalm prays in his
own name in particular, or represents the whole Church, it is manifest,
that finding himself overwhelmed with adversities, he supplicates
deliverance with passionate ardor. And while acknowledging that he is
justly chastised by the hand of God, he encourages himself and all
genuine believers to cherish good hope, since God is the everlasting
deliverer of his people, and has always in readiness the means of
effecting their rescue from death.

<span id="xiv-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
130:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Out of the deep places have I cried to
thee, O Jehovah **2.** O Lord hear voice; let thine ears be attentive to
the voice of my prayers **3.** If thou, O God shouldst mark iniquities,
O Lord who shall stand? **4.** But with thee there is forgiveness that
thou mayest be feared.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Out of the deep places have I cried
to thee, O Jehovah!* It is to be noticed that the Prophet speaks of
himself as sending forth his voice, as it were from out of a deep gulf,
 <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) feeling himself overwhelmed
with calamities. As the miseries to which there is no prospect of a
termination commonly bring despair in their train, nothing is more
difficult than for persons, when involved in grievous and deep sorrow,
to stir up their minds to the exercise of prayer. And it is wonderful,
considering that whilst we enjoy peace and prosperity we are cold in
prayer, (because then our hearts are in a state of infatuated security,
how in adversities, which ought to quicken us, we are still more
stupefied. But the Prophet derives confidence in coming to the time one
of grace from the very troubles, cares, dangers and sorrow into which he
was plunged. He expresses his perplexity and the earnestness of his
desire both by the word cry, and by the repetition continued in the
second verse. So much the more detestable then is the barbarous
ignorance of the Papist’s, in shamefully profaning this Psalm by
wresting; it to a purpose wholly foreign to its genuine application. To
what intent do they mumble it over for the dead, if it; is not that, in
consequence of Satan having bewitched them, they may by their profanity
extinguish a doctrine of singular utility? From the time that this Psalm
was, by, a forced interpretation, applied to the souls of the dead, it
is very generally believed to be of no use whatever to the living, and
thus the world has lost an inestimable treasure.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span><span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**3.** *If thou, O God! shoudst mark
iniquities*  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) Here the Prophet
acknowledges that although grievously afflicted he had justly deserved
such punishment, as had been inflicted upon him. As by his own example
he gives a rule which the whole Church ought to observe, let no man
presume to intrude himself into the presence of *God,* but in the way of
humbly deprecating his wrath; and especially when God exercises severity
in his dealings towards us, let us know that we are required to make the
same confession which is here uttered. Whoever either flatters himself
or buries his sins by inattention to them, deserves to pine away in his
miseries; at least he is unworthy of obtaining from God the smallest
alleviation. Whenever God then exhibits the tokens of his wrath, let
even the man who seems to others to be the holies of all his fellows,
descend to make this confession, that should God determine to deal with
us according to the strict demands of his law, and to summon us before
his tribunal, not one of the whole human race would be able to stand. We
grant that it is one man only who here prays, but he at once pronounces
sentence upon the whole human race. “All the children of Adam,” he
substantially says, “from the first to the last, are lost and condemned,
should God require them to render up an account of their life.” It is
therefore necessary that even the holiest of men should pass under this
condemnation, that they may betake themselves to the mercy of God as
their only refuge. The Prophet does not however mean to extenuate his
own fault by thus involving others with himself, as we see hypocrites
do, who when they dare not altogether justify themselves, resort to this
subterfuge, “Am I the first or the only man who has offended?” and thus,
mingling themselves with a multitude of others, they think themselves
half absolved from their guilt. But the Prophet, instead of seeking to
shelter himself under such a subterfuge, rather confesses, after having
thoroughly examined himself, that if of the whole human race not even
one can escape eternal perdition, this instead of lessening rather
increased his obnoxiousness to punishment. Whoever, as if he had said,
shall come into the presence of God, whatever may be his eminence for
sanctity, he must succumb and stand confounded,  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) what then will be the case as to me,
who am not one of the best? The right application of this doctrine is,
for every man to examine in good earnest his own life by the perfection
which is enjoined upon us in the law. In this way he will be forced to
confess that all men without exception have deserved everlasting
damnation; and each will acknowledge in respect to himself that he is a
thousand times undone. Farther, this passage teaches us that, since no
man can stand by his own works, all such as are accounted righteous
before God, are righteous in consequence of the pardon and remission of
their sins. In no other manner can any man be righteous in the sight of
God. Very differently do the Papists think. They indeed confess that the
deficiencies of our works are supplied by the lenity which God exercises
towards us; but at the same time they dream of a partial righteousness,
on the ground of which men may stand before God. In entertaining such an
idea they go very far astray from the sense of the Prophet, as will
appear more plainly from the sequel.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**4.** *But with thee there is forgiveness.*
This verse leads us farther. Though all men confess with the mouth that
there is no human being in the world whom God may not justly adjudge to
everlasting death, should it so please him, yet how few are persuaded of
the truth which the Prophet now adds, that the grace of which they stand
in need shall not be denied them? They either sleep in their sins
through stupidity, or fluctuate amidst a variety of doubts, and, at
length, are overwhelmed with despair. This maxim, “that no man is free
from sin,” is, as I have said, received among all men without dispute,
and yet the majority shut their eyes to their own faults, and settle
securely in hiding ­ places to which, in their ignorance, they have
betaken themselves, if they are not forcibly roused out of them, and
then, when pursued close by the judgments of God, they are overwhelmed
with alarm, or so greatly tormented as to fall into despair. The
consequence of this want of hope in men, that God will be favorable to
them, is an indifference about coming into the Divine presence to
supplicate for pardon. When a man is awakened with a lively sense of the
judgment of God, lie cannot fail to be humbled with shame and fear. Such
self-dissatisfaction would not however suffice, unless at the same time
there were added faith, whose office it is to raise up the hearts which
were cast down with fear, and to encourage them to pray for forgiveness.
David then acted as he ought to have done when, in order to his
attaining genuine repentance, he first summons himself before God’s
judgment seat; but, to preserve his confidence from failing under the
overpowering influence of fear, he presently adds the hope which there
was of obtaining pardon. It is, indeed, a matter which comes under our
daily observation, that those who proceed not beyond the step of
thinking themselves deserving of endless death, rush, like frenzied men,
with great impetuosity against God. The better, therefore, to confirm
himself and others, the Prophet declares that God’s mercy cannot be
separated or torn away from himself. “As soon as I think upon thee,” he
says in amount, “thy clemency also presents itself to my mind, so that I
have no doubt that thou wilt be merciful to me, it being impossible for
thee to divest thyself of thy own nature: the very fact that thou art
God is to me a sure guarantee that thou wilt be merciful ” At the same
time let it be understood, that he does not here speak of a confused
knowledge of the grace of God, but of such a knowledge of it as enables
the sinner to conclude with certainty, that as soon as he seeks God he
shall find him ready to be reconciled towards him. It is not therefore
surprising that among the Papists there is no steady calling upon God,
when we consider that, in consequence of their mingling their own
merits, satisfactions, and worthy preparation ­ as they term it ­ with
the grace of God, they continue always in suspense and doubt respecting
their reconciliation with God. Thus it comes to pass, that by praying
they only augment their own sorrows and torments, just as if a man
should lay wood upon a fire already kindled. Whoever would reap profit
from the exercise of prayer, must necessarily begin with free remission
of sins. It is also proper to mark the final cause ­ as we say ­ for
which God is inclined to forgive, and never comes forward without
showing himself easy to be pacified towards those who serve him; which
is the absolute necessity of this hope of obtaining forgiveness, to the
existence of piety, and the worship of God in the world. This is another
principle of which the Papists are ignorant. They, indeed, make long
sermons  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) about the fear of God,
but, by keeping poor souls in perplexity and doubt, they build without a
foundation. The first step to the right serving of God unquestionably
is, to submit ourselves to him willingly and with a free heart. The
doctrine which Paul teaches concerning alms-deeds, <span
id="xiv.i-p13.3"></span>[2Co 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p13.3"></span>, that “God loveth a cheerful giver,” is to be
extended to all parts of the life. How is it possible for any man to
offer himself cheerfully to God unless he rely upon his grace, and be
certainly persuaded that the obedience lie yields is pleasing to him?
When this is not the case all men will rather shun God, and be afraid to
appear in his presence, and if they do not altogether turn their back
upon him, they will catch at subterfuges. In short, the sense of God’s
judgment, unless conjoined with the hope of forgiveness, strikes men
with terror, which must necessarily engender hatred. It is no doubt
true, that the sinner, who, alarmed at the Divine threatenings, is
tormented in himself, does not. despise God, but yet lie shuns him; and
this shunning of him is downright apostasy and rebellion. Whence it
follows, that men never serve God aright unless they know that he is a
gracious and merciful being. The other reason to which I have adverted
must also be remembered, which is, that unless we are assured that what
we offer to God is acceptable to him, we will be seized with indolence
and stupidity which will keep us from doing our duty. Although
unbelievers often show a great deal of earnestness, just as we see the
Papists laboriously occupied with their superstitions, yet, from their
not being persuaded that God is reconciled to them, they do not all the
while render to him any voluntary obedience. Were they not held back by
a slavish fear, the horrible rebellion of their heart, which this fear
keeps hidden and suppressed, would soon manifest itself externally.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
130:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** I have waited for Jehovah, my soul
hath waited; and I have hoped in his word. **6.** My soul hath waited
for the Lord before the watchers of the morning, idea, before the
watchers of the mourning.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**5.** *I have waited for Jehovah.* After
having testified in general that God is ready to show mercy to poor
sinners who betake themselves to him, the Psalmist concludes that he is
thereby encouraged to entertain good hope. The past tense in the verbs
*wait* and *trust* is put for the present*. I have waited* for *I wait;
I have hoped* for *I hope.* The repetition occurring in the first part
of the verse is emphatic; and the word *soul* gives additional emphasis,
implying, as it does, that the Prophet trusted in God even with the
deepest affections of his heart. From this we also gather that he was
not only patient and constant in the sight. of men, but that even in the
inward feelings of his heart he had maintained quietness and patience
before God; which is a very evident proof of faith. Many, no doubt, are
restrained by vain glory from openly murmuring against God or betraying
their distrust, but there is hardly one in ten who, when removed from
the inspection of his fellow-men, and in his own heart, waits for God
with a quiet mind. The Psalmist adds, in the concluding clause, that
what supported his patience was the confidence which he reposed in the
divine promises. Were these promises taken away, the grace of God would
necessarily vanish from our sight, and thus our hearts would fail and be
overwhelmed with despair. Besides, he teaches us, that our being
contented with the word of God alone affords a genuine proof of our
hope. When a man, embracing the word, becomes assured of having his
welfare attended to by God, this assurance will be the mother of waiting
or patience. Although the Prophet here speaks to himself for the purpose
of confirming his faith, yet there is no doubt that he suggests to all
the children of God like matter of confidence in reference to
themselves. In the first place he sets before them the word, that they
may depend entirely upon it; and next he warns them that faith is vain
and ineffectual unless it frame us to patience.

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**6.** *My soul hath waited for the Lord
before the watchers of the morning.* In this verse he expresses both the
ardor and the perseverance of his desire. In saying that he anticipated
the watchmen, he shows by this similitude with what diligence and
alacrity he breathed after God. And the repetition is a proof of his
perseverance; for there is no doubt that thereby he intended to express
an uninterrnitted continuance of the same course, and consequently
perseverance. Both these qualities in his exercise, are worthy of
attention; for it is too manifest how slow and cold we are in elevating
our minds to God, and also how easily we are shaken and even fall at
every little blast of wind. Farther, as the watches of the night were in
ancient times usually divided into four parts, this passage may be
explained as implying that as the watchmen of the night, who keep watch
by turns, are careful in looking when the morning will dawn, so the
Prophet looked to God with the greatest attention of mind. But the more
natural sense seems to be, that as in the morning the warders of the
gates are more wakeful than all other people, and are the earliest in
rising, that they may appear at the posts assigned them, so the mind of
the Prophet hastened with all speed to seek God. The repetition, as I
have already observed:, shows that he stood keeping his gaze
perseveringly fixed upon its object. We must always beware of allowing
our fervor to languish through the weariness of delay, should the Lord
for any length of time keep us in suspense.  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md)

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
130:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007.md)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**7.** But let Israel hope in Jehovah; for
with Jehovah there is mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption.
**8.** And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md)

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span>**7.** *But let Israel hope in Jehovah.*
After having spoken of himself, and exhibited in his own person an
example for all to follow, he now applies the doctrine to the whole body
of the Church. It is to be noticed that the foundation upon which he
would have the hope of all the godly to rest is the mercy of God, the
source from which redemption springs. In the first clause he reminds
them that although they bring with them no worth or merits of their own,
it ought to suffice them that God is merciful. This mutual relation
between the faith of the Church and the free goodness of God is to be
attentively marked, to the end we may know that all those who, depending
upon their own merits, persuade themselves that God will be their
rewarder, have not their hope regulated according to the rule of
Scripture. From this mercy, as from a fountain, the Prophet derives
redemption; for there is no other cause which moves God to manifest
himself as the redeemer of his people but his mercy. He describes this
redemption as *plenteous,* that the faithful, even when reduced to the
last extremity, may sustain themselves from the consideration that there
are in the hand of God many and incredible means by which to save them.
This Psalm may have been composed at a time when the Church was in so
very afflicted a condition as might have discouraged one and all, had
not the infinite greatness of the power of God served as a buckler to
defend them. The true use of the present doctrine is, first, that the
faithful, even when plunged in the deepest gulfs, should not doubt of
their deliverance being in the hand of God, who, whenever necessity
shall require, will be able to find means, which are now hidden and
unknown to us; and, secondly, that they should hold it as certain, that
as often as the Church shall be afflicted he will manifest himself to be
her deliverer. To this truth the sentence immediately following refers.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>**8.** *And he shall redeem Israel from all
his iniquities.* Here the Psalmist applies more closely to the Church
what he has said in the preceding verse. He concludes that it is not to
be doubted that God, who has it in his power to save by multiplied
means, will prove himself the deliverer of the people whom he has
chosen. By these words he teaches us, that when we have evidence of our
being adopted by God, we ought also to regard our salvation as certain.
His meaning might be explained more familiarly in this way: As to redeem
is the continual office of God, and as he is not the redeemer of all men
indiscriminately, but only of his chosen people, there is no reason for
apprehending that the faithful will not emerge from all calamities; for
were it otherwise, God would cease to execute the office which he claims
to himself. He repeats the sentiment of the preceding verse, that,
provided Israel with all humility draw near to God to plead for pardon,
his sins will not be an obstacle in the way of God’s showing himself his
redeemer. Although the Hebrew word, <span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>עון*,
avon,* is often put for the punishment of sin, yet it also contains a
tacit reference to the fault. Whenever, then, God promises a mitigation
of the punishment, he at the same time gives assurance that he will
pardon the sins; or rather in offering to sinners a gratuitious
reconciliation, he promises them forgiveness. According to this
exposition it is here said that he will redeem his Church, not from the
captivity of Babylon, or from the tyranny and oppression of enemies, or
from penury, or, in short, from any other disasters but from sin; for
until God pardon the sins of the men whom he afflicts, deliverance is
not to be hoped for. Let us then learn from this passage in what way we
are to expect deliverance from all calamities, or the order which it
becomes us to observe in seeking it. Remission of sins always goes
first, without which nothing will come to a favorable issue. Those who
only desire to shake off the punishment are like silly invalids, who are
careless about the disease itself with which they are afflicted,
provided the symptoms which occasion them trouble for a time are
removed. In order, then, that God may deliver us from our miseries, we
must chiefly endeavor to be brought to a state of favor with him by
obtaining the remission of our sins. If this is not obtained, it will
avail us little to have the temporal punishment remitted; for that often
happens even to the reprobate themselves. This is true and substantial
deliverance, when God, by blotting out our sins, shows himself merciful
towards us. Whence, also, we gather, that having once obtained
forgiveness, we have no reason to be afraid of our being excluded from
free access to, and from enjoying the ready exercise of, the
loving­kindness and mercy of God; for *to redeem from iniquity* is
equivalent to moderating punishments or chastisements. This serves as an
argument to disprove the preposterous invention of the Papists
respecting satisfactions and purgatory, as if God, in forgiving the
fault, still reserved for a future time the execution of the punishment
upon the sinner. If it is objected that the Lord sometimes punishes
those whom he has already pardoned; in reply, I grant that he does not
always, at the very moment in which he reconciles men to himself, show
them the tokens of his favor, for he chastises them to render them
circumspect for the future, but while he does this, he in the meantime
fails not to moderate his rigour. This, however, forms no part of the
satisfactions by which the Papists imagine that they present to God the
half of the price of their redemption. In innumerable passages of
Scripture, where God promises to his people outward blessings, he always
begins with a promise of the pardon of sin. It is therefore the grossest
ignorance to say, that God does not remit the punishment till they have
pacified him by their works. Moreover, while God’s intention in
inflicting some punishments or chastisements upon the faithful, is to.
bring them to yield a more perfect obedience to his law, the Papists are
mistaken in extending these punishments beyond death. But it is not
wonderful to find them heaping together so many heathenish dreams,
seeing they adhere not to the true and only way of reconciliation, which
is, that God is merciful only to such as seek the expiation of their
sins in the sacrifice of Christ. It is to be noticed that it is said
*from all iniquities,* that poor sinners, although they feel themselves
to be guilty in many ways, may not cease to cherish the hope that God
will be merciful to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc12013.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span> The depths or deep gulfs are used in
Scripture as an emblem of extreme danger or calamity, whether of body or
of mind. See <span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>[Ps.
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015.md)<span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>. “The
Papists, taking the deep as a type of purgatory, recite this Psalm in
the persons of those who have died in their communion.” — *Cresswell.*
To this Calvin afterwards adverts.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc12013.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> The allusion is to judicial proceedings. It
is as if the Psalmist had said, If thou wert, like an earthly judge, to
note down every minute circumstance of guilt, who would be able to stand
such a trial, or leave thy court unconvicted, or uncondemned? The verb,
“<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>שמר, denotes not only *to mark,* or
*observe,* but to observe diligently, so as to retain a perpetual memory
of what is done amiss ­ a rigid and judicial observation of faults: see
<span id="xiv.i-p9.2"></span>[Job
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014.md)<span id="xiv.i-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p9.3"></span>[Job
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017.md)<span id="xiv.i-p9.3"></span> ” *­
Phillips.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc12013.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>Et demeure
confus.” ­ Fr.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc12013.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span> “<span
id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>Concionantur.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="xiv.i-p13.2"></span>Ils tiendront long propos.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc12013.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span> Some, as Street, Mant, Dr. Adam Clarke,
French and Skinner, and Phillips, suppose that the allusion in this
verse is to the watchings which the Priests and Levites in their turns
exercised during the night in the Temple, (see <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ps 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>,) and especially to those officers of theirs
who were appointed to watch for the first dawn of day, in order that the
morning sacrifice might be offered. “In the Talmudical Tract Tamid it is
related, ‘The prefect said to them, Go and see if the time of slaying;
have arrived; if it had arrived, the watcher calls out, <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.2"></span>ברקאי, Coruscations.’ Agreeably to this
explanation of the verse is the rendering of the Chaldee, which is as
follows: “My soul waits for the Lord, more than the keepers of the
morning vigils, which they observe for offering of the morning
oblation.” *­ Phillips.* “The custom alluded to by the Targumist,” \[or
Chaldee,\] says Street, “is mentioned in <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.3"></span>[Ex 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007.md)<span
id="xiv.ii-p8.3"></span>. ‘And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense
every morning: when he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense upon
it.’” “The similitude,” observes Mant, “*is* beautifully expressive of
the eager impatience of the Psalmist; which is still further augmented
by the repetition.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc12013.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
punitions.” — *Fr*. “Or, punishments.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 131](cc12014.md)
