[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12003)  [Next](cc12005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>PSALM 121

<span id="v-p2"></span>The Psalmist, to encourage true believers
confidently to trust in the aid of God, and to teach them to betake
themselves to his protection, first, affirms that, to whatever quarter
we turn our eyes it is impossible to find salvation anywhere else; and,
in the second place, extols in lofty terms the fatherly care of God in
defending his faithful ones.

<span id="v-p3"></span>Song of Degrees.

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
121:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** I will lift up my eyes to the mountains,
whence my help will come  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) **2.** My
help is from Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p5"></span><span id="v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**l** *I will lift up my eyes to the
mountains.* The inspired writer, whoever he was, seems, in the opening
of the Psalm, to speak in the person of an unbelieving man. As God
prevents his believing people with his blessings, and meets them of his
own accord, so they, on their part, immediately east their eyes directly
upon him. What then is the meaning of this unsettled looking of the
Prophet, who casts his eyes now on this side and now on that, as if
faith directed him not to God? I answer, that the thoughts of the godly
are never so stayed upon the word of God as not to be carried away at
the first impulse to some allurements; and especially when dangers
disquiet us, or when we are assailed with sore temptations, it is
scarcely possible for us, from our being so inclined to the earth, not
to be moved by the enticements presented to us, until our minds put a
bridle upon themselves, and turn them back to God. The sentence,
however, may be explained as if expressed in a conditional form.
Whatever we may think, would the Prophet say, all the hopes which draw
us away from God are vain and delusive. If we take it in this sense, he
is not to be understood as relating how he reasoned with himself, or
what he intended to do, but only as declaring, that those lose their
pains who, disregarding God, gaze to a distance all around them, and
make long and devious circuits in quest of remedies to their troubles.
It is indeed certain, that in thus speaking of himself, he exhibits to
us a malady with which all mankind are afflicted; but still, it will not
be unsuitable to suppose, that he was prompted to speak in this manner
from his own experience; for such is the inconstancy natural to us, that
so soon as we are smitten with any fear, we turn our eyes in every
direction, until faith, drawing us back from all these erratic
wanderings, direct us exclusively to God. All the difference between
believers and unbelievers in this respect is, that although all are
prone to be deceived, and easily cheated by impostures, yet Satan
bewitches unbelievers by his enchantments; whereas, in regard to
believers, God corrects the vice of their nature, and does not permit
them to persevere in going astray. The meaning of the Prophet is
abundantly obvious, which is, that although all the helps of the world,
even the mightiest, should offer themselves to us, yet we ought not to
seek safety anywhere but in God; yea, rather, that when men shall have
long wearied themselves in hunting after remedies, now in one quarter
and now in another, they will at length find. from experience, that
there is no assured help but in God alone. By the *mountains,* the
Prophet means whatever is great or excellent in the world; and the
lesson he teaches is, that we ought to account all such favor as
nothing.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>Farther, these two verses ought to be read
connectedly, bringing out this sense: When I shall have lifted up my
eyes to the mountains, then I will at length experience that I have
fallen into a rash and unprofitable mistake, until I direct them to God
alone, and keep them fixed upon him. It is at the same time to be
observed, that God in this place is not in vain honored with the title
of *Creator of heaven and earth;* it being intended hereby tacitly to
rebuke the ingratitude of men, when they cannot rest contented with his
power. Did they in good earnest acknowledge him as Creator, they would
also be persuaded, that as he holds the whole world in his hand, and
governs it as seemeth good in his sight, he is possessed of infinite
power. But when, hurried away by the blind impetuosity of their
passions, they have recourse to other objects besides him, they defraud
him of his right and empire. In this way ought we to apply this title of
God to the case in hand. The amount is, that whilst we are naturally
more anxious than is needful in seeking alleviation and redress to our
calamities, especially when any imminent danger threatens us, yet we act
a foolish and mistaken part in running up and down through tortuous
mazes: and that therefore we ought to impose a restraint upon our
understandings, that they may not apply themselves to any other but God
alone. Nor is the opinion of those unsuitable, who think that the Hebrew
word <span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>אל*, el,* which we translate *to,*
namely, *to the mountains,* is put for <span id="v.i-p7.2"></span>על*,
al,* which signifies *above,* giving this sense, That men, however high
they may look, will find no true salvation except hi God.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
121:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**3.** He will not suffer thy foot to stumble:
he who keepeth thee will not slumber. **4.** Behold! he who keepeth
Israel will not slumber nor sleep. **5.** Jehovah is thy keeper; Jehovah
is thy defence  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) on thy right hand.

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span><span id="v.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>**3** *He will not suffer thy foot to
stumble.* Here the Prophet, in order to recall the faithful to the right
path, and to defeat the influence of all the allurements which are wont
to distract their minds, affirms that whatever advantages worldly men
are accustomed to desire or hope for from the world, true believers will
find abundantly and at hand in God alone. He not only attributes power
to God, but also teaches that He is so affectioned towards us, that he
will preserve us in all respects in perfect safety. As often as the
power of God is extolled, there are many who immediately reply, It is
very true that he can do such and such things if he is so inclined, but
we do not certainly know what is his intention. In this passage,
therefore, God is exhibited to the faithful as their guardian, that they
may rest with assured confidence on his providence. As the Epicureans,
in imagining that God has no care whatever about the ‘world, extinguish
all piety, so those who think that the world is governed by God only in
a general and confused manner, and believe not that he cherishes with
special care each of his believing people, leave men’s minds in
suspense, and are themselves kept in a state of constant fluctuation and
anxiety. In short, never will the hearts of men be led in good earnest
to call upon God, until a persuasion of the truth of this guardianship
is deeply fixed in their minds. The Psalmist declares that the purpose
for which God is our keeper, is, that he may hold us up. The Hebrew
word, <span id="v.ii-p6.1"></span>מוט, *mot,* which is here used,
signifies both *a sliding* or *falling,* and *a trembling* or
*staggering.* Now, although it often happens that the faithful stagger,
yea, are even ready to fall altogether, yet as God sustains them by his
power, they are said to stand upright. And as amidst the many dangers
which every moment threaten us, it is difficult for us to get rid of all
anxiety and fear, the Prophet at the same time testifies, that God keeps
watch unceasingly over our safety.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span><span id="v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>**4.** *Behold! he who keepeth Israel will not
slumber nor sleep.*  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) To recall each
individual to the consideration of the common covenant, he represents
the Divine providence as extending to the whole body of the Church. In
order that each of us for himself may be assured that God will be
gracious to him, it behoves us always to begin with the general promise
made to all God’s people,. This form of expression, *he will not slumber
nor sleep,* would be improper in other languages, according to the idiom
of which it should rather be, *He will not sleep, yea, he will not
slumber:* but when the Hebrews invert this order, they argue from the
greater to the less. The sense then is, that as God never slumbers even
in the smallest degree, we need not be afraid of any ham befalling us
while he is asleep. The design of the Prophet is now obvious. To
persuade true believers that God has a special care of each of them in
particular, he brings forward the promise which God made to the whole
people, and declares God to be the guardian. of his Church, that from
this general principle, as from a fountain, each might convey streams to
himself. Accordingly immediately after, (<span
id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ps 121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005)<span
id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>,) addressing himself to each in particular, he
repeats, *Jehovah is thy keeper,* that no person might hesitate to apply
to himself that which belonged to the whole community of Israel.
Besides, God is called *a defense at the right hand,* to teach us that
it is not necessary for us to go far in seeking him, but that he is at
hand, or rather stands at our side to defend us.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
121:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**6.** The sun shall not smite thee by day,
nor the moon by night.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) **7.**
Jehovah shall keep thee from all evil; he will keep thy soul. **8.**
Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in, henceforth and for
ever.

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span><span id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>**6.** *The sun shall not smite thee by day.*
By these forms of expression the Psalmist magnifies the advantages which
result to us from our having God present with us; and, by the figure
synecdoche, under one particular, he declares in general that the
faithful shall be safe from all adversities, defended as they are by
Divine power. The language is metaphorical, the cold of night and the
heat of day denoting all kind of inconveniences. The sense then is, that
although God’s people may be subject in common with others to the
miseries of human life, yet his shadow is always at their side to shield
them from thereby receiving any harm. The Prophet does not, however,
promise the faithful a condition of such felicity and comfort as implies
an exemption from all trouble; he only, for the purpose of assuaging
their sorrows, sets before them this consolation — that being interested
in the Divine layout, they shall be secure from all deadly harm; a point
which he unfolds more distinctly in the following verses, where he tells
us that God will so keep his own people from all evils, as to maintain
their life in safety. The statement in the text before us is indeed
general, but he afterwards specifies the chief parts of human life.

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span><span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span>**8.** *Jehovah will keep thy going out and
thy coming in.* The sense is, Whatever thou shalt undertake or engage in
during thy life shall come to a happy and successful termination. God no
doubt directs by his Holy Spirit the, deliberations of his servants; but
it appears to me, that this passage is rather to be referred to
prosperous issues. If, however, any one would give it a more extended
meaning I have no objection. It is enough for me to embrace that sense
which is indisputably certain and solid, That God will be the continual
guide of his people, so that stretching out his hand to them he will
conduct them according to their hearts’ desire from the beginning even
to the end. Farther, it is of importance to mark the reason why the
Prophet repeats so often what he had briefly and in one word expressed
with sufficient plainness. Such repetition seems at first sight
superfluous; but when we consider how difficult it is to correct our
distrust, it will be easily perceived that he does not improperly dwell
upon the commendation of the divine providence. How few are to be found
who yield to God the honor of being a keeper, in order to their being
thence assured of their safety, and led to call upon him in the midst of
their perils! On the contrary, even when we seem to have largely
experienced what this protection of God implies, we yet instantly
tremble at the noise of a leaf falling from a tree, as if God had quite
forgotten us. Being then entangled in so many unholy misgivings, and so
much inclined to distrust, we are taught from the passage that if a
sentence couched in a few words does not suffice us, we should gather
together whatever may be found throughout the whole Scriptures
concerning the providence of God, until this doctrine-” That God always
keeps watch for us” — is deeply rooted in our hearts; so that depending
upon his guardianship alone we may bid adieu to all the vain confidences
of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc12004.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p3"></span> Phillips, who thinks it “probable that that
Psalm was written just as the Israelites were about to commence their
journey to their native land,” gives this explanation of the verse*:*
“*I will l lift up eyes to the mountains,* viz., Zion, Tabor, Carmel,
etc.; but especially to the first, as being the place of the ark, and
consequently the place to which the Israelites directed their eyes, as
to a fountain of all good. There they looked for help as often as
circumstances rendered expected assistance requisite, as we learn from
several passages in the Psalms. See <span id="v.i-p3.1"></span>[Ps
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)<span id="v.i-p3.1"></span>; <span
id="v.i-p3.2"></span>[Ps 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)<span
id="v.i-p3.2"></span>.” In returning from Babylon, how many a longing
and anxious look would the Jews east to the hills of Palestine, and with
how many stirring and sacred emotions would the sight of them fill their
minds!

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc12004.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span> The Hebrew word is <span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>צל*, tsel,* “a shadow;” and hence it has been
supposed that the words, “thy shadow at thy right hand.,” are a
figurative expression, referring to the protection afforded by the shade
of a tree against the scorching rays of the sun, or to the custom which
prevails in tropical climates especially, of keeping off the intense
heat of the sun by a portable screen, such as an umbrella or parasol.
The word is often put for *defense* in general. Compare <span
id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>[Nu 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009)<span
id="v.ii-p3.2"></span>; <span id="v.ii-p3.3"></span>[Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)<span id="v.ii-p3.3"></span>;
<span id="v.ii-p3.4"></span>[Jer
48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045)<span id="v.ii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc12004.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span> A notion was prevalent among the heathen,
that their gods sometimes slept, and were not then conscious of the
wants of their worshippers. Elijah thus addressed in irony the followers
of Baal, <span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>[1Ki
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027)<span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>:

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>“Cry aloud; for he is a god; either he is
talking, or he is pursuing,  
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth,  
and must be waked.”

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>Very different was the character of the
guardian of Israel. He relaxed not his watchful care over his people by
indulging in light slumbers during the day, nor even by sleeping in the
night, when the tired frame of man seeks and demands repose.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc12004.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> There seems to be an allusion in the first
member to sun-strokes, which are very fatal in hot countries, sometimes
inflicting instant death, or being soon followed by death, while at
other times, when the person lives, he continues through the remainder
of his days in a state of idiocy. Comparatively few survive and
perfectly recover the effects of such a visitation. What the Psalmist
means by the *smiting of the moon* is at first sight not so obvious.
Some suppose that he speaks in conformity with a popular belief, which
it is supposed prevailed in the East in his time, just as it does in the
present day, respecting the deleterious influence of the moonbeams on
the human body, although there is no ground for such a belief, the moon
no doubt getting the blame of the injury done by the cold and dampness
of the night. But the probability is, that by the striking of the moon
he simply alludes to the cold of the night, which has very baneful
effects on the human frame, particularly in such oriental countries as
Palestine, where there is a sudden change from extreme heat in the day
to extreme cold in the night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 122](cc12005)
