[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12008)  [Next](cc12010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>PSALM 126

<span id="x-p2"></span>This Psalm consists of three parts. First, the
Prophet exhorts the faithful, who had returned from the captivity, to
gratitude, and highly extols the grace displayed in their deliverance,
to show them, beyond all doubt, that they were brought back to their own
country by the hand of God, and not by a fortuitous conjuncture of
circumstances, or by the favor of men. In the second part a prayer is
added, that God would perfect his own work which he had begun. Finally,
although there was no immediate prospect of a full restoration, yet he
mitigates the feeling of weariness which delay might occasion, and
assures them, that though at present the seed was watered with tears,
the harvest would be joyous.

<span id="x-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
126:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** When Jehovah brought back the captivity
 <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) of Zion, we were like those that
dream. **2.** Now shall our mouth be filled  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) with laughter, and our tongue with
rejoicing: now shall they say  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)
among the heathen, Jehovah hath done great things for them. **3.**
Jehovah hath done great things for us, whereof we have been made glad.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p7"></span><span id="x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**1.** *When Jehovah brought back the captivity
of Zion, etc*. It is unnatural and forced to suppose, with some
expositors, that this is a prediction of what was to come. For my part I
have no doubt that the Psalm was composed upon the return of the Jewish
people from the Babylonish captivity; and for this reason I have
translated the verb <span id="x.i-p8.1"></span>בשוב*, beshub,* in the
past tense. Now, whoever was the author of it,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) whether one of the Levites or one of the
Prophets, he affirms that the manner of their deliverance was too
wonderful to be attributed to fortune, in order to lead the faithful to
the conclusion that the prophecy of Jeremiah, which had assigned seventy
years as the term of the captivity, was truly fulfilled. (<span
id="x.i-p9.1"></span>[Jer 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012)<span
id="x.i-p9.1"></span>, and <span id="x.i-p9.2"></span>[Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="x.i-p9.2"></span>.) By
the verb *dream,* which expresses the astonishing character of the
event, he teaches us that there is no room left for ingratitude. As
often as God works by ordinary means, men, through the malignity of
their natures, usually exercise their ingenuity in devising various
causes of the deliverance wrought, in order to darken the grace of God.
But the return of the Jewish people from the Babylonish captivity,
having been a miracle of such splendor as was sufficient to swallow up
and confound all the thoughts of men, it compels us. to own that it was
a signal work of God. This is the reason why the Prophet compares this
deliverance to a dream. “So far,” he materially says, “is any mind from
comprehending this unparalleled benefit of God, that the bare thinking
upon it transports us with amazement, as if it were a dream, and not an
event which had already taken place. What impiety, then, will it be, not
to acknowledge the author of it.” Moreover, he does not mean that the
faithful were so dull of understanding as not to perceive that they were
delivered by the hand of God, but only that, judging according to carnal
sense and reason, they were struck with astonishment; and he was
apprehensive lest, in reasoning with themselves about that redemption,
as about an ordinary thing, they should make less account of the power
of God than it became them to do. The noun <span
id="x.i-p9.3"></span>שיבת, *shibath,* translated *captivity,* might be
rendered *bringing back,* as some do, which would give greater elegance
to the expression of the Psalmist, as in that case <span
id="x.i-p9.4"></span>שיבת would be a noun of the same verb which is used
in the beginning of the verse.  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) As,
however, this makes little difference in regard to the sense, it is
enough to have noticed it to my readers in passing.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span><span id="x.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**2.** *Now shall our mouth be filled with
laughter.* The adverb of time, <span id="x.i-p12.1"></span>אז, *az,* is
commonly translated *then;* but as the verbs are in the future tense, I
have thought that it might not be improper to translate tires — grow
*shall our mouth be filled,* and *now shall they say.* If, however, we
admit what some Hebrew Doctors affirm, that the force of this particle
is to change the future tense into the past, the adverb *then* will be
the appropriate word. The design of the Prophet is not at all obscure.
He would have the people so to rejoice on account of their return, as
not to bury in forgetfulness the grace of God. He therefore describes no
ordinary rejoicing, but such as so fills their minds as to constrain
them to break forth into extravagance of gesture and of voice. At the
same time he intimates that there was good ground for this joy, in which
it became the children of God to indulge, on account of their return to
their own land. As there was at that period nothing more wretched than
for them to live in captivity, in which they were in a manner
dispossessed of the inheritance God had promised them; so there was
nothing which ought to have been more desirable to them than to be
restored. Their restoration to their own country having been therefore a
proof of their renewed adoption by God, it is not surprising to find the
Prophet asserting that their mouth was filled with laughter, and their
tongue with exultation. With a similar joy does it become us at the
present day to exult when God gathers together his Church and it is an
undoubted evidence that we are steel-hearted, if her miserable
dispersion does not produce in our minds grief and lamentation. The
Prophet proceeds farther, declaring that this miracle was seen even by
the blind; for in that age of the world, as is well known, the heathen
were wandering in darkness like blind men, no knowledge of God having
shone upon them; and yet God’s power and operation were so conspicuous
in that event, that they burst forth into the open acknowledgment *that
God had done great things for his people.* So much the more shame-fill
then was the indifference of the Jews to be accounted, if they did not
freely and loudly celebrate God’s grace, which had acquired so much
renown among the unbelieving. The form of speech employed is also to be
marked, which forcibly expresses the idea intended to be conveyed, that
the mighty power of God in this deliverance was known by the Gentiles.
In the following verse the Prophet repeats in his own person, and in
that of the Church, the words uttered by the heathen in the last member
of the preceding verse. Let us at least, as if he had said, put forth a
confession corresponding to that which God has extorted from the
unbelieving Gentiles. When he adds *that they were glad,* there is an
implied antithesis between this fresh joy and the long continued sorrow
with which they were afflicted in their captivity. he expressly declares
that joy was restored to them, to enable them the better to estimate the
dismal condition from which they had been extricated.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
126:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**4.** O Jehovah! bring back our captivity,
 <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) as rivers in the south.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) **5.** They who sow in tears shall reap
in joy. **6.** Going forth, he shall go and weep, carrying the price of
the seed: coming, he shall return with rejoicing, carrying his sheaves
with him.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span><span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>**4.** *O Jehovah! bring back our captivity.*
The second part of the Psalm, as I have said, contains a prayer that God
would gather together the residue of the captives. The Holy Spirit
endited this form of prayer for the Jews who were already come home to
their own country, that they might not forget their poor brethren who
were still in exile. All the Jews, no doubt, had a door opened to them,
and perfect liberty granted them, to come out of the land of their
captivity, but the number of those who partook of this benefit was small
when compared with the vast multitude of the people. Some were kept from
returning by fear, and others by sloth and want of courage, on seeing
such perils at hand as they apprehended they had not power to overcome,
choosing rather to lie torpid in their own filthiness, than to undertake
the hardship of the journey. It is probable also that many of them
preferred their present ease and comfort to eternal salvation. What the
Prophet Isaiah had foretold was no doubt fulfilled, (<span
id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>[Isa 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span
id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>,). That although the people were in number as the
sand of the sea, yet only a remnant of them should be saved. Since,
then, many openly refused the benefit when it was offered them, and as
there were not; wanting many difficulties and impediments to be
encountered by those who availed themselves of this liberty granted them
by the good pleasure of the king,  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)
so that it was only a few of sounder judgment and of a more intrepid
heart, who dared to move a foot — and even they with reluctance, — it is
no wonder that the Prophet requires the Church still to make
supplication to God for the bringing back of the captivity. Along with
this, the state of those who had already returned is also to be noted;
for their land being in the possession of strangers, who were all their
inveterate and sworn enemies, they were no less captives in their own
country than among the Babylonians. It was therefore necessary, on a
twofold account, that the Church should earnestly beseech God to gather
together such as were dispersed; first, that he would give courage to
the timid, awaken the torpid, cause the besotted to forget their
pleasures, and stretch forth his hand to be a guide to all; and,
secondly, that he would settle the body of the people who had returned
in liberty and ease.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>As to the similitude which follows, many
think the sense to be, that the bringing back of their captivity prayed
for would be as grateful to them as if water should flow through a
desert.  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) We know how grievous and
painful a thing it is to travel in a hot country through and sands. The
*south,* is taken for the wilderness, because the region on the south of
Judea was waste and almost uninhabitable. Yet it seems to me more just
to say, that the grace of God is here magnified, and still more enlarged
by the Prophet’s comparing it to a miracle. “Although it is a difficult
matter,” he substantially says, “for the dispersed remnant to be again
united into one body, yet God, if he please, can do this, just as he can
cause rivers of water to flow through a parched desert.” He, at the same
time, alludes to the road intervening between Judea and Babylon, as
appears from the situation of the two countries. Thus the words will not
require any supplement, the meaning being simply this, that the bringing
back of their captivity would be as if a river should run through a
barren and and country. And, certainly, to open up a way for the people
who, so to speak, were swallowed up in a deep gulf, was as if a course
had been opened up for irrigating waters to flow through a desert.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span><span id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>**5.** *They who sow in tears shall reap in
joy.* This sentence*,* in my opinion, ought not less to be extended to
the future than understood of the past. The carrying away of the Jews
into Babylon was to them as a seed-time;  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) God having, by the prophecy of Jeremiah,
encouraged them to hope for the harvest. Still, it was not without very
great heaviness and anguish of heart that they were dragged into such
long continued captivity. It was, as if in the time of dearth the poor
husbandman, who already experiences the gnawings of hunger, were
compelled to abridge himself of his ordinary food in order to provide
for the coming year; and although this is a hard and distressing case,
he is yet moved to sow from the hope of the harvest. The Jews then, when
led into captivity, were, doubtless, no less sorrowful than he who, in
the time of scarcity, casts the precious seed into the ground; but
afterwards a joyful harvest followed, when they were delivered; for the
Lord restored to them gladness, like that which is experienced in a most
abundant increase.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) I, however,
also conceive that the Prophet exhorts the faithful to patience in
reference to the future. The restoration of the Church was not yet
completed, and even, for the two reasons which I have a little before
specified, that period was evidently the time of sowing. Although the
edict of the king frankly invited the Jews to return, yet only a few of
many returned, gradually and fearfully, in small companies. Moreover,
those who did so were unkindly and harshly welcomed by their neighbors,
and to so much trouble were they subjected that their former bondage
appeared equally tolerable. Whence we gather, that they had still to
suffer — the full time of harvest, not having yet arrived; and,
therefore, the Prophet, not without cause, exhorts them strenuously to
labor, and to persevere in the midst of continual difficulties without
fainting, until they found themselves placed in more favorable
circumstances. With respect to the words, some translate. <span
id="x.ii-p16.1"></span>משך*, meshech, a price;* and others, *a basket*
or *seed vessel.*  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) For the latter
translation there is no foundation. Those who translate *price* quote in
support of their version that passage in the book of <span
id="x.ii-p17.9"></span>[Job 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018)<span
id="x.ii-p17.9"></span> “The price of wisdom is above rubies.” But as
the verb <span id="x.ii-p17.10"></span>משך, *mashach,* from which this
noun is derived, signifies *to extend* or *to draw out,* it may perhaps,
both here and in that other place, be more fitly taken in its proper
signification. In the text quoted from Job it is profound wisdom, and
not intellectual acuteness, which is commended, and thus the extending
of wisdom, that is to say, a continual course of wisdom, is, from its
being deeply grounded, better than pearls. In like manner, in the
passage before us, the drawing out of the seed is applied to the
husbandmen themselves, implying, that they extend and prolong their life
when they sow. If, however, the word *price* is preferred, the sense
will be, that when corn is scarce, seed is committed to the ground with
tears, because it is precious and costly. This doctrine extends still
farther. Our life is, in other parts of Scripture, compared to the
seed-time, and as it will often happen that we must sow in tears, it
becomes us, lest sorrow should weaken or slacken our diligence, to raise
our minds to the hope of the harvest. Besides, let us remember that all
the Jews who were carried captives into Babylon did not sow; for as
really among them, who had hardened themselves against God and the
Prophets, had despised all threatenings, so they lost all hope of
returning. Those in whom such despair brooded were consumed in their
miseries; but those who were sustained by the promise of God, cherished
in their hearts the hope of harvest, although in a time, of extreme
scarcity they cast their seed into the ground, as it were, at venture.
In order then that joy may succeed our present sorrow, let us learn to
apply our minds to the contemplation of the issue which God promises.
Thus we shall experience that all true believers have a common interest
in this prophecy, That God not only will wipe away tears from their
eyes, but that he will also diffuse inconceivable joy through their
hearts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc12009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="x.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p3"></span> The abstract noun is put for the concrete,
“the captivity of Zion” for “the captives of Zion” — those who were led
away captive from Zion. Accordingly, in the French version, Calvin uses
the concrete —”<span id="x.i-p3.1"></span>Les captifs;” —”The captives.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc12009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="x.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p4"></span> “<span id="x.i-p4.1"></span>Ou, alors nostre
bouche a este remplie.” — Fr. *marg.* “Or*,* then our mouth was filled.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc12009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="x.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p5"></span> “<span id="x.i-p5.1"></span>Ou, alors on
disoit.” — Fr. *marg.* “Or, then they said.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc12009.htm#fr_87) <span
id="x.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p9"></span> Grotius and Amyraldus suppose that it was
compiled by Ezra, after the Jews had begun to return from Babylon.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc12009.htm#fr_88) <span
id="x.i-p9.5"></span>

<span id="x.i-p10"></span> That is, it would be derived from <span
id="x.i-p10.1"></span>שוב*, shrub, he returned;* whereas if it is
rendered *captivity,* it is derived from <span
id="x.i-p10.2"></span>שבה, *shabah, he led captive.* The English Bible
translators seem to have been uncertain whether <span
id="x.i-p10.3"></span>שיבת, *shibath,* is to be considered as derived
from the first of these verbs or from the second, their reading in the
text being, “turned back our captivity,” and their marginal rendering
being, “returned the returning.” There is a play upon the words, <span
id="x.i-p10.4"></span>שוב, “turn,” and <span id="x.i-p10.5"></span>שיבת,
“captivity.” It is to be observed that the concluding part of the above
sentence in the text is from Calvin’s French Commentary. There is
nothing to represent it in the Latin Version.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc12009.htm#fr_89) <span
id="x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> Walford reads, “Bring back all our captives,
O Jehovah!” “The word *all,*” says he, “is not in the Hebrew text, but
is necessary to the sense; for some had returned, and others were
returning or about to return.” Some of the captive Jews came back to
their own land in the reign of Cyrus, others in the reign of Darius, and
the rest in the reign of Xerxes. Such therefore as had been the first to
return, may be supposed to pray in these words for the restoration of
their brethren.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc12009.htm#fr_90) <span
id="x.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span> Phillips translates *in the dry place.* “The
noun <span id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>נגב,” says he, “in its usual
acceptation, signifies *south;* but its primary sense is that *of
dryness,* in which it is used in <span id="x.ii-p4.2"></span>[Jos
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019)<span id="x.ii-p4.2"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p4.3"></span>[Jud
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#015)<span id="x.ii-p4.3"></span>;
where <span id="x.ii-p4.4"></span>ארץ הנגב is opposed to <span
id="x.ii-p4.5"></span>גלת מום*, springs of water.*” In the Septuagint
the reading is, like the torrents m the parched land.’ Street has —

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>*“Jehovah hath restored us from our
captivity,  
As he* restoreth *the torrents in the dry country.”*

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>French and Skinner in like manner read “in a
thirsty land.”

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc12009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="x.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>Precaria
libertas.” — *Lat.* “<span id="x.ii-p10.2"></span>Ceste liberte obtenue
d’eux par le bon plaisir du Roy.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc12009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span> Walford reads, “like the streams of the
south.” — “In the southern districts of Palestine and Arabia,” says he,
“the heat is so vehement during some seasons as to dry up the rivers
completely, and parch the soil. When rains come, the torrents again
flow, and the soil is refreshed and verdant; — a delightful image of the
joy experienced by captives on returning to their native land.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc12009.htm#fr_93) <span
id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p15.1"></span>Fuit Judteis
sun migratio sationis instar.” — *Lat.* “<span id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>Le
tranaport des Juifs en Babvlone leur a este comme un temps de semence ”
— Fr

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc12009.htm#fr_94) <span
id="x.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span> The word *then* may be prefixed to this
verse: then, ie., when thou hast brought back the captives, they that
sowed in tears shall reap in joy.” — *Cresswell.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc12009.htm#fr_95) <span
id="x.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p17.1"></span>משך. This word
has been variously interpreted; for as it is found only here and in
<span id="x.ii-p17.2"></span>[Job
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018)<span id="x.ii-p17.2"></span>,
its signification is uncertain. In the Syriac we have it rendered by a
word which signifies *a skin* and hence J. D. Michaelis proposes to take
<span id="x.ii-p17.3"></span>משך for *a sack* made of skin. So Aben Ezra
thinks ‘that it is the name of a measure in which there is seed.’ The
author of Mendlessohn’s Beor, approves of this comment, and observes,
that <span id="x.ii-p17.4"></span>משך was a small cup made of skin.’ The
root is <span id="x.ii-p17.5"></span>משך, to draw out.’ We should,
however, adhere as strictly to the meaning of the root if we render the
expression as Gesenius has done, by the *drawing of the seed,* i.e., the
strewing or sowing of the seed. I think, however, Michaelis’s rendering
is the best, as fitting with the preceding word <span
id="x.ii-p17.6"></span>גסא; and so we have *carrying* the *sack of
seed,* at the end of the first hemistich, which corresponds with
*carrying his sheaves* at the end of the second.” — *Phillips.* On the
margin of our English Bible it is “seed-basket.” Street reads, “Bearing
the vessel with the seed;” Horsley, “He that goeth, and weeping beareth
the seed to be drawn forth; French and Skinner, “Bearing seed for his
sowing;” Fry, “Sowing his seed,” observing, that <span
id="x.ii-p17.7"></span>משך expresses the action of casting the seed into
the ground; and Walford, “Carrying seed for sowing.” “Literally it is,”
says Cresswell, “a *drawing forth of seed, i.e.,* as much as the sower,
putting his hand into whatever contained the seed, could take out at
once. <span id="x.ii-p17.8"></span>[Am
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)<span id="x.ii-p17.8"></span>.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 127](cc12010)
