[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc12010)  [Next](cc12012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>PSALM 128

<span id="xii-p2"></span>This Psalm is akin to the preceding, and, so to
speak, a kind of appendage to it; for it declares that the divine
blessing, to the diffusion of which among the whole human race Solomon
testified, is to be seen most conspicuously in the ease of God’s true
and sincere servants.

<span id="xii-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
128:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Blessed is the man who feareth
Jehovah, and walketh in his ways. **2.** For when thou shalt eat the
labor of thy hands, thou shalt be blessed, and it shall be well with
thee. **3.** Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine on the sides of thy
house, and thy children as olive plants around thy table.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md)

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span><span id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**1** *Blessed is the man who feareth
Jehovah.* In the preceding Psalm it was stated that prosperity in all
human affairs, and in the whole course of our life, is to be hoped for
exclusively from the grace of God; and now the Prophet admonishes us
that those who desire to be partakers of the blessing of God must with
sincerity of heart devote themselves wholly to him; for he will never
disappoint those who serve him. The first verse contains a summary of
the subject-matter of the Psalm; the remaining portion being added only
by way of exposition. The maxim “that those are blessed who fear God,
especially in the present life,” is so much with variance with the
common opinion of men, that very few will give it their assent.
Everywhere are to be found fluttering about many Epicureans, similar to
Dionysius, who, having once had a favorable wind upon the sea and a
prosperous voyage, after having plundered a temple,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) boasted that the gods favored church
robbers. Also the weak are troubled and shaken by the prosperity of evil
men, and they next faint under the load of their own miseries. The
despisers of God may not indeed enjoy prosperity, and the condition of
good men may be tolerable, but still the greater part of men are blind
in considering the providence of God, or seem not in any degree to
perceive it. The adage, “That it is best not to be born at all, or to
die as soon as possible,” has certainly been long since received by the
common consent of almost all men. Finally, carnal reason judges either
that all mankind without exception are miserable, or that fortune is
more favorable to ungodly and wicked men than to the good. To the
sentiment that those are blessed who fear the Lord, it has an entire
aversion, as I have declared at length on <span
id="xii.i-p7.3"></span>[Psalm 37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#000.md)<span
id="xii.i-p7.3"></span>. So much the more requisite then is it to dwell
upon the consideration of this truth. Farther, as this blessedness is
not apparent to the eye, it is of importance, in order to our being able
to apprehend it., first to attend to the definition which will \]be
given of it by and bye, and secondly, to know that it depends chiefly
upon the protection of God. Although we collect together all the
circumstances which seem to contribute to a happy life, surely nothing
will be found more desirable than to be kept hidden under the
guardianship of God. If this blessing is, in our estimation, to be
preferred, as it deserves, to all other good things, whoever is
persuaded that the care of God is exercised about the world and human
affairs, will at the same time unquestionably acknowledge that what is
here laid down is the chief point of happiness.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>But before I proceed farther, it is to be
noticed that in the second part of the verse there is with good reason
added a mark by which the servants of God are distinguished from those
who despise him. We see how the most depraved, with no less pride than
audacity and mockery, boast of fearing God. The Prophet therefore
requires the attestation of the life as to this; for these two things,
the fear of God and the keeping of his law, are inseparable; and the
root must necessarily produce its corresponding fruit. Farther, we learn
from this passage that our life does not meet with the divine
approbation, except it be framed according to the divine law. There is
unquestionably no religion without the fear of God, and from this fear
the Prophet represents our living according to the commandment and
ordinance of God as proceeding.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span><span id="xii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**2.** *For when thou shalt eat the labor of
thy hands thou shalt be blessed.* Some divide this sentence into two
members, reading these words, *For thou shalt eat the labor of thy
hands,* as a distinct sentence, and then what follows, *Thou shalt be
blessed,* as the beginning of a new sentence. I indeed grant that it is
true, as they assert, that the grace of God, manifested in the faithful
enjoying the fruits of their labor is set in opposition to the curse to
which all mankind have been subjected. But it is more natural to read
the words as one sentence, bringing out this meaning — That God’s
children are happy in eating the fruits of their labor; for if we make
them two sentences, these words, *thou, shalt be blessed, and it shall
be well with thee,* would contain a cold and even an insipid repetition.
Here the Prophet, confirming the doctrine stated in the first verse,
teaches us that we ought to form a different estimate of what happiness
consists hi from that formed by the world, which makes a happy life to
consist in ease, honors, and great wealth. He recalls God’s servants to
the practice of moderation, which almost all men refuse to exercise. How
few are to be found who, were it left to their own choice, would desire
to live by their own labor; yea, who would account it a singular benefit
to do so! No sooner is the name of happiness pronounced, than instantly
every man breaks forth into the most extravagant ideas of what is
necessary to it, so insatiable a gulf is the covetousness of the human
heart. The Prophet therefore bids the fearers of God be content with
this one thing — with the assurance that having God for their
foster-father, they shall be suitably maintained by the labor of their
own hands; just as it is said in <span id="xii.i-p10.1"></span>[Ps
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.i-p10.1"></span>,

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>“The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger;
but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.”

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>We must remember that the Prophet does not
speak of the highest blessedness, which consists not in meat and drink,
nor is confined within the narrow bounds of this transitory life; but he
assures God’s believing people that even in this pilgrimage or earthly
place of sojourn they shall enjoy a happy life, in so far as the state
of the world will permit; even as Paul declares that God promises both
these to such as fear him, in other words, that God will take care of us
during the whole course of our life, until he has at last brought us to
eternal glory. (<span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>..md)
The change of person serves also to give greater emphasis to the
language; for after having),’ spoken in the third person, the Prophet
comes to address his discourse to. *each* individual in particular, to
this effect: — Not only does immortal felicity await thee in heaven, but
during thy pilgrimage in this world God will not cease to perform the
office of the father of a family in maintaining thee, so that thy daily
food will be administered to thee by his hand, provided thou art
contented with a lowly condition.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span><span id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**3** *Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine
on the sides of thy house.* Here again it is promised, as in the
preceding Psalm, that God will make those who honor him fruitful in a
numerous offspring. The majority of mankind indeed desire to have issue,
and this desire may be said to be implanted in them by nature; but many,
when they have obtained children, soon become cloyed therewith. Again it
is often more grateful to want children than to leave a number of them
hi circumstances of destitution. But although the world is carried away
by irregular desires after various objects, between which it is
perpetually fluctuating in its choice, God gives this his own blessing,
the preference to all riches, and therefore we ought to hold it in high
estimation. If a man has a wife of amiable manners as the companion of
his life, let him set no less value upon this blessing than Solomon did,
who, in <span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>[Pr
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>,
affirms that it is God alone who gives a good wife. In like manner, if a
man be a father of a numerous offspring, let him receive that goodly
boon with a thankful heart. If it is objected that the Prophet in
speaking thus, detains the faithful on the earth by the allurements of
the flesh, and hinders them from aspiring towards heaven with free and
unencumbered minds, I answer, that it is not surprising to find him
offering to the Jews under the law a taste of God’s grace and paternal
favor, when we consider that they were like children. He has, however,
so tempered, or mixed it, as that by it; they might rise in their
contemplations to the heavenly life. Even at the present day God, though
in a more sparing manner, testifies his favor by temporal benefits,
agreeably to that passage in Paul’s first Epistle to Timothy just now
quoted, (<span id="xii.i-p14.2"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p14.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>“Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.”

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>But by this he does not cast any hindrance
or impediment in our way to keep us from elevating our minds to heaven,
but ladders are by this means rather erected to enable us to mount up
thither step by step. The Prophet, therefore, very properly reminds the
faithful that they already receive some fruit of their integrity, when
God gives them their food, makes them happy in their wives and children,
and condescends to take care of their life. But his design in commending
the present goodness of God is to animate them to hasten forward with
alacrity on the path which leads to their eternal inheritance. If the
earthly felicity described in this Psalm may not always be the lot of
the godly, but should it sometimes happen that their wife is a
termagant, or proud, or of depraved morals, or that their children are
dissolute and vagabonds, and even bring disgrace upon their father’s
house, let them know that their being deprived of God’s blessing is
owing to their having repulsed it by their own fault. And surely if each
duly considers his own vices he will acknowledge that God’s earthly
benefits have been justly withheld from him.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
128:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Lo! surely, thus blessed shall be the
man who feareth Jehovah. **5.** Jehovah shall bless thee from Zion; and
thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life: **6.**
And thou shalt see thy children’s children, and peace upon Israel.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** *Lo! surely, thus blessed shall be
the man who feareth Jehovah.* The preceding doctrine, that even in the
outward condition of God’s servants while in this transitory state there
is afforded such evidence of the divine favor and goodness as
demonstrates that we do not lose our labor in serving him, is here
confirmed by the Prophet. Yet as the reward of godliness does not appear
eminently conspicuous, he, in the first place, uses the demonstrative
particle, *Lo!*  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) and then adds
*surely;* for so I interpret the particle <span
id="xii.ii-p6.2"></span>כי, *ki.* We must, however, always remember, as
I have previously noticed, that the divine blessing is promised to us
upon earth in such a way as that it may not engross our thoughts and
keep them grovelling in the dust; for it is not meet that our hope of
the life to come should be stifled. This is the reason why we do not at
all times equally enjoy the benefits of God.

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *Jehovah shall bless thee from Zion.*
Some, would have this sentence to be a prayer, and therefore they
resolve the future tense into the optative mood. But it seems rather to
be a continued statement of the same doctrine previously dwelt on, the
Prophet now expressing more plainly that the benefits which he has
recounted are to be ascribed to God as their author. Although the gifts
of God often present themselves before our eyes, yet through the
obscurity which false imaginations throw around them our perception of
them is dim and imperfect. Hence this repetition of the sentiment, That
whenever true believers meet with any prosperous events in the course of
their life, it is the effect of the divine blessing, is not to be deemed
superfluous. The persons described are said to be blessed *from Zion,*
to lead them to call to remembrance the covenant into which God had
entered with them, for he had graciously promised to be favorable to the
observers of his law; and these principles of godliness they had imbibed
from their infancy. The Prophet, therefore, declares that it is no novel
doctrine or something before unheard of which he adduces, the law having
long ago taught them that it is made manifest even by the temporary
benefits conferred on those who serve God, that the pains taken in
serving him are not thrown away; and he affirms that of this they shall
actually have the experience. What is added concerning *the good of
Jerusalem* is to be regarded as en-joining upon the godly the duty not
only of seeking their own individual welfare, or of being devoted to
their own peculiar interests, but rather of having it as chief desire to
see the Church of God in a flourishing condition. It would be a very
unreasonable thing for each member to desire what may be profitable for
itself, while in the meantime the body was neglected. From our extreme
proneness to err in that respect, the Prophet, with good reason,
recommends solicitude about the public welfare; and he mingles together
domestic blessings and the common benefits of the Church in such a way
as to show us that they are things joined together, and which it is
unlawful to put asuader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc12011.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="xii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> “The tables of the Jews, as we may hence
(and from <span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>[1Sa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011)<span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>.md)
infer, were round: they had sobs (<span id="xii.i-p3.2"></span>[Eze
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041)<span id="xii.i-p3.2"></span>.md)
placed about them, on which (<span id="xii.i-p3.3"></span>[Ge
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.i-p3.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p3.4"></span>[Jud
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.i-p3.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p3.5"></span>[1 Sam.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.i-p3.5"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p3.6"></span>[1Ki
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p3.6"></span>.md)
they sat, excepting at the Paschal feast.” — *Cresswell.* In the
Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible, the writer on this passage
objects to the common reading — *Fruitful vine by the sides of thine
house.* *olive-plants round about thy table.* “We do not remember,” says
he, “to have met with a single instance in the East of vines trained
against the walls of a house, or of olives near or about a house.
Neither have we read of such instances. The passage doubtless derives
its figures from the fertility of the vine, and from the appearance of
the olive, or the order in which olive-trees are planted.” He
accordingly proposes the following construction — “Thy wife, on the
sides (interior apartments) of thy house, shall be as the fruitful vine;
and thy children, round about thy table, like olive-plants.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc12011.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="xii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>Lequel true
fois ayant bon vent sur mer, et la navigation prospore apres avoir pille
une temple.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc12011.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span> <span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>Il use en
premier lieu d’un mot qui est commoe pour demonstrer la chose au doigt
ou a l’oeil, *voyla* — *Fr.* “He, in the first place, uses a word, which
is, as it were, to point to the thing with the finger, or show it to the
eye*, Lo!*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 129](cc12012.md)
