<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](crc09)  [Next](crc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Death of Lochu

Cuchulainn killed no one from the Saile ind Orthi (?) in the Conaille
territory, until they reached Cualnge. Cuchulainn was then in Cuince; he
threatened then that when he saw Medb he would throw a stone at her
head. This was not easy to him, for it is thus that Medb went and half
the host about her, with their shelter of shields over her head.

Then a waiting-woman of Medb's, Lochu by name, went to get water, and a
great troop of women with her. Cuchulainn thought it was Medb. He threw
two stones from Cuince, so that he slew her in her plain (?). Hence is
Ath Rede Locha in Cualnge.

From Findabair Cuailnge the hosts divided, and they set the country on
fire. They collect all there were of women, and boys, and maidens, and
cattle, in Cualnge together, so that they were all in Findabair.

'You have not gone well,' said Medb; 'I do not see the Bull with you.'

'He is not in the province at all,' said every one.

Lothar the cowherd is summoned to Medb.

'Where is the Bull?' said she. 'Have you an idea?'

'I have great fear to tell it,' said the herd. 'The night,' said he,
'when the Ulstermen went into their weakness, he went with three
twenties of heifers

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

with him, so that he is at the Black Corrie of Glenn Gatt.'

'Go,' said Medb, 'and carry a withe <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)
between each two of you.'

They do this: hence this glen is called Glenn Gatt. Then they bring the
Bull to Findabair. The place where he saw the herd, Lothar, he attacked
him, so that he brought his entrails out on his horns; and he attacked
the camp with his three fifties of heifers, so that fifty warriors were
killed. And that is the death of Lothar on the Foray.

Then the Bull went from them out of the camp, and they knew not where he
had gone from them; and they were ashamed. Medb asked the herd if he had
an idea where the Bull was.

'I think he would be in the secret places of Sliab Culind.'

Then they returned thus after ravaging Cualnge, and did not find the
Bull there. The river Cronn rose against them to the tops of the trees;
and they spent the night by it. And Medb told part of her following to
go across.

A wonderful warrior went next day, Ualu his name. He took a great stone
on his back to go across the water; the stream drove him backwards with
the stone on his back. His grave and his stone are on the road at the
stream: Lia Ualand is its name.

They went round the river Cronn to the source, and they would have gone
between the source and the mountain, only that they could not get leave
from Medb; she preferred to go across the mountain, that their track
might remain there for ever, for an insult

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

to the Ulstermen. They waited there three days and three nights, till
they dug the earth in front of them, the Bernas Bo Cuailnge.

It is there that Cuchulainn killed Crond and Cœmdele and ———. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) A hundred warriors died ——— <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_43) with Roan and Roae, the two historians of
the Foray. A hundred and forty-four, kings died by him at the same
stream. They came then over the Bernas Bo Cuailnge with the cattle and
stock of Cualnge, and spent the night in Glenn Dail Imda in Cualnge.
Botha is the name of this place, because they made huts over them there.
They come next day to Colptha. They try to cross it through
heedlessness. It rose against them then, and it carries a hundred
charioteers of them to the sea; this is the name of the land in which
they were drowned, Cluain Carptech.

They go round Colptha then to its source, to Belat Alioin, and spent the
night at Liasa Liac; that is the name of this place, because they made
sheds over their calves there between Cualnge and Conaille. They came
over Glenn Gatlaig, and Glass Gatlaig rose against them. Sechaire was
its name before; Glass Gatlaig thenceforth, because it was in withes
they brought their calves; and they slept at Druim Fene in Conaille.
(Those then are the wanderings from Cualnge to Machaire according to
this version.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42:1](crc10.htm#fr_42) Ir. *gatt*, a withe.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43:1](crc10.htm#fr_44) Obscure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Harrying of Cualnge](crc11)

</div>
