<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](crc15)  [Next](crc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6ILA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cattle Raid of Cualnge*, by L. Winifred Faraday, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Meeting of Cuchulainn and Findabair

'Let an offer go to him,' said Ailill, 'that Findabair will be given to
him on condition that he keeps away from the hosts.'

Mane Athramail goes to him. He goes first to Loeg.

'Whose man are you?' said he.

Loeg does not speak to him. Mane spoke to him thrice in this way.

'Cuchulainn's man,' said he, 'and do not disturb me, lest I strike your
head off.'

'This man is fierce,' said Mane, turning from him. He goes then to speak
to Cuchulainn. Now Cuchulainn had taken off his tunic, and the snow was
round

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

him up to his waist as he sat, and the snow melted round him a cubit for
the greatness of the heat of the hero.

Mane said to him in the same way thrice, 'whose man was he?'

'Conchobar's man, and do not disturb me. If you disturb me any longer, I
will strike your head from you as the head is taken from a blackbird.'

'It is not easy,' said Mane, 'to speak to these two.'

Mane goes from them then and tells his tale to Ailill and Medb.

'Let Lugaid go to him,' said Ailill, 'and offer to him the maiden.'

Lugaid goes then and tells Cuchulainn that.

'O friend Lugaid,' said Cuchulainn, 'this is a snare.'

'It is the king's word that has said it,' said Lugaid; 'there will be no
snare therefrom.'

'Let it be done so,' said Cuchulainn.

Lugaid went from him therewith, and tells Ailill and Medb that answer.

'Let the fool go in my form,' said Ailill, 'and a king's crown on his
head, and let him stand at a distance from Cuchulainn lest he recognise
him, and let the maiden go with him, and let him betroth her to him, and
let them depart quickly in this way; and it is likely that you will play
a trick on him thus, so that he will not hinder you, till he comes with
the Ulstermen to the battle.'

Then the fool goes to him, and the maiden also; and it was from a
distance he spoke to Cuchulainn. Cuchulainn goes to meet them. It
happened that he recognised by the man's speech that he was a fool. He
threw a sling stone that was in his hand at him,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

so that it sprang into his head and brought his brains out. Then he
comes to the maiden, cuts her two tresses off, and thrusts a stone
through her mantle and through her tunic, and thrusts a stone pillar
through the middle of the fool. There are their two pillars there: the
pillar of Findabair, and the fool's pillar.

Cuchulainn left them thus. A party was sent from Ailill and Medb to seek
out their folk, for they thought they were long; they were seen in this
position. All this was heard throughout the camp. There was no truce for
them with Cuchulainn afterwards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[62:1](crc15.htm#fr_65) Or 'female stealers.'
(O'Davoren.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Combat of Munremar and Curoi](crc17)

</div>
