[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pbd07)  [Next](pbd09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pomo Bear Doctors*, by S.A. Barrett, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WEAPONS AND THEIR USE

A bear doctor usually carried one and sometimes two elk-horn daggers,
called *bōō* *a*, literally "elk horn." Such a dagger was from six to
ten inches in length and was made by pounding at its base and breaking
off the large end point of an elk antler and sharpening its tip. It was
rubbed on a grinding stone and smoothed throughout its length and a hole
was bored in its base through which a loop about two feet long was
passed for suspending it about the neck or from the belt. This loop was
always of string, as this is not affected by dampness.

Obsidian or flint knives, called *bat!*, were sometimes used in addition
to or in place of the elk-horn dagger. The blade of such a knife was
made by first striking the larger flakes from it with a hammer stone and
then chipping its edges with an antler chipping tool. This blade was set
into a split oak handle and bound securely with string, but was not
pitched. Both of these were thrusting weapons.

Other weapons were sometimes used, even the stone pestle being employed
as a weapon.

Bear doctors often operated in pairs, and sometimes in greater numbers.
They frequently deployed so as to cover a considerable area in their
hunt, and had a method of intercommunication. If a prospective victim
was sighted at some distance, the bear doctor stood erect on the top of
the nearest ridge, with his back turned directly toward him. This signal
brought the other bear doctors into positions to surround the victim.
Informants maintain that in the actual attack a bear doctor frequently
stood unconcernedly, near the path of his victim, and with his back
toward him until he was quite near. He then whirled and attacked
suddenly. They stated that this was also the method of attack of a real
bear.

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

It is said that the only way to overcome a bear doctor was to seize his
head or shoulders and jerk off his helmet. This completely removed his
magic power. The story is told that Kamachi, a very brave and powerful
man formerly living at the Yorkville Rancheria, mistook two real bears
for bear doctors, attacked them in this manner, and finally succeeded in
killing them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rites Over the Suit](pbd09)
