[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pbd06)  [Next](pbd08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pomo Bear Doctors*, by S.A. Barrett, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE MAGIC SUIT

The suit of the bear doctor, called *gawī*, was made as follows: First,
an openwork basket was woven of white oak twigs to fit the head and with
openings for eyes, nose, and mouth. Disks of abalone shell with small
openings to permit actual vision were fitted into the eye openings in
the basket. This basket served as a foundation over which to place the
skin of the bear's head. It was made so that it exactly fitted the
wearer's head and remained in place even when he moved violently. The
covering of this helmet, as also the outer covering for the rest of the
body, was usually made of real grizzly bear skin, though a net covered
with soaproot fiber was sometimes used. The skin of the bear's head was
shaped, but not stuffed, so as to retain its proper form, the eye-holes
of the skin being made to fit the shell-filled eye-holes in the basket.
The remainder of the bearskin was fitted exactly to the body, arms, and
legs so as to perfectly hide every part of the body and give the wearer
the appearance of a grizzly.

When soaproot fiber was used in making the bear doctor's suit, a

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

fine net was first woven and thickly covered with shredded soaproot
fiber (*ap* *tsida*). This was woven entirely in one piece and so
arranged as to completely cover the wearer from head to foot, including
the basketry helmet just mentioned. It laced in front.

A low shoe, with the sole rounded and shaped somewhat like that of a
bear's foot, was worn. This shoe was made of woven basketry held between
two hoops and so arranged that the foot went between the two sections,
which were attached directly to the costume. It was said that sometimes,
also, similarly shaped shoes were placed upon the hands. At other times
nothing was worn on either hands or feet.

Before donning the suit an "armor" of shell beads was put on. Four belts
covered the abdomen. Each was about six inches wide and made of a
different size and form of beads. One, called *hmūki*, covered the
umbilicus. The other three, which were placed one above the other,
completely covered the remainder of the abdomen, chest, and back up to
the armpits, and were called respectively *kibūkal*, *catanī* *kūtsa*,
and *tadatada*. The last protected the heart, and was made of very
large, discoidal beads. Ordinarily these bead belts were woven in the
usual way. Sometimes, however, one or more of the four was covered
without by a layer of woodpecker scalps. Strings of shell beads were
wound closely about the arms from wrist to shoulder and the legs were
similarly covered. All these beads served as a protection against arrows
in case the bear doctor was attacked by hunters.

A type of body armor, made of wooden rods and used in open warfare, is
said to have been sometimes used by bear doctors. This
[consisted](errata.htm#1.md) of two layers of rods obtained from the
snowdrop bush (*bakol*), each rod being about the size of a lead pencil.
These were bound together with string, one layer of rods being placed
vertically and the other horizontally, in such a manner as to make a
very close and effective armor.

Two globose, three-rod foundation baskets, called *kūtc* *tcadōtcadoī*,
and each about three inches in diameter, were half filled with water and
each encased tightly in a closely woven fabric made of milkweed fiber
cord, or in a casing of rawhide. One was then tied, inside the bearskin
suit, just under each jaw or under each armpit. In the soap-root fiber
suit, small pockets were woven on its inner surface for their reception.
The swashing of the water made a sound (pluk, pluk, pluk, pluk)
resembling that of the viscera of a bear as he moves along. Sometimes,
instead of these baskets, a slightly larger pair of plain-twining were
tied one at each side at the waist. The doctor never

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

wore more than one pair at a time and never wore a single basket alone.
Canoe-form baskets ten or twelve inches long and with unusually small
openings were sometimes carried in place of the small, globose baskets
above mentioned. They were sometimes filled with water, as were the
small baskets, and at other times were used as receptacles for beads,
berries, or other commodities.

[Plate 7 (frontispiece)](pbd00.htm#img_front.md) shows a Pomo bear doctor
suit, in the Peabody Museum of Harvard University, reproduced by
courtesy of Mr. C. C. Willoughby. This is a model. While differing in
some details from the explanations received from informants, it confirms
them in substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Weapons and Their Use](pbd08.md)
