<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Baha'i](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sog11) 
[Next](sog13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Splendour of God*, by Eric Hammond, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

*The Fourth Valley*:

<span class="smallcaps">The Valley of Divine Unity</span>

He (the traveller) drinks from the cup of abstraction and gazes on the
manifestations of singleness.

At this station he rends asunder the veils of plurality, flies away from
the worlds of lust, and ascends to the Heaven of Oneness:

He hears with Divine ears, and beholds the mysteries of the creation of
the Eternal One with God-like eyes. He steps into the retreat of the
Friend, and becomes an intimate in the pavilion of the Beloved. . . .

He sees no commendation, name, or dignity, of himself; he sees his own
commendation in the commendation of the True One, and beholds the Name
of the True One in his own name. He will know 'all voices to be from the
King,' and hear all the melodies from Him.

He will be established on the throne of—'Say, all is from God,' and rest
on the carpet of—'There is no power nor might but through God alone.'

He will look upon things with the vision of oneness . . . and see the
light of unity manifest and present in all the existent things. All the
differences which the traveller sees in the world of Being during the
various stages of his journey, are due to the view of the traveller
himself. We bring an illustration in order that this fact may become
thoroughly evident:

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Consider the phenomenal sun which shines forth on all beings with the
same effulgence. . . .

But its appearance in every place and the light it sheds thereon, is in
accord with the degree of the capacity of that place. In a mirror it
reflects . . . it creates fire in the crystal . . . it develops
everything according to the capacity of that thing; by the command of
the Causer of effects.

Colours also appear in accord with (the nature of) the place; even as in
a yellow glass the splendour is yellow, in a white one the ray is white,
and in a red one it is red. These differences are due to the place and
not to the effulgence of light; and if the place is confronted by an
obstacle, such as walls or ceiling, that place is bereft of the
splendour of the sun.

Some weak souls, having enclosed the ground of knowledge within the wall
of self and desire, and within the veil of heedlessness and blindness,
are therefore screened from the effulgence of the Sun of Significances
and the mysteries of the Eternal Beloved One; are kept from the Gems of
wisdom . . . deprived of Beauty, and separated from the Ka‘aba (sanctum)
of Glory. . . .

An agreeable odour is unpleasant to the beetle, and a fragrant perfume
has no effect upon one afflicted with a cold.

Hence, for the guidance of the multitude, it has been said, 'Remove the
cold from thy head and

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

brain, so that the Fragrance of God may fill thy nostrils.'

The difference of place is now made clear.

When the gaze of the traveller is restricted, when he looks through
glasses (of different colours) he sees yellow, red, or white.

It is due to such a view of things that conflict is stirred up . . . and
a gloomy dust, rising from men of limitations, has enveloped the world.

Some extend their gaze to the effulgence of the light; and others drink
from the wine of Oneness and therefore see nothing but the sun itself.

Because of journeying in these different stations, travellers differ in
their understanding and explanation of things.

That is why the sign of difference is manifest in the world; for some
dwell on the plane of oneness and speak of the world of oneness; some
stand in the worlds of limitation, others in the stages of self, and
still others are absolutely veiled.

The ignorant, who have gained no portion from the splendour of the
Beautiful One, speak in certain (unreasonable) words, and in every time
and age they inflict upon the people of Unity that which is only worthy
of and befits their own selves.

'If God should punish men for their iniquity, He would not leave (on the
earth) any moving thing; but He giveth them respite unto an appointed
time' (Koran).

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

A pure heart is like unto a mirror; purify it with the polish of Love,
and severance from all save God, until the Ideal Sun may reflect
therein, and the Eternal Morn may dawn.

Then wilt thou find clear and manifest the meaning of—'Neither doth My
earth nor heaven occupy Me, but the heart of My faithful servant
occupieth Me!'—and wilt take thy life in thy hands and sacrifice it,
with a thousand longings, to the new Beloved.

When the lights of the splendour of the King of Oneness are seated on
the throne of the heart and soul, His light becomes manifest in all the
parts and members.

Then will the mystery of the (following) tradition emerge from the veil
of obscurity:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'A servant always draws near Me with prayers, until I respond unto him.
And when I have responded to him, then I become his ear wherewith he
heareth.'

</div>

For (in this case) the Owner of the house becomes manifest in His Own
House (*i.e.* the heart), and the pillars of the house are all
illuminative and radiative through His light.

The action and effect of the Light is from the Giver of Light; this is
why all move through Him, and arise by His Desire.

This is that Fountain wherefrom drink those

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

near unto God; as it is said, 'A Fountain whereof those shall drink who
are near (unto God).'

Let no one suppose these explanations to be redolent of
anthropomorphism, or indicative of a degrading or restricting of the
worlds (or states) of the True One to the planes of the creatures . . .
for God, in His Essence, is sanctified above ascent or descent, entrance
or exit. He has been, and will be everlastingly independent of (or free
from) the attributes of the creatures.

No one has known Him, and no soul has found out His substance.

All the sages are bewildered in the Valley of His Knowledge, and all the
saints are perplexed (in their endeavours to) comprehend His Essence. He
is purified from being comprehended by all men of comprehension, and is
exalted above the knowing of men of knowledge.

'The road (to His Essence) is barred, and search (therefor) is rejected.

His evidence is His Sign, and His Being is His proof.'

Thus the lovers of the Face of the Beloved One have said, 'O Thou whose
essence alone bears evidence of the Essence of Him who is sanctified
beyond homogeneity with His creatures.' . . .

How can a mortal shadow compare with the Immortal Sun?

Yea, such mentions as are made concerning the stages of knowledge,
concern only the knowledge

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

of the splendour of that Sun of Truth which becomes manifest in the
mirrors (*i.e.* prophets, manifestations).

The reflection of that Light is within the hearts; but it is veiled
through sensual coverings and accidental conditions; as is the case with
a light enclosed within an iron lantern. When the lantern is removed the
radiance of the light will appear.

Likewise, when one rends asunder the illusive veils from the face of the
heart, the light of oneness will dwell therein.

Wherefore it is known that even for the Splendour (of the Sun of Divine
Essence) there is no entrance nor exit; how much less for that Essence
of Beings and that Mystery of the Desired One.

Reflect upon these stations with verification, and not with blind
imitation.

The repellent 'avaunt' of words cannot repulse the traveller (after
Truth), nor can the terror of allusions impede him.

'What veil can stand between the lover and the Beloved? The Wall of
Alexander itself can be no obstacle or screen.'

Mysteries are many, and strangers are countless.

Books are not sufficient for the Mystery of the Beloved, nor can it be
exhausted in these Tablets, although it is no more than one word, and
but one allegory.

'Knowledge is but one point, but the ignorant have multiplied it.'

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

I do not wish to mention much of the former sayings; for to speak of the
sayings of others would be an evidence of acquired learning (*i.e.*
mediate knowledge), and not of the Divine Gift (*i.e.* immediate
knowledge).

Moreover such explanations are beyond the limits of this treatise.

My forbearing to speak of the sayings of others is not due to pride, but
because of a showing forth of Wisdom and a manifesting of the Gift. . .
.

This servant accounts himself as nothing, even in the court of one of
the beloved of God (*i.e.* believers); how much more so in the presence
of the 'Holy Ones'?

Praise be unto my Lord, the Supreme. . . .

Although a short illustration has already been given as to the beginning
and end of the relative or dependent (not absolute) world (or plane),
yet again we set another example, so that all of the meanings may become
manifest in the garment of illustration.

For instance . . . consider . . . how you are the first in relation to
your son, and the last in relation to your father; how, outwardly
(*i.e.* according to the soul), (you bear evidence) of the inward
mysteries which, as a Divine Gift, are deposited within you.

Consequently, being the first, the last, the manifest, the hidden,
becomes true of you in the sense set forth above; so that in these four

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

grades bestowed on you, you may comprehend the (corresponding) grades of
the Divine; . . . 'Verily! He is the First and the Last, the Manifest
and the Hidden!'

The First is identical with the Last, and the Last is the same as the
First.

'Enkindle a fire with the Love of the Beloved One, and consume therewith
every thought and pious work.'

Consider thine own self; if thou hadst not become a father nor seen a
son, thou wouldest not have heard even these words.

Now, therefore, forget all these, so that thou mayest learn in the
School of Unity, before the Instructor of Love, and come back from the
stage—'Verily, we are (from God)'—unto ('and to Him) we return.'

Thus thou mayest abandon the abode of Unreality, and attain into thine
own real station, and abide in the shade of the Tree of Knowledge.

Impoverish thyself so that thou mayest arrive at the Court of Affluence.

Humiliate the body, so that thou mayest drink from the River of Glory,
and attain unto all the meanings of the poems which thou hast
questioned.

It is evident that these states depend upon the view of the traveller.

In every city he sees a world; in every valley he comes upon a fountain;
in every desert he hears a melody.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Peace be on whomsoever accomplisheth this supreme journey, and followeth
the True One through the Lights of Guidance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifth Valley: The Valley of Contentment](sog13)

</div>
