[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm108)  [Next](hm110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXVQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. I*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# THE ONLY TRUE WAY;

###### OR,

### AN USEFUL, GOOD, AND HELPFUL TRACT,

##### POINTING OUT THE PATH OF TRUTH.

#### \_\_\_\_\_

#### 1677.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### THE ONLY TRUE WAY.

BELOVED friend and brother, under the name of this glorious Art there is
to be found much false teaching, which is put forward by
pseudo-alchemists, whose writings are nothing but imposture and deceit,
and are yet highly esteemed by people of the simpler sort. These
charlatans induce their dupes to waste much money and time on that which
can profit them nothing; for unless a thing be well begun, it can never
be brought to a good end. Yet most men, who, nowadays, have devoted
themselves to this exalted art of chemistry, are pursuing a wrong
course, and are deceivers or deceived. The deceivers are conscious of
their own ignorance, and try to veil it under an obscure and allegorical
style. The less they really know, the more pompous and the more
unintelligible do their speculations become. But the reader, who is
puzzled by their perplexing style, may at least comfort himself with the
assurance that he knows as much about the matter as the authors. That
assurance must serve for a kind of clue to the endless labyrinth of
their false sublimations, calcinations, distillations, solutions,
coagulations, putrefactions, and corruptions. Nevertheless, we may
almost every day see foolish persons spend their whole substance on
those absurd experiments, being induced to do so by the aforesaid
pseudo-alchemists, who impose on them with a false process, and fanciful
perversions of Nature.

With these useless and unnecessary experiments the true Alchemists will
have nothing to do. They follow the method pursued by Nature in the
veins of the earth, which is very simple, and includes no solutions,
putrefactions, coagulations, or anything of the kind. Can Nature, in the
heart of the earth, where the metals do grow and receive increase, have
anything

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

corresponding to all those pseudo-alchemistical instruments, alembics,
retorts, circulatory and sublimatory phials, fires, and other materials,
such as cobbler's wax, salt, arsenic, mercury, sulphur, and so forth?
Can all these things really be necessary for the growth and increase of
the metals? It is surprising that any one not entirely bereft of his
senses can spend many years in the study of alchemy, and yet never get
beyond those foolish and frivolous solutions, coagulations,
putrefactions, distillations, while Nature is so simple and
unsophisticated in her methods. Surely every true Artist must look upon
this elaborate tissue of baseless operations as the merest folly, and
can only wonder that the eyes of those silly dupes are not at last
opened, that they may see something besides such absurd sophisms, and
read something besides those stupid and deceitful books. It seems that
they are so entangled in their sophisms that they can never attain to
the freedom of true philosophy.

But let me tell you that so long as you love lies, and turn away from
rational philosophy, you will never find the right way. I can speak from
bitter experience. For I, too, toiled for many years in accordance with
those sophistic methods, and endeavoured to reach the coveted goal by
sublimation, distillation, calcination, circulation, and so forth, and
to fashion the Stone out of substances such as urine, salt, atrament,
alum, etc. I have tried hard to evolve it out of hairs, wine, eggs,
bones, and all manner of herbs; out of arsenic, mercury, and sulphur,
and all the minerals and metals. I have striven to elicit it by means of
aqua fortis and alkali. I have spent nights and days in dissolving,
coagulating, amalgamating, and precipitating. Yet from all these things
I derived neither profit nor joy. I had hoped much from the
quintessence, but it disappointed me like the rest.

Therefore, beloved brother, let me warn you to have nothing to do with
sublimations of sulphur and mercury, or the solution of bodies, or the
coagulation of spirits, or with all the innumerable alembics, which bear
little profit unto veritable art. So long as you do not seek the true
essence of Nature, your labours will be doomed to failure; therefore, if
you desire success, you must once for all renounce your allegiance to
all those old methods, and enlist under the standards of that method
which proceeds in

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

strict obedience to the teaching of Nature—in short, the method which
Nature herself pursues in the bowels of the earth. For you see that
Nature uses only one substance in her work of developing and perfecting
the metals, and that this substance includes everything that is
required. Now, this substance appears to call for no special treatment,
except that of digestion by gentle heat, which must be continued until
it has reached its highest possible degree of development. For this
simple heating process the cunning sophists have substituted solutions,
coagulations, calcinations, putrefactions, sublimations, and other
fantastical operations—which are only different names for the same
thing; and thereby they have multiplied a thousand-fold the difficulties
of this undertaking, and given rise to the popular notion that it is a
most arduous, hazardous, and ruinously expensive enterprise. This they
have simply done out of jealousy and malice, to put others off the right
track, and to involve them in poverty and ruin. But they will find it
difficult to justify their conduct before God, who has commanded us to
love our neighbours as ourselves. For out of sheer malice they have
rendered the road of truth impassable, and perplexed a simple natural
process with such an elaborate tissue of circumstantial nomenclature, as
to make the amelioration of the metals appear a hopelessly difficult
task.

For while you heat, you also putrefy, or decompose, as you may see by
the changes which a grain of wheat undergoes in the, ground under the
influence of the rain and of the sun; you know that it must first decay
before new life can spring forth. It is this process which they have
denominated putrefaction and solution. Again when you heat, you also
sublime, and to this coction they have applied the terms sublimation and
multiplication, that the simple man might err more easily. In like
manner coagulation takes place in heating; for they say that coagulation
takes place when humidity is changed into the nature of fire, so as to
be able to resist the action of fire, without evaporating, or being
consumed. And heating also includes that which they call "circulation,"
or conjunction, or the union of fire with water to prevent complete
combustion.

Thus you see that that which they have called by so many names is really
but one simple process. The substance, which

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

is *one*, they have described under a similar variety of appellations,
to prevent men from finding that which, by the grace of God, can provide
for them so many precious blessings. In the first place they call it
"our mercury," by which they mean nothing but moisture, which begins to
unite itself with the fire, and therefore may be compared to mercury.
Again, they use the expression, "our sulphur," whereby they mean nothing
but the fire itself, which lies hid beneath the water, or humidity, and
is heated by the water to its highest degree. Then, again, they call it
Hyle, or the First Substance, because all things are first generated out
of water and fire. Other names, such as Arsenic, Orpiment, Bismuth, are
not used by the Sages at all, but only by certain ignorant charlatans,
of whom we need not take any further notice. Let *us* follow the
guidance of Nature: *she* will not lead us astray.

If you let this be your motto, you will surely be able to call to mind
the first substance, out of which all metallic substances are generated.
But before we consider this question, it will much behove you to
understand why the Sun, Moon, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, are
metals, and what is their origin. Besides finding an answer to this
question, you must also bear in mind that all created things are divided
into three kingdoms, viz., the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral.
To the first belong all living things that have flesh and blood; to the
second all herbs, plants, and trees; to the third all metals, stones,
and everything that cannot be burned.

But, though divided into three classes, yet all things, O my brother,
may be traced back to one common Principle, from which they derive their
generation, or birth. By different varieties of heat this first
substance is transmuted in various ways, and assumes different specific
forms. Since, then, Nature is so simple, I advise you once more to have
done with all those foolish sublimations, coagulations, and
putrefactions, and the ridiculous old wives’ fables which are even now
believed by many, and simply to follow Nature, and her unsophisticated
methods: then she will take you by the hand, and guide you to the true
substance. For the only method of correcting or ameliorating Nature,
consists in the natural heating of essences. Now, this Essence, my
friend, is the principal thing, on which depends the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

whole matter. This simple truth, the vulgar herd of alchemists seem
quite unable to understand, and thus go on toiling day by day with
substances which have nothing to do with the matter. They might as well
sow horn, or wood, or stones, and expect a golden harvest of corn. The
*sun* and *moon* cannot be made out of *all* substances, but only out of
the natural Essence out of which all things are formed, being afterwards
differentiated into divers substances by different varieties of heat.
Thus the special quality of every individual thing is to be referred to
the degree of its coction. If, therefore, we wish to exercise the true
Art of Alchemy, we must imitate the method by which Nature does her work
in the bowels of the earth.

The ancients have named many colours in connexion with this process,
such as black, white, citrine, red, green, and so forth. All this is
simply intended to lead you astray from the right road, and to keep you
in ignorance. Those ancient writers were constantly at the greatest
pains to obscure their style with such a perplexing variety of
allegorical expressions as to render it impossible for the ordinary
reader to understand their meaning.

Therefore, I would again and again exhort you not to believe them when
they tell you that you must have or take a black substance, or that the
substance turns black, white, and red in the course of the chemical
process. The black colour was suggested to them by the fact that the
substance or essence at first mingles with a brilliant material fire, by
which a liquid is separated from the essence in the form of a certain
black fume. This black fume the ancients called the Black Raven, and the
essence they denominated the Raven's Head. This separation you should
carefully observe. From it the ancients learned that the separation of
natural [substances](errata.htm#14) is nothing but a natural defect of
the heating process. This, again, suggested to them the consideration
that those essences that had been imperfectly heated by Nature, might be
aided in a natural manner by ordinary fire, and that thus the essences
which are still combustible, and their liquids (which the ancients
invidiously called mercury), being black when they are separated from
the essence, might be perfected by art, and the essences guarded against
combustion by their liquid, and the liquid rendered incapable of being

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

separated from the essence. This the ancients called "our sulphur." For
after this preparation the essence is no longer vegetable or animal, but
by the perfection of its heating it has become a mineral essence, and is
therefore called sulphur; the essence is nothing but an *elementary*
fire, and its liquid, which is guarded against combustion, is true
*elementary* air, and, because air is naturally warm and moist, it is
called mercury by those jealous ancients. Air contains in itself the
nature of fire, and elementary fire, again, contains within itself the
nature of air: thus, by the union of their common elements, a true
amalgamation of the two can take place. Such are the material fire and
water which we *see*. These material elements are nothing but an aid to
the essences of the elements by which they can be naturally reduced to
the highest degree (of perfection?). This gradation is the only true
Alchemy, and there is none beside. The pseudo-alchemy of our modern
charlatans is mere waste of money and time.

It would be a great mistake for you to suppose that you can derive any
real knowledge from the writings of the Sages. They show you only the
outside, and conceal the internal Essence. To you they offer the husks,
but the finest of the wheat they keep for themselves. They show you a
way which they do not dream of treading. I advise you, therefore, in
future, to give them a wide berth; or you will only enrich the
apothecaries while you plunge yourself and your family into the deepest
poverty; nay, instead of gaining the universal panacea, you will
contract the most dangerous diseases from constantly moving in an
atmosphere black with sulphurous and mercurial smoke, and fetid with the
stench of bismuth and all manner of salts.

It is truly amazing that none of the seekers after this great treasure,
though willing to submit to any amount of labour and hardship for its
sake, seem capable of perceiving the lesson which constant failure is
striving to impress upon them. What, I pray you, have those thousands of
persons, who have tried the solutions, coagulations, putrefactions,
amalgamations, and circulations, gained by their agonising toil? What
good result have they produced with their waters, solutions of metals,
blood, hair, eggs, milk, sugar, and all manner of herbs? Let me beseech
you to profit by their heart-breaking experience, and to

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

have done with everything but true Alchemy, which teaches that the
substance is brought to perfection, and attains the exaltation of
elementary fire, by its own light and liquid—by which also imperfect
metals are ameliorated, because their elementary fire was not properly
digested by its liquid. And for the same reason the elementary fire
cannot remain, for the liquid is separated from that elementary fire by
the heat of the ordinary fire, and evaporates in the form of white
smoke. The elementary fire, on the other hand, does not evaporate, but
abides with its earth, and must be burned with it, because its
protecting liquid has vanished in white smoke. This is that whiteness of
which the Ancients have said that it comes after the black colour. For
this reason, they are in the habit of saying that you must make it black
before you make it white. We begin our process with blackness, and
transmute the black smoke, but do not take it for our substance, and
make it white. The latter would be a foolish supposition and imposture.
If you would avoid such misapprehensions, you must not attempt the study
of this subject until you have a sound knowledge of the operations of
Nature, and more especially of the essential properties of the metals.

I am afraid, my Brother, that my book will cause you heaviness of heart,
instead of joy, because I sweep away at one fell stroke all those false
sophistical notions which had become so dear to you. Nevertheless, you
must once for all relinquish that idea of yours that you are profoundly
versed in the mysteries of this Art, and leave these childish
absurdities to those who derive wealth and profit from them. Among these
persons, Adam de Bodenstein held a very distinguished place; for he
wrote all manner of so-called theosophical books, and boasted of his
attainments in the alchemistic Art, of which he was really quite
ignorant. Yet to the present day many people believe that he (whose
expressions are those of a mere charlatan) had a real knowledge of true
alchemy. It is true that his nonsense cannot for a moment impose on the
initiated; but among the blind (as the proverb says) it is easy to win
golden opinions as a good fencer. On this account, and as Bodenstein is
no more among the living, I will dismiss the subject, for nothing but
what is favourable should be spoken of the dead

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and of the absent. This I will say, however, that he was a good Sophist
and a good physician; but of Alchemy he knew little or nothing. I should
not have said this much if I were not really anxious to warn the unwary
against being dazzled by the splendour of his name, and to prevent them
from being lured on by it to their own ruin.

If, then, you are a lover of the truth, you will bid farewell to these
specious absurdities, and henceforth entrust yourself to the guidance of
Nature alone; be sure that she will lead you onward without faltering to
the desired goal, even that method by which she works towards the
essence. Moreover, she will demand of you neither much labour nor any
considerable outlay. The whole thing is done by a simple process of
heating, which includes the solution and coagulation of the bodies, and
also the sublimation and putrefaction. But some writers have substituted
for the simple and true essence a certain other essence, with which they
have deceived the whole world, and involved many persons in considerable
losses. Whether their conduct was upright and loving will one day be
decided by the Great Judge. It would be better not to publish such
writings, since the false statements and groundless assertions with
which they swarm, plunge so many credulous persons into grievous losses.
For if there were not so many books put forward by ignorant writers,
many thousands of persons who at the present moment are hopelessly
floundering about in a sea of specious book-learning, would have been
led by the light of their own unaided intellects to the knowledge of
this precious secret; they are prevented, these many years, from seeing
the plain truth by a vast mass of printed nonsense which commands their
reverence, because they do not understand it. The Ancients did indeed
know something about the Art; but at the present day we can very well
dispense with the cumbrous phraseology under which they (most
successfully) attempted to veil their meaning. It can only tend to the
bewilderment of honest enquirers, who are thereby thrown off the true
scent, unless indeed they should come to be instructed by living
Masters.

I myself may not speak out as plainly as I would, for I am silenced by
the vow which binds all the masters of the Art, the curse that lights on
those who violate the sacred seal of Nature's

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

secrets, and the malediction of all the philosophers. Therefore, I must
exhort you again and again to trust your own observations rather than
the writings of others, and to let the Book of Nature be the most
favoured volume of your library. Observe her methods, not only in the
production of metals, but in the procreation of the fruits of the earth,
and their constant growth and development, in the winter and summer, in
the spring and autumn, by rain and sunshine. If you had a sound
knowledge of Nature's methods in producing the bud and the flower, and
in ripening the green fruit, you would be able to set your hand to the
germs which Nature provides in the bowels of the earth, and to educe
from them (or their substance) that which you so much desire.

Forgive me then, my Brother, for so unceremoniously overthrowing all
your old settled and dearly cherished convictions. My excuse must be
that I have done it for your own good, as you would otherwise never
learn the true secret of transmuting metals. You may believe and trust
me, for I can have no conceivable motive for filling the world with
fresh lies, of which, God knows, it is already full enough, through the
agency of the aforesaid deceivers and their willing dupes, who after
being lured on by those false books to the loss of all their worldly
goods, have not suffered their eyes to be opened by their losses, and
seem unable to find their way out of that gigantic labyrinth of
falsehood. Nay, they have even taken upon themselves to write books, and
to speak as if they were perfect masters of the Art, and had derived
great advantage from it, though in reality they have been brought so low
as to be able to afford nothing but miserable decoctions. They dissolved
until their whole fortune had undergone a process of dissolution; they
sublimed until all their gold and silver had evaporated; they putrefied
until their clothes decayed upon their bodies; and they calcined until
all their wood and coal were consumed to ashes, and they themselves were
reduced to wallet and staff.

This is the prize which they have won with all their trouble. Let their
ruin be a warning to you, my Brother. For *their* alchemy, instead of
imparting health, is followed by penury and disease; instead of
transmuting copper into gold, it changes

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

gold into copper and brass. Consider also how many ignorant persons,
such as cobblers, tailors, bankrupt merchants, and tavern keepers,
pretend to a knowledge of this Art, and, after a few years’ unsuccessful
experimenting in the laboratory, call themselves great doctors, announce
in boastful and sesquipedalian language their power to cure many
diseases, and promise mountains of gold. Those promises are empty wind,
and their medicines rank poison, with which they fill the churchyards,
and for the impudent abuse of which God will one day visit them with
heavy punishment. But I will leave the magistrates and the jailers to
deal with these swindling charlatans. I speak of them only to put you on
your guard. If so many persons write on the subject of Alchemy, who know
nothing whatever about the nature and generation of metals, it becomes
all the more necessary for you to be careful what books you read, and
how much you believe.

For I tell you truly that so long as you have no real and fundamental
knowledge of the nature of the metals, you cannot make much progress in
the true Art of Alchemy, or understand the natural transmutation of
metals. You must grasp the meaning of every direction before you can put
it into effect. Always mistrust that which you do not understand
(*i.e.*, in studying this art). There are *many* false ways, but there
can be only *one* that is true, and indicates a process which does not
require many hands, or much labour. For this reason, beloved friend and
Brother, you must work hard by day and by night to obtain a thorough
knowledge of the metals, and of their essential nature. Then you will be
able to understand the requirements of the art. You will know without
being told what is the true substance and the true method. You will see
the utter uselessness of your former labour, and you will be amazed at
your former blindness. Study the nature of metals and the causes of
their generation, for they derive their birth from the same source as
all other created things.

For as by a heating process the infant is developed in the mother's womb
out of the father's seed, and as the chicken is brought forth out of the
egg by the natural incubation of the hen, so the metals, too, are
developed in a certain way out of a certain substance. Yet I do not say,
my Brother, that

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

mercury and sulphur are the first substance of metals. Those juggling
deceivers have told you so; but in the veins of the earth, where the
metals grow, are found neither mercury nor sulphur. Therefore, when they
speak of sulphur, you must understand them to allude to elementary fire,
and by mercury you must understand the liquid. In a similar lying spirit
they have called fire (elementary) "our Sun," and the liquid "our Moon,"
or the elementary fire soul, and the elementary liquid spirit, because
elementary substances are invisible. The soul is invisible fire, and the
spirit invisible moisture: the outward essential fire and water they
have called '*bodies*,' because they are visible and palpable. Nay, they
try to make you believe that these are metallic bodies, and that you
must dissolve them. But do not let them deceive you. Be on your guard
against their dishonest tricks, and cunning devices, by which they set
you to experiment with metallic bodies, when they really mean the
metallic essence.

They point out to you various materials and substances, notwithstanding
that there is only *one* true substance, and *one* true method. Be sure
that their solutions, coagulations, sublimations, calcinations, and
putrefactions, do not represent the method of Nature in the heart of the
earth, where the metals grow. For pious Nature only heats the elementary
fire which is thereby ameliorated and fixed through its liquid; which
latter she also changes, by various degrees of heat, into all the
various objects which compose the three natural kingdoms—and although
now it is differentiated into bodies so different as vegetables,
animals, and minerals, yet they have all originally sprung from one
common substance, all have one root, which the Ancients denominated the
first Matter or Hyle. But it is really nothing but hidden elementary
fire, with its liquid, which the Ancients called the root liquid,
radical moisture, or humid radical, because it is the root of all
created things.

This liquid, with its fire, is differentiated into the various kinds of
natural bodies, by the various degrees of heat, or '*coction*,' which
take place in them. One thing is more perfectly heated in its elementary
fire through its liquid, than another. The *vegetable* nature is that in
which the coction is least perfect. Therefore its essence is easily
burned, and its liquid easily separated from its elementary fire, by
common fire.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

The coction of the *animal* is almost as imperfect as that of the
vegetable substance: for its essence is easily burned. The coction of
the *mineral* substances is the most perfect of all, because in them the
metallic liquid is more closely united (by coction) to its elementary
fire. Hence metals are better able to resist common fire than the
vegetable and animal substances. When a metal is placed in the fire, it
does not burn with a bright flame like wood; for the liquid of wood is
not so completely joined (by coction) to its essence, as the liquid of
metals is to *its* essence. The union of the liquid with the essence is
not metallic, but vegetable, for which reason the latter is consumed
with a black smoke, when, by a higher degree of coction, the vegetable
has been transmuted into a metallic essence, it no longer gives out a
black smoke in common fire, but a white smoke, as you may see when
imperfect metals are melted in the fire. That is why the Ancients said
that you must first make the substance black before you make it white,
*i.e.*, it must first give out a black smoke before it gives out a
white. Again they say: You must first make it white before you make it
red. To make red is to make perfect, because gold and silver have been
rendered perfect by coction, their essence being fully united to their
liquid, and changed into pure fire.

Do not then suffer yourself to be thrown off your guard by the obscure
phraseology of the Ancients. If you thoroughly study the simple
fundamental nature of the metals, you will know what their enigmatic
expressions mean, and will not, like some moderns, conclude from their
writings that you must take a certain substance and dissolve it until it
turns black, then again purify and calcine it till the blackness
disappears and it begins to turn white; and after that, once more
increase the fire and calcine and toil until the substance turns red.
Such an interpretation of the language of the Ancients can only suggest
itself to persons entirely ignorant of the nature of metallic
substances; indeed, the Ancients wrote as they did solely in order to
hide their real meaning from all but the close students of Nature. To
this end they were in the constant habit of employing the terms
"mercury" and "sulphur." And although the metallic essence is the true
substance which, by natural coction, must be raised from the lowest to
the highest stage of

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

development, and although the meaning of the Ancients is intelligible
enough to the initiated, yet the ignorant can gather from their language
no more than the fact that the substance must be taken from the metals.
But where are they to obtain it, and how are they to bring it to
perfection? The metallic essence can not be separated from the imperfect
metals without being injured; for if it be separated with fire the
liquid must evaporate, and the essence (with its earth) be consumed. Nor
will you be able to separate the essence of the imperfect metals by
means of aqua fortis, arsenic, aqua vitæ, or alkali, without injuring
the essence and its liquid by the foreign moisture: for the metallic
nature can bear no foreign substance, and if any foreign moisture
combines with the metallic liquid, it loses its proper quality and is
entirely corrupted.

The metallic essence of the perfect metals you cannot obtain in a
separate form; for their liquid and elementary fire are welded together
by so perfect a process of coction, and so closely united with their
earth, that neither fire nor water can avail to separate them, seeing
that the fire has no power over them, and no foreign moisture can
combine with, or corrupt, the liquid of perfect metals. All your labour
will be in vain: the coction has done its work so well that you will
never be able to undo it.

Hence, the Ancients said that there was no sulphur in anything but in
the metals, and hence also they called the metallic liquid quicksilver.
But names do not alter facts: the fact is that the elementary fire must
be so united to its elementary liquid by natural coction that they
become indivisible. For the liquid protects the fire against combustion,
so that both remain fixed and unchanged in common fire. This perfected
substance the Ancients have well called Elixir, or fire which has
undergone a process of perfect coction: for that which before was crude
and raw is "cooked," or digested by the process of coction. That element
which, by its imperfection, causes base metals to be broken up and
disintegrated by fire, has been digested and perfected by natural heat.

For this reason you must not grudge the labour which the proper
performance of this heating process demands, seeing that it includes
purification, sublimation, dissolution, and all the other

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

chemical processes enumerated by the ancient alchemists. All these you
may safely dismiss from your mind, as they can cause you nothing but
trouble, loss, and waste of time. My purpose in writing this faithful
admonition is to caution you again and again to beware of those pitfalls
with which the contemptuous obscurity of the Ancients has so plentifully
beset the path of the ingenuous enquirer. I also desired to suggest to
you the true *substance*, and the one true *method*, and have throughout
endeavoured to express myself in a style as free from allegorical
obscurity as possible. I have recalled you from your wanderings in the
pathless wilderness, and put you in the right way. Now you must beseech
Almighty God to give you the real philosophical temper, and to open your
eyes to the facts of nature. Thus alone you will be able to reach the
coveted goal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Glory of the World; or, Table of Paradise](hm110)
