[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Christianity](../../index) [Index](index) [Previous](gjb-0-1) [Next](gjb-1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

## FOREWORD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE main materials contained in these pages will certainly be new for
the vast majority of readers. Moreover the Mandæan narratives, legends
and discourses are not only interesting because of their own distinctive
matter and manner, but they are also arresting; for they raise a number
of problems, some of which are far-reaching and one is fraught with
implications of immense importance. The definite solutions of these
problems, however, lie in the future, and the most important of them
will perhaps never be reached; for, in the absence of straightforward
historical information, general agreement on any subject that concerns
Christian origins immediately or even indirectly is now well-nigh a
psychological impossibility.

   The writer's intention in publishing these selections is not to
speculate about the problems, for we are not yet in a position to state
them with sufficient accuracy, but the very modest undertaking of making
accessible for English readers some specimens of narrative and doctrine
from one collection only of the traditional gnostic material which the
Mandæan scribes have preserved to our own day through centuries of
copying, and which hands on an early literature purporting at least in
part to go back to times contemporaneous with Christian origins. For I
think it will be of service for them, as a beginning, to read for
themselves what the Mandæans have conserved from the past of the now
legendary story of their great prophet, John the Baptizer, and some of
the most characteristic notions and doctrines ascribed directly to
him,—and that too in their full native setting and not in the form of
brief summaries or isolated sentences, which is practically all they
will meet with in the very few articles on the subject which have yet
appeared in English,—and in articles only, for of books there are none.

   Moreover it has been impossible to do even this previously; <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> for it is only quite recently that we have had
put into our hands a reliable and complete version in German of two of
the three main collections preserved to us; and we are still awaiting
the translation of the most important deposit, without which it is
impossible to survey the whole field thoroughly and so make really
reliable inferences. All prior attempts at partial translation have been
tentative at best and for the most part erroneous. But though we are
still without a scientific version of the Treasury, it is nevertheless
already possible to give almost a complete setting forth of one topic;
for the selections from the John-Book here presented include practically
all the matter that refers directly to the prophet, seeing that the
Treasury makes only one brief reference immediately to him.

   In this material a figure is depicted which in many ways differs
greatly from the familiar picture sketched in the gospels and briefly
referred to in the classical Josephus. The interest of the Gnostics has
never been in external history, so that for the most part we are either
in complete ignorance of, or lamentably uninformed about, the persons of
their great teachers and writers. Their interest was rather in inner or
psychic story and the imaginative history of ideas. Consequently the
Mandæan picture of John is the prophetical and intimate aspect it
presented to those within the mystic atmosphere of the community and to
the fond memory of an esoteric tradition. No external view is preserved.
I have deliberately brought out this contrast as strongly as possible by
setting the Mandæan story in the midst between two studies of traditions
which make much of John's wild appearance and strange dress, a popular
external element which would at first sight suggest an equally primitive
quality of his thought and action. This has been done to enable the
reader to realize as strongly as possible the difficulties surrounding
the fundamental problem of historicity, though the sharpness of the
contrast is already somewhat modified by the doctrinal considerations
brought out in the first study, which may theoretically help to bridge
over to some extent the gap between the crudest features of the popular
external tradition and what claims to be an internal tradition, no
matter how it may have been sublimated in the form in which it has
reached us. The second study, on the Slavonic Josephus' account of the
Baptist and Jesus, though throwing no, or scarcely any, light on
doctrine, <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> is, in my opinion, of
importance from the point of view of possible external popular
tradition, and in any case will be a novelty for most readers.

   It is a remarkable and somewhat saddening reflection that now, when
after long years of waiting we are at last obtaining adequate versions
of these so faithfully preserved Mandæan gnostic scriptures, their
handers-on themselves are dying out, and those of them who remain do not
seem to be sufficiently instructed or to possess the general education
to throw light on the problems which their documents present to
scholars. They do not seem to have any notion of the history of religion
or the critical power in any way to analyze their own scriptures and
compare them with parallel developments in the past. What I do not quite
understand, however, is why, with regard to the philological side of the
subject, no attempt, as far as I can ascertain, has been made by any
European Semitic scholar scientifically to study Mandæan with the
Mandæans themselves, and so collaborate with them in translation. They
all speak Arabic as well as their native tongue; and it is somewhat
puzzling that neither Brandt nor Lidzbarski, who have, after the pioneer
work of Nöldeke on the language, busied themselves so sedulously with
the documents, should not have visited them. They are accessible; and
indeed do not seem in any way to be averse from giving information, as
is seen from Siouffi's informant in the eighties of last century and
quite recently from the account of Miss E. S. Stephens (now Mrs.
Drower). The latter has made great friends with the Amara community and
gives an entertaining chapter about them, under the heading 'A Peculiar
People,' in her brightly-written travel-book, *By Tigris and
Euphrates*.<span id="page_vii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_vii_note_1) It is the description of
an intelligent and deeply interested observer, but of one unaquainted
with the literature of the subject, and therefore not in a position to
press for information on points of importance, if perchance it could be
obtained. The account deals with externals, but it may be of interest to
our readers to reproduce what Mrs. Drower was told about the *shalmono*
and the *masseqtā*-ceremony, or rite of the making of a 'perfect' in
this connection.

   "There is a way . . . in which a Subba may reach a state <span
id="page_viii">p. viii</span> of holiness akin to that of the dweller in
Mshuni-Koshto \[the M. Abode of the Blessed\], and this strange and
unworldly people often resort to it. To achieve this state a man must
renounce worldly desires and the delights of the flesh, but his path is
harder than that of the Catholic monk in that he continues to live among
men, a layman, and amongst his family without being able to partake of
the joys of family life. In fact, after the ceremony of renunciation has
taken place, the funeral service is read over him and he is, henceforth,
no more than a living ghost.

   "He may carry on his trade of farmer, boat-builder, or silversmith as
before; but his personal life is one of renunciation, deprivation and
self-mortification. He may not smoke, drink wine, coffee, tea, or any
drug. He may not give an order, or express a desire. Should he need
anything, he must procure it himself, or do without. His detachment from
worldly things must be so complete that if a fire were to burn his
house, destroy his goods and suffocate his wife and children he must
show or feel no trace of emotion. . . . 'A permanent gaiety must be
shown in his face.'

   "The ceremony which separates the 'shalmono' from the world of the
living is called the 'Massakhto.' The applicant goes to the bishop, who
questions him closely as to the seriousness of his intentions, and
impresses upon him the irrevocable nature of the step he wishes to take.
After seven days' preparation with the bishop, if the applicant's desire
is unshaken, he spends seven days and seven nights in a church \[?\] or
place apart.

   "Every day the bishop and priests come to him, and for food the
postulant eats three tiny flat loaves of sacramental bread, about as
large as an Osborne biscuit, daily; also part of the flesh of a dove. .
. .

   "At the end of the week a feast is prepared to which the new
'shalmono' is invited, usually in the house of the bishop. At the end of
the feast all the priests who have eaten arise, with a last mouthful of
food in their hands. Solemnly, then, the Prayer for the Dead is recited
for the 'shalmono,' and, just as for a dead man, the last mouthful is
eaten, the last mouthful which is supposed to stay the departed soul on
its journey through purgatory. . . .

   "The life of a 'shalmono' is harder than that of a priest, for
priests and priestesses may marry; indeed, marriage is obligatory."

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

   The last sentence suggests that the *shalmono* is a celibate from the
start, but Mrs. Drower has already spoken of his wife and children and
quotes Siouffi to the same effect, and the documents lay it down
expressly that celibacy in no case whatever was approved, not even in
that of a prophet.

   It is evident that we have in this indication of a present-day class
of 'perfect' separated out from the mass of the faithful, a subject for
sympathetic enquiry, with the object of ascertaining whether among them
there are any who enjoy mystic experience, and if so what is its nature,
and whether it throws any light on the spiritual phases of the
tradition.

   Mrs. Drower is happy in choosing for the heading of her account 'A
Peculiar People' and not 'A Strange Sect' or some such title. For one of
the great points of interest is that the Mandæans show all the signs of
being a race distinct from their neighbours. They make no converts and
seem for many centuries to have kept themselves to themselves. They are
not Arabs or Jews in type, but (?) 'Babylonians,' 'Chaldeans,'—a problem
for the ethnologist to decide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. John the Baptizer and Christian Origins](gjb-1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_vii">p. vii</span>

<span id="page_vii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_vii_fr_1) London, Hurst &
Blackett, 1923, pp. 204-219.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
