[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taitp) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### MYTHS AND LEGENDS

THE Andamanese have a number of stories which are told to the younger
people by their elders and relate to the doings of their ancestors in a
time long ago. Some of these stories are recorded in the present
chapter. A difficulty in the way of giving any clear and readable
account of them is the fact that there are many slightly different
versions of one and the same legend. To some extent the variations are
local, each tribe, and even each portion of a tribe having its own set
of legendary stories. Besides these local variations there are also
individual variations. Two men of the same tribe may relate what is
substantially the same story, yet each chooses his own words and
gestures, and to some extent they may even arrange the incidents
differently.

In the last chapter it was mentioned that there are certain individuals,
known as *oko-ǰumu* in the North Andaman and *oko-paiad* in the South,
who are believed to have special knowledge as to the spirits and as to
the magical efficacy of remedies for sickness. It is these *oko-ǰumu*
also who are the authorities on the legendary lore of the Andamanese. In
the case of magical remedies there is a certain common stock of beliefs
as to the efficacy to be attributed to different substances, such as
leaves of different plants, and on the basis of these beliefs the
*oko-ǰumu* elaborates the remedies that he uses in particular cases.
Each *oko-ǰumu*, however, prides himself on being, to some extent,
original. An example of this has been already mentioned. When a great
storm arose an *oko-ǰumu* of one of the Northern tribes succeeded in
stopping it (in the belief of

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

the natives) by placing a piece of the crushed stem of the *Anadendron*
creeper under a particular stone in the sea. On a later occasion another
storm arose, and the successor of the first-mentioned *oko-ǰumu* was
appealed to that he might exert his powers. He did not simply imitate
his predecessor, but he placed a piece of crushed bark and twigs of the
*Ficus* *laccifera* in the sea under a different stone. In very much the
same way there is a common stock of beliefs as to the events that took
place in the time of the ancestors, but each *oko-ǰumu* builds up on
this basis his own particular set of legends, so that it is rarely that
two of them tell the same story in the same way. An *oko-ǰumu* may
obtain for himself a reputation by relating legends of the ancestors in
a vivid and amusing way. Such a man would be able to invent new stories
by combining together in his own way some of the traditional incidents.
The desire on the part of each *oko-ǰumu* to be original and so to
enhance his own reputation is a fertile source of variation in the
legends.

This lack of traditional form, which is a very important characteristic
of the Andamanese mythology, may be compared with their lack of
traditional songs. Just as every man composes his own songs, so, within
certain limits, every *oko-ǰumu* relates in his own way the legends of
his tribe. But whereas every man is a composer of songs, only a certain
number are regarded as having authority to speak on the legends.

Underlying the legends of any tribe there are a certain number of
beliefs or representations with which every native is familiar. It is on
the basis of these that the *oko-ǰumu* elaborates his own doctrine, if
we may call it so, which he hands on to his followers, who in turn may
become *oko-ǰumu* and produce further slight modifications of their own.
Thus the legends are continually being changed, though in any one
generation the changes introduced are slight, and it would take a long
time for important changes in belief to be brought about. There is
evidence, however, that a succession of leading men in the *A-Pučikwar*
tribe have succeeded in introducing a new doctrine as to the weather,
making *Bilik* the name of a class of beings instead of the name of a
single being, and that this

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

doctrine, while it has not entirely ousted the former beliefs, has yet
succeeded in gaining currency not only in the *A-Pučikwar* tribe, but
also in the *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* and *<u>O</u>k<u>o</u>-J̌uw<u>o</u>i*
tribes.

At the present time it is only possible to recover a small part of the
many different legends with their variants. The introduction of many new
interests into the lives of the natives, through the European settlement
and the many changes it has produced, has caused the ancient legends to
be neglected. Most of the old *oko-ǰumu* have died without leaving any
followers to take their place. Many of the legends recorded here are
merely what some of the men not specially skilled in legendary lore can
remember of the stories told them in former days by *oko-ǰumu* who are
now dead.

One feature of the legends that must be pointed out is their
unsystematic nature. The same informant may give, on different
occasions, two entirely different versions of such a thing as the origin
of fire, or the beginning of the human race. The Andamanese, to all
appearance, regard each little story as independent, and do not
consciously compare one with another. They thus seem to be entirely
unconscious of what are obvious contradictions to the student of the
legends. It is necessary to emphasise the fragmentary and unsystematic
nature of the Andaman mythology because Mr Man, in his work on the
Andamanese, has brought together a number of legends from the tribes of
the South Andaman and has combined them into a continuous and fairly
consistent narrative, and has thus, undoubtedly not intentionally, given
a wrong impression to the reader of what the nature of the disconnected
stories really is. While each of the stories included in Mr Man's
account is derived directly from the natives, it would seem certain that
the arrangement of them into a more or less consistent narrative is due
to Mr Man.

In recording the legends in this chapter, only the English translation
is given. In some cases the legends were translated on the spot and
written down in English. In other cases they were written down in the
native language and then translated. When I was recording the legends I
very frequently had to ask what was meant by a particular statement, the
meaning of

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

which might be quite clear to a native, but which was obscure to one not
accustomed to thinking in the same way as the natives. In some cases I
could obtain no satisfactory explanation, and such legends are given in
this chapter in as nearly as possible an exact literal translation of
the original. In other cases the explanations given by the natives have
been incorporated in the translation itself.

In order to give the reader a fair idea of the nature of the legends as
they are told, one is here given in the native language (*Aka-Čari*)
with a word-for-word translation.

|                         |                                                  |
|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| *A Maia Dik iǰokoduko*; | *o k<u>o</u>nmo teč inǰukt<u>e</u>rt<u>o</u>ia*; |
| Sir Prawn makes fire;   | yam leaf catches fire;                           |

 

|                                 |                    |                  |
|---------------------------------|--------------------|------------------|
| *k<u>o</u>nmo teč bi ikterbie*; | *kete uiǰoko*;     | *uiǰokobiko*;    |
| yam leaf is dry;                | that one it burns; | he makes a fire; |

 

|                     |                       |                           |
|---------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| *Maia Dik ubenoba*; | *Maia Totemo emato*;  | *uǰokil uektebalo*;       |
| Sir Prawn slept;    | Sir Kingfisher takes; | he fire with he runs away |

 

|                              |                                   |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| *Maia Totemo ǰokobiko*;      | *Maia Totemo taǰeo ubiko*;        |
| Sir Kingfisher makes a fire; | Sir Kingfisher fish (food) cooks; |

 

|                         |                               |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------|
| *upetil ubeno*;         | *Maia Mite ǰuktebalo uemato*. |
| his belly in he sleeps; | Sir Dove runs away taking.    |

The above translation is hardly comprehensible without a little
explanation. The word *iǰoko* means "something burns," the word ubiko
means "he cooks (by roasting)." The compound *iǰokobiko* may mean either
"he makes a fire and cooks something at it" or it may simply mean "he
makes up a fire (by adding firewood)." The word *iǰokoduko* has a quite
different meaning, "to produce fire." The derivation of *inǰuktertoia*
is uncertain, as I am not sure of the proper use of *er-t<u>o</u>ia*; it
is translated on the basis of the explanation given me by the man who
told the story. The word ikterbie is descriptive of the dryness of dead
leaves.

A free translation would be as follows: "It was Sir Prawn who first
produced or obtained fire. Some yam leaves, being shrivelled and dry by
reason of the hot weather, caught fire and burnt. The prawn made a fire
with some firewood and

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

went to sleep. The kingfisher stole fire and ran away with it. He made a
fire and cooked some fish. When he had filled his belly he went to
sleep. The dove stole fire from the kingfisher and ran away." It is
implied that it was the dove who gave the fire to the ancestors of the
Andamanese.

Versions of legends of the origin of fire are given by Mr Portman, in
each of the languages of the Southern group of tribes <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0).

All the legends relate to events that are supposed to have happened in
the past, and deal with the doings of the ancestors of the Andamanese.
In the North Andaman the ancestors are sometimes called *Lau t’er-kuro*,
i.e. the big spirits, "big" being used in the sense of our word "chief."
Another term for them is *N’a-mai-koloko*, from *n’* or *nio* = they,
*aka-mai* = father, and *koloko* = people, so that the phrase literally
means "the father people," or the ancestors. In the South Andaman the
ancestors are sometimes called *Čauga tabaŋa*, which is the equivalent
of *Lau t’er-kuro*. Mr Man seems to have misunderstood the exact meaning
of this term. He writes: "*Lači Lora-lola*, the chief of the survivors
from the Deluge <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1), gave, at his death,
the name of *Čauga tabaŋa* to their descendants......The *Čauga tabaŋa*
are described as fine tall men with large beards, and they are said to
have been long lived, but, in other respects and in their mode of living
they did not differ from the present inhabitants. The name seems to have
been borne till comparatively recent times, as a few still living are
said to remember having seen the last of the so-called *Čauga tabaŋa*
 <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)."

Mr Man has evidently not realised that the term *čauga* cannot be
applied to any living Andamanese, but may be applied to every dead one.
The *Čauga* are the spirits of dead natives, and new *Čauga* are
continually coming into existence by death. Any person who is of such
importance when alive as to form the subject of legends or stories after
his death may be distinguished (after his death only) as a *Čauga
tabaŋa*. The name may thus be applied to the purely mythical ancestors
of the legends, and also to the spirits of men recently dead

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

whose memory is preserved owing to fame acquired in some way when they
were alive. It is thus possible that some of the natives with whom Mr
Man formerly conversed are now *Čauga tabaŋa*, i.e. big spirits, having
been " big men " when they were alive.

Another name sometimes used in the South Andaman to denote the ancestors
is *Tomo-la* <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3). This word, however, is
sometimes used in the singular to denote the mythical first man. Its use
is thus similar to that of the name *Bilik* in the *A-Pučikwar* tribe,
which is used both as the name of a single mythical being and also as
the name of a class of beings. Only the early ancestors of the
Andamanese, i.e. those about whom the legends are related, can be called
*Tomo-la*.

Among the ancestors who appear in the legends there are a few who bear
names that are used as personal names of men and women at the present
time, and who appear in the legends simply as men and women. The larger
number of the ancestors, however, bear names that are those of species
of animals. In each case the ancestor is identified with the species
which bears the same name. Yet others of the mythical ancestors have
names that are neither personal names at the present day, nor names of
animals. It may perhaps be supposed that in all such cases the name has
some sort of meaning, but in many instances it was not found possible to
discover the meaning with certainty.

When speaking of the ancestors, the natives generally add to the name
the appropriate title. These titles are, in the North Andaman *Maia*
(Sir) and *Mimi* (Lady), in *Akar-Bale* *Da* (Sir) and *In* (Lady), and
in *Aka-Bea* *Maia* and *Čana*.

There are legends as to the origin of mankind, i.e., of their own race,
for they did not recognize, until recently, the existence of any men of
other races than their own, calling aliens *Lau* (spirits). There is,
however, no unanimity in their beliefs as to how mankind originated,
even in any one tribe. An *Aka-Bo* legend is as follows:

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

"The first man was *J̌utpu* <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4). He was
born inside the joint of a big bamboo, just like a bird in an egg <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5). The bamboo split and he came out. He was a
little child. When it rained he made a small hut for himself and lived
in it. He made little bows and arrows. As he grew bigger he made bigger
huts, and bigger bows and arrows. One day he found a lump of quartz and
with it he scarified himself. *J̌utpu* was lonely, living all by himself.
He took some clay (*k<u>o</u>t*) from a nest of the white ants and
moulded it into the shape of a woman. She became alive and became his
wife. She was called *K<u>o</u>t*. They lived together at Teraut-buliu.
Afterwards *J̌utpu* made other people out of clay. These were the
ancestors. *J̌utpu* taught them how to make canoes and bows and arrows,
and how to hunt and fish. His wife taught the women how to make baskets
and nets and mats and belts, and how to use clay for making patterns on
the body."

The same story was told me by *Aka-J̌eru* men, the only difference being
that they gave the name of the place where *J̌utpu* lived differently,
mentioning a spot in the *Aka-J̌eru* country.

From the *Aka-J̌eru* I also obtained what is really another version of
the same legend, though the name of the first ancestor is given
differently. "The first man came out of the buttress of a *p<u>o</u>ičo*
(*Sterculia*) tree, and was called *P<u>o</u>ičotobut* (*Sterculia*
buttress). He had no wife, so he cohabited with an ant's nest
(*k<u>o</u>t*) and thus obtained a large number of children. These were
the first Andamanese, and *P<u>o</u>ičotobut* taught them all their arts
and customs. *P<u>o</u>ičotobut* lived at *Boroŋ Buliu* (in *Aka-J̌eru*
country)."

The association between the origin of the Andamanese and an ant's nest
(*k<u>o</u>t*) is retained in another legend, told by an *Aka-J̌eru* man.
"*Tarai* (the south-west monsoon) was the first man. His wife was
*K<u>o</u>t*. They lived at

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Tarai-era-poŋ* <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6). Their children were *Tau* (the sky),
*B<u>o</u>to* (wind), *Piribi* (storm), and *Air* (the foam on a rough
sea)."

An entirely different legend, of which, however, I could not obtain a
detailed version, is also found in the *Aka-J̌eru* tribe. This is to the
effect that the first living being was Maia Čara <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7). He made the earth, and caused it to be
peopled with inhabitants. He also made the sun and moon. In the last
chapter Čara was mentioned as a mythical being associated with the sun,
with daylight and with fine weather. One of my informants of the
*Aka-J̌eru* tribe said that *Čara* had a wife named *Nimi* (a common
personal name), and that his children were *Čeo* (knife), *Ina* (water),
*Loto*, and *Luk*. It is *Maia Čara*, according to one commonly received
account, who makes the daylight every day.

I could not obtain any *Aka-Kede* legend as to the origin of mankind.
One informant of that tribe said that it was *Bilika* (the north-east
monsoon) who made the world and the first men and women, but he could
give me no detailed legend.

In the *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* and *A-Pučikwar* tribes there are several
versions of a legend that makes the monitor lizard (*Varanus salvator*)
the progenitor of the Andaman race. In all the versions there is no
mention of how the lizard himself originated. The following was told me
by an *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* man. "When *Ta P<u>e</u>ti* (Sir Monitor Lizard)
was *aka g<u>o</u>i* (i.e. unmarried, but having completed the
initiation ceremonies), he went into the jungle to hunt pig. He climbed
up a *Dipterocarpus* tree, and got stuck there <span
id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8). *Beyan* (civet-cat, *Paradoxurus*) found
him there, stuck in the tree. She released him and helped him to get
down. The two got married. Their children were the *Tomo-la* (i.e. the
ancestors)."

Another legend telling how the monitor lizard obtained a wife was
related to me on more than one occasion by *A-Pučikwar* men. "The first
of the ancestors (*Tomo-la*) was *Ta P<u>e</u>tie* (Sir Monitor Lizard).
He lived at *Tomo-la-tog*. At first he had

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

no wife. One day, when he was out fishing, he found a piece of black
wood of the kind called *k<u>o</u>lotat* (*Diospyros* sp.). He found it
in the creek, and brought it to his hut, where he put it on the little
platform over the fire <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9). He sat down by
the fire and set to work over an arrow that he was making. As he bent
over his work he did not see what was happening. By and by he heard some
one laugh, and looked up. Then he saw that the piece of wood had turned
into a woman. He got up and took her down from the platform. She sat
down with him and became his wife. They had a son named *P<u>o</u>i* (a
species of small bird, possibly a woodpecker), and afterwards many other
children. They lived together for a long time at *Tomo-la-tog*. One day
*Ta P<u>e</u>tie* went fishing and was drowned in the creek. He turned
into a *kara-duku*."

There is some doubt about the translation of the word *kara-duku*. It is
an *Aka-Bea* word, although it was used as given above, by an
*A-Pučikwar* man. Mr Man translates it "cachalot." Mr Portman says that
*kara-duku* is "crocodile," but that the cachalot, the proper name of
which is *biriga-ta*, is also sometimes called *kara-duku* <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10). The only authority for the existence of
crocodiles in the Andamans is the statement of Mr Portman, who says that
the natives killed one in the Middle Andaman and brought the bones to
him. Although I was in many of the creeks of the Andamans at different
times I never saw a crocodile, and none of the other officers of the
Settlement, who have repeatedly explored a large part of the islands,
ever seems to have seen one, so that the one recorded by Mr Portman may
possibly have been a single one that had come oversea from the mainland
of Asia.

Another *A-Pučikwar* account of the origin of the first woman
*K<u>o</u>lotat*, is as follows: "At first there were no women, only
men. A man called *K<u>o</u>lotat* came to live in the *A-Pučikwar*
country. *Ta P<u>e</u>tie* (Sir Monitor Lizard) caught him and cut off
his genitals and made him into a woman. She became his wife. Their
children were the first of the ancestors (*Tomo-la*)."

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

Another account given by members of the *A-Pučikwar* tribe is that the
first man was *Tomo*, or *Tomo-la*. One version that I heard is that
*Tomo* made the world and peopled it with the ancestors. He made the
moon (*Puki*) who is his wife. *Tomo* and his wife invented all the arts
of the Andamanese and taught them to the ancestors. After his death
*Tomo* went to live in the sky, where he now is. It is *Tomo* who sends
the fine weather, while *Bilik* sends the bad weather. In the world
where *Tomo* now lives it is always daylight and is always fine. When
men die their spirits go up to the sky and live with *Tomo*. The man who
gave me this version said that he did not know how *Tomo* originated,
but was quite sure that he was not made by *Bilik*. *Tomo* came first
and *Bilik* came afterwards. The Andamanese are all the children of
*Tomo* <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11).

In disagreement with this story, another man of the same tribe said that
*Tomo* was made by *Bilik*. He (i.e., *Tomo*) had a wife *Mita* (Dove),
and they were the ancestors of the Andamanese. Yet another informant
said: "*Ta Tomo* was the first man. He made bows and arrows and canoes.
His canoes were made of the wood of the Pandanus tree. *Mita* (Dove) was
his wife. It was she who first made nets and baskets and discovered the
uses of red paint and white clay." When I asked how *Tomo* and his wife
originated my informant replied that he did not know.

A species of bird (perhaps a woodpecker), called *P<u>o</u>i* in
*A-Pučikwar* and *K<u>o</u>io* in *Aka-K<u>o</u>l*, is often said to
have been the son of *Tomo*. I was once told that *K<u>o</u>io* was the
first of the Andamanese, from whom they are all descended, and that his
wife was Mita. Another informant said that *P<u>e</u>tie* (Monitor
Lizard) was the first man and *Mita* was his wife, while still another
stated that *Ta Mita* (Sir Dove) was the progenitor of the race, making
the dove male instead of female. These different versions will give some
idea of the

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

contradictory nature of the statements of the Andamanese. All of them
come from only two tribes, the *A-Pučikwar* and the *Aka-K<u>o</u>l*.

From the *Akar-Bale* tribe I obtained the following legend. "*Puluga*
made the first of the ancestors. He made one man and one woman called
*Nyali* and *Irap* <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12). He gave them
fire, and taught them how to hunt and fish, and how to make bows and
arrows and baskets and nets. The place where they lived is called *Irap*
because they lived there <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13)."

Another *Akar-Bale* version is that the first man was *Da Duku* (Sir
Monitor Lizard), and that his wife was *In Bain* (Lady Civet-cat).

Mr E. H. Man, in his account of the South Andaman, says that there are a
few discrepancies in their accounts of the creation and origin of the
human species, but in the main features all the natives with whom he
spoke are agreed. The world was created by *Puluga*, who then made a man
named *Tomo*, the first of the human race. *Tomo* was black, like the
present Andamanese, but was much taller and bearded. *Puluga* showed him
the various fruit-trees in the jungle, which then existed only at
*Wota-emi*, a spot in the country of the *A-Pučikwar* tribe. The wife of
*Tomo* was *Čana Elewadi* (Lady Crab), and as to her origin there are
different legends. According to some, *Puluga* created her after he had
taught *Tomo* how to sustain life; others say that *Tomo* saw her
swimming near his home and called to her, whereupon she landed and lived
with him; while a third story represents her as coming pregnant to Kyd
Island, where she gave birth to several male and female children, who
subsequently became the progenitors of the present race. *Tomo* had two
sons and two daughters by *Čana Elewadi*; the names of the former were
*Biro-la* and *B<u>o</u>ro-la*, and of the latter *Rie-la* and
*Č<u>o</u>rmi-la*.

A story that tells how *Tomo* came to his end states that

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

one day, while hunting, he fell into the creek called *Yara-tig-ǰig* and
was drowned. He was at once transformed into a *kara-duku* (which Mr Man
translates as "cachalot"). *Čana Elewadi*, ignorant of the accident that
had befallen her husband, went in a canoe with some of her grandchildren
to ascertain the cause of his continued absence; on seeing them,
*Kara-duku* upset their skiff and drowned his wife and most of her
companions. She became a small crab, of a description still named after
her, *elewadi*, and the others were transformed into lizards (*duku*).
Another version of this story is that, wearied with an unsuccessful
day's hunting, *Tomo* went to the shore, where he found a *čidi* (Pinna)
shell-fish; while playing with it, it fastened on him, and he was unable
to free himself until a *baian* (Paradoxurus) seized the *čidi* and
liberated him at the expense of one of his members. Shortly after this
he saw his wife and some of their children coming after him in a canoe;
unwilling that they should become aware of the misfortune that had
befallen him he upset the canoe, drowning its occupants and himself. He
then became *kara-duku*, and the others *duku*, which are now plentiful
in the jungles <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14).

In some of the preceding legends reference is made to *Biliku* or
*Puluga*. There is a very general belief, in all parts of the islands,
that in the time of the ancestors, *Biliku* or *Puluga* lived on earth.
Each tribe has at least one spot in its territory that is pointed out as
the place where *Biliku* (or *Puluga*) lived. In some tribes there are
three or four such places, each of which is claimed as the original home
of *Biliku* by the people living in the neighbourhood. In many cases the
name of the spot contains a reference to the legend, as *Puluga
l’od-baraiǰ* (the village of *Puluga*) in *Akar-Bale* or *Biliku
era-poŋ* (the cave of *Biliku*) in the North Andaman.

I was able to obtain a few legends relating to the time when *Biliku*
lived on earth, though there were probably many more that I was not
fortunate enough to hear.

The following is an *Aka-J̌eru* legend:

"In the time of the ancestors *Biliku* lived at *Ar-k<u>o</u>l*. One day
the people caught a turtle and brought it to the camp.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Biliku* was sitting there. They asked her if
she would eat some of it. She said 'No.' They put the meat in the roof
of the hut and went away. When they had gone *Biliku* ate the whole
turtle. Then she went to sleep. The people came back and found the
turtle gone. They said '*Biliku* has eaten it.' They left the camp and
all went to *Tebi-čiro*. They left *Biliku* asleep. Some of the people
went to hunt for turtle. Their canoe passed near *Ar-k<u>o</u>l*.
*Biliku* saw the people in the canoe. She called to them and asked to be
taken with them. The people refused saying 'You ate up all the turtle.'
*Biliku* had a round stone and several *be* shells (pearl shells). She
threw the shells at the people in the canoe. The first shell did not hit
them but came back and fell at her feet; and so also with the second.
Then *Biliku* got very angry and threw a third time. The shell struck
the canoe and killed all the people in it. The canoe and its occupants
became a reef of rocks that is still there. The other people at
*Tebi-čiro* called across to *Biliku* saying 'Come over here.' She
answered 'Very well! I am coming.' She took the stone that she had and
put it in the sea, and it floated. She got on to it to cross over. When
she had got half way across *Biliku* and her stone sank in the sea. They
became two big rocks that are there still." This legend refers to the
west coast of the North Andaman. The pearl shells that *Biliku* throws
seem to be lightning, and the round stone the one that she rolls about
to make thunder.

A few other statements about *Biliku* and *Tarai* from the four tribes
of the North Andaman are given below just as they were taken down in my
note-books.

\(1\) "*Biliku* lived at *Pura-’ra-poŋ* in the time of the ancestors.
Her husband was *P<u>e</u>rǰido* and her children *Totaimo*, *Mite*
(cicada) and *Tarai*. She made the sun and the moon. It was she who
first invented all the things that are now made and used by women, such
as baskets, nets, etc., and it was she who discovered fire, and who
first discovered the use of edible roots such as *k<u>o</u>nmo* and
*mino* (two species of *Dioscorea*)."

\(2\) "*Biliku* used to live at *Čaura*. She had a husband

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

*Tarai* and a son *P<u>e</u>rǰido*, and a daughter Mite. She used to
live only on certain vegetable foods, *l<u>o</u>ito*, *pata*, *bui*,
*čo*, *k<u>o</u>nmo* and *mino* and others. It was *Biliku* who made the
earth (the forest, *ti-miku*). She began at *Čaura*."

\(3\) "*Biliku* lived at *Ar-Kol* in the time of the ancestors. Her
husband was *Tarai* and their children were the birds,
*T<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>i*, *Taka*, *Čot<u>o</u>t*, *Poruatoko*, *Kelil*,
*Mite*, *Č<u>o</u>pčura*, *Benye*, *Biratkoro*, *Čereo*, *Milidu*,
*Bobelo*, *Kolo*, and *Teo*." (*Aka-J̌eru*.)

\(4\) "*Biliku* lived at Poroket. She was unmarried. She had a son
*P<u>e</u>rǰido*, and her other children were *T<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>i*,
*Čelene*, *Čot<u>o</u>t* and *Čerei*. (These four are the names of
birds.) It was *P<u>e</u>rǰido* who invented all the arts of the
Andamanese such as their bows and arrows, etc." (*Aka-Bo*?.)

\(5\) "*Biliku* used to live at *Peč-meo* with her husband
*T<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>i* (a bird). She used to eat *l<u>o</u>ito*, and when
anyone else ate that root she was angry. *Tarai* lived at *Čaroŋa* with
his wife *Kelil* (a bird). He ate only *mikulu*." (*Aka-K<u>o</u>ra*.)

\(6\) "*Tarai* has very long legs and a short body. He used to live on a
small island beyond Interview Island, which is now submerged. When
*Tarai* goes to sleep he breathes very heavily and this makes the wind."

The next is an *Aka-Kede* legend. "In the days of the ancestors *Bilika*
lived at *Purum-at-čape* in the *Aka-Kede* country, with her husband
*P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>kul*. One day *P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>kul* was out
hunting. He returned with a pig that he had killed and came to the creek
on the other side of which was his home (*C<u>o</u>ti-t<u>e</u>r-buli
Buliu*). Laden as he was with the pig he could not swim across the
creek. *Bilika* was sleeping, but her children were playing near and saw
their father on the other side of the creek. They ran and told their
mother that their father was coming but could not cross the creek.
*Bilika* went and lay down on one bank of the creek and stretched out
her leg so that it reached the other bank. *P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>kul*
walked across her leg and so reached home."

While it is clear from this legend that *Bilika* was of super-human
size, the same was also true of her husband, if we may judge from
another legend. "*P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>kul* made for himself a bow (of the
large southern pattern), with which to shoot pig. At

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

this time the sky was low down near the earth, only just above the tops
of the trees. When *P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>kul* had finished his bow he
lifted it upright. The top of it struck the sky and lifted it up to its
present position where it has remained ever since."

In another legend from another part of the *Aka-Kede* tribe *Bilika* is
spoken of as being male. "*Bilika* lived at *P<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>ŋ-et-čo*
with his wife Mite. They had a child. The ancestors ate *Bilika's* food,
*l<u>o</u>ito* and *kata* and other plants. *Bilika* was very angry. He
used to smell their mouths to see if they had eaten his food. When he
found a man or woman who had done so he would cut his throat. The
ancestors were very angry with *Bilika*, because he killed the men and
women when they ate his foods. They all came together and killed
*Bilika* and his wife *Mite*. *Maia Burto* (a species of fish) took the
child (of *Bilika*) away to the north-east."

Owing to my lack of knowledge of the *Aka-Kede* language there are some
points of the above legend that remain obscure. I think that the child
of *Bilika* is also named *Bilika*, and that it is he (or she) who now
lives in the north-east and sends the storms. The plants
(*l<u>o</u>ito*, *kata*, etc.), called here the "food" of *Bilika*, are
those mentioned in the last chapter as specially belonging to *Bilika*,
who is angry when the natives eat them. As regards the name, *Mite*, of
*Bilika's* wife, I do not know whether this is the name of the
bronze-winged dove, or of the cicada. In some of the Andamanese
languages the names of these two are very similar, the only difference
being a very slight one in the way of pronouncing the two vowels.

The *A-Pučikwar* people who live on the east coast of Baratang Island
say that in the beginning the ancestors lived at a place called
*Wota-emi*, and *Bilik* lived opposite to them across the strait at a
place called *T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima*. In a rock at *Wota-emi* there is a
large peculiarly shaped hollow. This is said to be where *Bilik* used to
sit when he was on earth.

An *Akar-Bale* legend is as follows. "In the days of the ancestors
*Puluga* lived at *J̌ila* off the east coast of Henry Lawrence Island and
the ancestors lived at *Puluga* l'od-baraij (the village of *Puluga*) on
the main island just opposite to *J̌ila*. *Puluga* was always getting
angry with the ancestors,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

because they dug up yams and ate *čakan* (*Entada scandens*) and
*barata* (*Caryota sobolifera*). When he was angry he used to destroy
their huts and property. So the people sent him out of the world, saying
'We do not want you here. You are always angry with us.' *Puluga* went
away to the north-east."

It is worth while to note that *J̌ila* is north-east from *Puluga
l’od-baraij*, just as *Tol-l’oko-tima* is north-east from *Wota-emi*. In
both cases there is a narrow strait between the place where the
ancestors lived and the home of *Puluga* or *Bilik*.

There are a number of different legends that relate how the ancestors
first obtained fire <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15). In many of
these legends there is a reference to *Biliku* or *Puluga*. A common
statement in the North Andaman is that "Fire was stolen from *Biliku* by
*Maia Tiritmo* (Sir Kingfisher)." Some of the legends give further
details. An *Aka-Čari* legend is as follows:

"*Biliku* had a red stone and a pearl shell (*be*). She struck them
together and obtained fire. She collected firewood and made a fire. She
went to sleep. *Mite* (the bronze-winged dove) came and stole fire. He
made a fire for himself. He gave fire to all the people in the village.
Afterwards fire was given to all the places. Each village had its own."

The next is an *Aka-J̌eru* version.

"In the days of the ancestors they had no fire. *Biliku* had fire. While
*Biliku* slept *Maia Lirčitmo* (Sir Kingfisher) came and stole fire. As
he was taking the fire *Biliku* awoke and saw him. *Lirčitmo* swallowed
the fire. *Biliku* took a pearl shell (*be*) and threw it at *Lirčitmo*
and cut off his head. The fire came out (of his neck). The ancestors got
the fire. *Lirčitmo* became a bird."

The next is also, I believe, an *Aka-J̌eru* story. "*Maia Tiritmo* (Sir
Kingfisher) lived at *Tolepar Buruin*. He had no fire. When he caught
fish he had no fire with which to cook it. He went to the place where
*Č<u>o</u>kčura* (heron) lived. There was no fire there. *Tiritmo* took
some rotten wood of the *piń* 

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

tree and hit it on a rock, and thus made fire. He gave fire to
*Č<u>o</u>kčura*. *Č<u>o</u>kčura* gave fire to *Totemo* (a species of
kingfisher). *Totemo* gave it to all the others.

A slightly different and less detailed version of the same story is as
follows:

"*Tiritmo* made fire. *Totemo* stole fire (from *Tiritmo*) and gave it
to *M<u>o</u>ičo* (Rail). *M<u>o</u>ičo* gave fire to all the people."

The next version, which was taken down in *Aka-J̌eru*, I did not fully
understand.

"Some one shot an arrow. The arrow hit the hill of fire. *Tiriń* (a
species of kingfisher) found the arrow. It was on fire. He took the fire
to his camp. He would not give fire to any one. The others asked him.
They went to their homes. At night they came to *Tiriń*'s hut and stole
fire. They went away, each to his own place."

There is a certain amount of obscurity about two other versions, which
are given in a translation as nearly literal as possible. "*Maia Dik*
(Sir Prawn) made fire. Some *k<u>o</u>nmo* (yam) leaves caught fire,
being dry. *Maia Dik* made a fire. *Maia Dik* slept. *Maia Totemo* (Sir
Kingfisher) stole fire and ran away. *Maia Totemo* made a fire. He
cooked fish. When he had eaten, he slept. *Maia Mite* (Sir Dove) stole
fire (from *Totemo*) and ran away.

The other is as follows. "Piribi got fire from a stone. He threw fire at
*Bilika*. It set some *k<u>o</u>nmo* (yam) leaves on fire.
*Č<u>o</u>rolo* (Parrot) got fire (from the burning leaves). He gave it
to the ancestors."

These two legends were taken down in *Aka-Čari*, but they are perhaps
really *Aka-K<u>o</u>ra* or *Aka-J̌eru* stories. I have the word *piribi*
in my notes as meaning a storm, but the translation is doubtful.

The next is an *Aka-Kede* version of what is the most widespread of the
legends.

"The ancestors had no fire. *Bilika* had fire. The ancestors tried to
steal fire from *Bilika*. *Lirtit* (Kingfisher) went one night while
*Bilika* was sleeping and stole fire. *Bilika* awoke and saw him going
away with the fire. She threw a pearl shell (*ba*) at him, which cut off
his wings and his tail. *Lirtit* dived

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

into the water and swam with the fire to *Bet-’ra-kudu* and gave it to
*T<u>e</u>pe*. *T<u>e</u>pe* gave fire to *Mite* (the bronze-winged
dove). *Mite* gave it to the others <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)."

An *Aka-Kede* legend of the origin of the sun may conveniently be given
in this place, as it is connected with the possession of fire by
*Bilika*. "*Bilika* made fire of *purum* wood. One day, when she was
very angry, she started throwing fire about. One large fire-brand she
threw into the sky, and there it became the sun." This legend explains
the name of the place *Purum-at-čape*, at which *Bilika* is said to have
lived when on earth. *Purum* is the name of a tree, not identified; at
means either "fire" or "fire-wood," and *čape* means a village or a hut.
The whole word therefore means "*Purum* fire village."

I did not obtain any legend of the origin of fire from the
*Ok<u>o</u>-J̌uw<u>o</u>i* and *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* tribes, but a version
from each of these tribes has been given by Mr Portman. A translation of
Mr Portman's *Ok<u>o</u>-J̌uw<u>o</u>i* story is as follows <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17). "*M<u>o</u>m Mirit* <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18) stole a fire-brand from *Kuro-t’on-mika*
while *Bilik* was sleeping. He gave the brand to the late *Leč*, who
then made fire at *Karat-tatak-emi*."

Mr Portman's *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* story is somewhat obscure. "*Bilik* was
sleeping at *T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima*. *Luratut* (Kingfisher) took away
fire to *Oko-emi*. *K<u>o</u>lotat* went to *Min-t<u>o</u>ŋ-ta* (taking
with him fire from *Oko-emi*). At *Min-t<u>o</u>ŋ-ta* the fire went out.
*K<u>o</u>lotat* broke up the charred firewood and made fire again (by
blowing up the embers). They (the people there) became alive. Owing to
the fire they became alive. The ancestors (*Jaŋil*) thus got fire at
*Min-t<u>o</u>ŋ-ta* village."

From the *A-Pučikwar* tribe I only obtained one version of the fire
legend. "When the ancestors lived at *Wota-emi*, *Bilik* lived at
*T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima* across the strait. In those days the ancestors
had no fire. *Bilik* took some wood of the tree called *p<u>e</u>rat*
and broke it and made fire for himself. *Luratut* (Kingfisher) came to
*T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima* while *Bilik* was sleeping and stole some fire.
*Bilik* awoke and saw *Luratut*. He (*Bilik*) took

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

up a lighted brand and threw it at *Luratut*. It hit him in the back of
the neck and burnt him. *Luratut* gave the fire to the people at
*Wota-emi*. *Bilik* was very angry about this and went away to live in
the sky."

The kingfisher of the story (*Alcedo beavani*?) has a patch of bright
red feathers on its neck. This is where it was burnt by the brand thrown
by *Bilik*.

Mr Portman gives a slightly different version from the same tribe <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19). "*Bilik* was sleeping at
*T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima*. *Luratut* went to bring fire. He caught hold of
the fire, and in doing so burnt *Bilik*. *Bilik* awoke and seized some
fire. He hit *Luratut* with the fire. Then he hit *Tarčal* (a fish) with
the fire. *Čalter* (another species of kingfisher) caught hold of the
fire. He gave it to the ancestors at *Wota-emi*. The ancestors made
fires."

From the *Akar-Bale* tribe I obtained the following legend: "The people
had no fire. *Dim-d<u>o</u>ri* (a fish) went and fetched fire from
*J̌ereg-l’ar-mugu* (the place of departed spirits). He came back and
threw the fire at the people and burnt them, and marked them all. The
people ran into the sea and became fishes. *Dim-d<u>o</u>ri* went to
shoot them with his bow and arrows, and he also became a fish." This
story is supposed to account for the bright colouring of certain species
of fish.

Mr Portman gives a somewhat similar version from the same tribe <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20). *Dim-d<u>o</u>ra* (a fish), a very long
time ago, at *Keri-l’oŋ-tower*, was bringing fire from *Puluga's*
platform (fire-place). He, taking the fire, burnt everybody with it.
*Bolub* and *Tark<u>o</u>r* and *Biličau* fell into the sea and became
fishes. They took the fire to *Rokwa-l’ar-toŋa* village and made fires
there."

Another *Akar-Bale* legend is that fire was given to the first ancestors
(*Da Duku* and *In Bain*) by *Puluga*. Still another is that fire was
obtained by the ancestors from *Aga*, the skink (*Mabuia tytleri*). The
mist that is often seen hanging over the jungle in small patches, after
rain or at dawn, is said to be the smoke of *Aga's* fire. An island in
the Archipelago is called *Aga l’od-baraij*, *Aga's* village.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

Mr Portman gives an *Aka-Bea* legend, which, however, relates that the
events took place at *Wota-emi* in the *A-Pučikwar* country <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21).

"*Puluga* was asleep at *Tol-l’oko-tima*. *Luratut* came, stealing fire.
The fire burnt *Puluga*. *Puluga* awoke. *Puluga* seized some fire.
Taking the fire he burnt *Luratut* with it. *Luratut* took the fire. He
burnt *Tar-čeker* (another kind of kingfisher) with it in *Wota-emi*
village. The ancestors lit fires. They (the ancestors) were the
*Tomo-la*."

Mr Man gives three different versions of legends as to the origin of
fire. According to the first of these, *Puluga*, after he had made the
first man, *Tomo*, gave him fire and taught him its use. *Puluga*
obtained fire by stacking in alternate layers two kinds of wood known as
*c<u>o</u>r* and *ber*, and then bidding the sun to come and sit on or
near the pile until she ignited it, after which she returned to her
place in the sky <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22). The second version
is that *Puluga* came to *Tomo* with a spirit named *Lači Puŋa Ablola*
to instruct *Tomo*, who at his direction, prepared a pyre and then
struck it, on which the fire was kindled and *Puŋa Ablola* proceeded to
teach him how to cook food <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23). This
legend contains an obvious contradiction. *Lači Puŋa Ablola*, as is
shown by the name itself (*Lači* = the late), is the name of some one
who is supposed to have lived and died and so become a spirit. Yet at
the same time *Tomo* is supposed to have been the first of the
Andamanese. There is the possibility, however, that this inconsistency
is due not to the natives themselves, but to Mr Man's transcription. It
is possible that the legend is that fire was discovered and was given to
the ancestors (the *Tomo*) by a person who, being dead, is now *Lači
Puŋa Ablola*, but who was then alive and one of the ancestors (*Tomo*)
themselves.

A third legend about fire given by Mr Man is associated by him with
another legend about a flood that once overwhelmed the ancestors.
According to Mr Man's version the fires were all extinguished by the
flood, so that the few survivors were left without fire. "At this
juncture one of their recently deceased

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

friends appeared in their midst in the form of a bird named *Luratut*.
Seeing their distress he flew up to *M<u>o</u>ro*, the sky, where he
discovered *Puluga* seated beside his fire; he thereupon seized and
attempted to carry away in his beak a burning log, but the heat, or
weight, or both, rendered the task impossible, and the blazing brand
fell on *Puluga*, who, incensed with pain, hurled it at the intruder;
happily for those concerned, the missile missed its mark and fell near
the very spot where the survivors were deploring their condition. As
*Luratut* alighted in their midst at the same moment, he gained the full
credit for having removed the chief cause of their distress <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)."

We may now consider a group of legends that relate how a great
catastrophe overwhelmed the ancestors. In many of the versions the
legend relates how the ancestors were transformed into animals. Some of
the legends are connected with *Biliku* or *Puluga* and others are
connected with the first discovery of fire. Beginning with the North
Andaman, the following is, I believe, an *Aka-J̌eru* version. "*Mimi
Čara* once broke some firewood in the evening (while the cicada was
singing). A great storm came and killed many people, who were turned
into fishes and birds. The water rose up till it covered the trees.
*Mimi Čara* and Mimi Kota took the fire and want up the hill to the cave
*Ŋaram*. They carried the fire under a cooking-pot. They kept the fire
alight in the cave, until the storm was over."

Another *Aka-J̌eru* legend was taken down hurriedly and the full details
were not obtained. "The people made a noise in the evening when *Mite*
(the cicada) was singing. *Mite* went to see her mother *Biliku*. Her
mother saw her eyes and face. She looked bad. Her eyes were red (with
weeping). *Biliku* was very angry. There was a big storm and heavy rain.
*Biliku* threw her pearl shells (lightning). She went mad. She destroyed
the whole world. *Biliku* went up to live in the sky. The earth was bare
(literally, empty). One day *Biliku* dropped a *Dipterocarpus* seed from
the sky. Out of this all the different kinds of tree grew, and the earth
was again covered with

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

forest." There was more of the legend, which I was unable at the time to
understand, and which I did not hear again. My informant added "It was
on this occasion that *Maia Taolu* saved the fire."

An *Aka-Čari* legend relates how the birds and beasts and fishes arose.
"*Maia Dik* (Sir Prawn) once got angry and threw fire at the people (the
ancestors). They all turned into birds and fishes. The birds flew into
the jungle. The fishes jumped into the sea. *Maia Dik* <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) himself became a large prawn which is
still called by the same name." In connection with this legend it must
be remembered that it was *Maia Dik*, according to one legend, who first
discovered the use of fire. One version of the story said that he made
fire by striking a piece of *paraŋo* wood. Then he threw the burning
wood about amongst the ancestors and they turned into birds and fishes.

An *Aka-J̌eru* version is very similar. "The people were all asleep. Maia
Kolo (Sir Sea-eagle) came and threw fire amongst them. They awoke in a
fright and all ran in different directions. Some ran into the sea and
became fishes and turtle; others ran into the jungle and became birds."

The *Aka-Kede* version of the catastrophe that overtook the ancestors is
as follows. " It was at the place called *Čilpet*. The people collected
a lot of honey. They refused to give any to *K<u>o</u>po-tera-wat* (a
bird, not identified). The latter got very angry, and in the evening,
when the cicadae were singing he made a great noise and disturbed their
song. Then there arose a great storm, and it rained very heavily, and
the sea rose over the land. It rose very rapidly till only the top of a
big Dipterocarpus tree showed above the water. The people took refuge in
the branches of this tree. *Mima Mite* (Lady Dove) managed to rescue
some fire and keep it alight under a cooking pot. The waters at length
subsided. Then the people did not know how to get down from the tree.
*Mima Čarami-lebek* made a long piece of string and with this she
lowered the people

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

safely to the ground." The *čarami-lebek*, which was not identified, is
a species of bird that lives, so the natives say, only at the top of the
very tallest trees of the forest.

An *Aka-K<u>o</u>l* version of the same legend is as follows: "At first
there were no birds in the jungle and no fish in the sea. The ancestors
were playing one evening and making a noise while the *peti* (cicada)
was singing. Then *Bilik* got angry and sent a great cyclone. All the
people were turned into birds and fishes and turtles and jungle beasts."

There is an *A-Pučikwar* legend that, in the days of the ancestors,
there was a big cyclone. There was a flood at *Wota-emi* and the water
rose up over the trees. Some of the ancestors climbed up into a big
*Dipterocarpus* tree and remained there till the waters had subsided. I
was not able to hear any more detailed version of the legend.

The following legend explaining how the ancestors were turned into
animals was told me by an *A-Pučikwar* man, but it is probably really of
*Akar-Bale* origin.

"It was in the days of the ancestors. *Ta K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* (Sir
Tree-lizard) went over to a big meeting at *Teb-ǰuru* (in the
Archipelago). There was a lot of dancing. *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* decided
to give a big dancing party of his own. He invited everybody and they
all came to his place. *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* danced a great deal. He
began to get wild. All the people were afraid, because he was very
strong. They caught hold of him by the arms. *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* got
very angry. He threw the people from him. He threw them so violently
that some fell in the sea and became fishes and turtle. Others fell on
different islands and became birds and animals. No one could hold
*K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*. At last *Berep* (a species of crab) caught hold
of his arm and would not let go. And thus *Berep* stopped him. Before
this there had been no birds in the jungles nor any fish in the sea."

A more complete version of this story was obtained from the *Akar-Bale*
tribe. "*Da Tigbul* (Sir Dugong) took all the people to dance at
*Kwaičo*. *In Bain* (Lady Civet-cat) told *Da Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* (Sir
Tree-lizard) that people were coming from *Tar-mugu* to dance and that
*Da Karami* <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) would quarrel with

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

him. *Da Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* replied 'Oh! I don't care. I can fight
all those people easily enough.' All the people came together for the
dance and Karami quarrelled with *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l*. The latter got
very angry. The people were afraid. *Tigbul* (Dugong) caught hold of
*Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* by the arm. *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* threw him from
him with such force that Tigbul fell into the sea and became a dugong.
Then *Kočurag-boa* caught hold of *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* and
*Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* threw him into the jungle <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27). *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* threw all the
people into the sea or into the jungle and they became birds and beasts
and fishes. No one could hold him. Da *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* went away
to *Teb-ǰuru*. The people told *Da Berag* (Sir Crab) what had happened
at *Kwaičo* and how no one could hold *Da Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l*. *Da
Berag* went after him to *Teb-ǰuru*. *Da Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* had
covered himself with *k<u>o</u>iob* (red paint) <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28). *Da Berag* pretended that he wanted some
paint to put on his upper lip, saying that he was sick. There was no
more red paint in the place, so *Da Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* said 'You had
better come and take some off me.' *Da Berag* put his nose to
*Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l's* arm as though to get some paint, and bit deeply
into *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l's* shoulder. *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* could not
get loose, and so he died. The people at *Teb-ǰuru* attacked *Da Berag*
and beat him. They could not kill him, because his skin was too hard, so
they threw him into the sea. When *Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l's* mother,
*Kegŋa*, came and found her son dead she was very angry. She wept for a
long time. Then she went into the jungle and cut the plant
*t<u>o</u>kul* which belongs to *Puluga*. *Puluga* was angry because the
*t<u>o</u>kul* was cut and sent a big storm which killed *Kegŋa* and all
the other people in that place."

Mr Man records another version of this legend.

"To explain the origin of certain fish, they say that one day before the
Deluge, *Maia K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* went to visit an encampment of the
*Tomola* situated in the Archipelago. While engaged in his song the
women, through inattention to his instructions, marred the effect of the
chorus, so, to punish them, he seized

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

his bow, whereupon the whole party in terror fled in all directions;
some escaping into the sea were changed into dugongs, porpoises, sharks,
and various other fish which till then had not been seen <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)."

Mr Man gives still another version of the same story. "One day, at the
commencement of the rainy season, a *tomola* named *Berebi* came to
visit *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t's* mother, *Čana Erep*, with the express
intention of seeing her son, of whom he was extremely jealous. When he
appeared *Berebi* treacherously bit him in the arm, but his teeth became
fixed in the flesh and he was therefore unable to detach himself from
his victim, whose friends promptly avenged his murder, and disposed of
the corpses by throwing them into the sea. (*K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*,
after death, was transformed into a species of tree-lizard, which is
still named after him, and *Berebi* became a fish called *Koŋo*, which
is armed with a row of poisonous barbs in its back.) The bereaved
mother, in her rage, grief and despair, committed various acts, against
which *Tomo* had been warned by *Puluga*, and while so doing incited
others to follow her example by the following words:

*e, e, e, dia ra-gumul l’ab-dala,  
e, e, e, ŋul kaǰa piǰ pugatken,  
e, e, e, ŋul čoaken toaiken,  
e, e, e, ŋul boarato aga-kolaken,  
e, e, e, ŋul gono boaŋken,  
e, e, e, ŋul toŋ čoara boaŋken,  
e, e, e, ŋig arlot pulaiǰoken*.

The translation of which is:

e, e, e (sobbing)--My grown-up handsome son,  
    "        "            Burn the wax,  
    "        "            Grind the seed of the *čakan* (Entada),  
    "        "            Destroy the *barata* (*Caryota*),  
    "        "            Dig up the *gono* (yam),  
    "        "            Dig up the *čati* (yam),  
    "        "            Destroy everything."

Thereupon Pu*luga* was exceeding wroth, and sent the flood, that which
destroyed all living things with the exception of two men and two women.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

"This tradition is preserved in the following lines:

*Keledoat ibaji lar čora,  
Ra gumul ab-gorga en ig-boadi  
Ra gumul be liga koarna  
Ra gumul ab-gorka  
Toala arbo eb dagan čoarpo*.

The meaning of which is:

Bring the boat to the beach  
I will see your fine grown-up son,  
The grown-up son who threw the youths (into the sea)  
The fine grown-up son,  
My adze is rusty, I will stain my lips with his blood.

In this, as in all their songs and chants, a good deal is left to the
imagination, but from their explanations which have been given by the
aborigines, the following appear to afford some light on the
subject:--*Berebi*, being jealous of the renown *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*
had won for himself by his numerous accomplishments and great strength,
took advantage of meeting him and his mother one day on the water to ask
them to let him enter their boat. On their complying with his request,
he provided himself with a rusty adze and hone, remarking on the rusty
condition of the former; then taking *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* by the arm
he sniffed it from the wrist to the shoulder as if admiring the
development of the muscles; while doing so he muttered the threat of
staining his lips with blood, which he shortly after fulfilled in the
manner already described <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)."

As the songs given in this legend are in the *Akar-Bale* language
(Southern dialect), it is probable that the legend is an *Akar-Bale*
one. It is really another version of the legend already given.

Another *Akar-Bale* story tells how the first ancestors *Duku*, the
monitor lizard, and *Bain* the civet-cat, managed to keep the fire
alight when a flood overwhelmed them. "One day in the time of the
ancestors there came a great storm, and the water rose over the land.
The rain put out the fires. *Da Duku* (Sir Monitor Lizard) took a
smouldering log and tried to climb up a tree with it. He could not climb
with the fire in his hand. His wife *In Bain* (Lady Civet-cat) took the
fire from him and took it

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

up to the top of a hill and there kept it alight till the rain stopped
and the water went away. The hill is called *Bain l’it-čapa* (Bain's
fire) to the present day." The hill is a rather steep-sided hill of no
great height in Havelock Island.

Mr Portman <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) connects the story of the
flood with the story of the dispersion of the ancestors over the
islands. Referring to the names of the tribes he says, "The Andamanese
state that these names were given to the different tribes by *Maia
Tomo-la* when they were dispersed after a cataclysm. They have a
tradition that this group of tribes was once all one tribe, and that the
Andaman Islands were much larger than at present. Some great cataclysm
occurred during which part of the islands subsided and many aborigines
were drowned, the remainder being separated into different territories
as at present by the orders of *Maia Tomo-la*, apparently the chief at
that time of the collected tribe. (The above is of course a
matter-of-fact version of the fanciful and impossible legends of the
Andamanese.)"

The dispersion legend in the South Andaman is connected with the name of
the *A-Pučikwar* tribe. The name (of which the *Aka-Bea* equivalent is
*Aka-Boǰig-yab*) means "those who talk the original language," it being
believed that the *A-Pučikwar* language was the one originally spoken by
the ancestors.

The only version of the dispersion legend that I heard was from the
*Aka-Kede* tribe. It was to the effect that *Bilika* once seized all the
ancestors and put them in a netted bag (such as the natives use for
carrying small objects of various kinds). She (or he) took them out a
few at a time and put them in different parts of the country, where
their descendants have been ever since.

Mr Man speaks of a legend of how the tribes came to be dispersed over
the islands. From his account it would seem that there were two
different dispersions, one before the Deluge, and a second after it. Mr
Man's account is as follows. "*Tomo* lived to a great age, but even
before his death his offspring became so numerous that their home could
no longer accommodate them. At *Puluga's* bidding they were furnished
with all necessary weapons, implements, and fire, and then scattered in

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

pairs all over the country. When this exodus occurred *Puluga* provided
each party with a distinct dialect. It would almost seem that, without
straining the legend to suit facts, we might discern in this a faint
echo of the Biblical account of the confusion of tongues and dispersion
at Babel <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)."

"Consequent on the disappearance of *Tomo* and his wife, the duties of
headship over the community at *Wota-emi* devolved on one of their
grandchildren, named *K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*, who was distinguished by
being the first to spear and catch turtles. The *tomola* remained on the
islands long after *Tomo's* transformation, but after
*K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t's* death, according to one legend, they grew
disobedient, and as *Puluga* ceased to visit them, became more and more
remiss in their observance of the commands given at the creation. At
last *Puluga's* anger burst forth, and, without any warning, he sent a
great flood that covered the whole land, and destroyed all living. Four
persons (two men, *L<u>o</u>ra-lola* and *P<u>o</u>i-lola*, and two
women, *Ka-lola* and *Rima-lola*), who happened to be in a canoe when
the catastrophe occurred, were able to effect an escape. When the waters
subsided, they found themselves near *Wota-emi*, where they landed and
discovered that every living thing on earth had perished; but *Puluga*
re-created the animals, birds, etc. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33)."

"When, for the second time in their history, their numbers had increased
to so great an extent that it became impossible for them to remain
together in one spot, an exodus, similar to the first, took place; each
party being furnished with fire and every other essential, started in a
different direction, and on settling down adopted a new and distinct
dialect. They each received a tribal name, and from them have sprung the
various tribes still existing on the islands <span
id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34)."

In the Southern tribes there is a legend to account for the origin of
night. The following version was obtained from the *A-Pučikwar* tribe.
"In the early days of the world, in the time of the ancestors, there was
no night; it was always day. *Ta P<u>e</u>tie* (Sir Monitor Lizard) went
into the jungle to dig up yams. He found some yams. He also found some
resin (*teki*), and a cicada (*r<u>o</u>to*). He brought them to the
camp of the ancestors at

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Wota-emi*. He sat down and the people came
round him. *Ta P<u>e</u>tie* took the cicada and rubbed it between his
hands and crushed it. As he did this the cicada uttered its cry. Then
the day went away and it was dark. It remained dark for several days.
The ancestors came together and tried to get back the day. They made
torches of resin, and danced and sang songs. First *Kotare* (a bird)
sang a song, but he could not get back the daylight. Then *Bumu* (a
beetle?) sang, but the day would not come. Then *Pecer<u>o</u>l* (the
bulbul, *Otocompsia emeria*) sang, and after him *K<u>o</u>io* (a bird),
but both in vain. Then *K<u>o</u>ŋoro* (a species of ant) sang a song
and morning came. After that, day and night followed one another
alternately."

A similar legend was obtained from the *Akar-Bale* tribe. "*Da
Teŋat* <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) lived at *Golugma Bud*. He
went fishing one day and got only one small fish of the kind called
*čelau* (*Glyphidodon sordidus*?): He turned to go home, and as he went
he shot his arrows before him into the jungle <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36). Then he went after his arrows to find
them again. As he went he spoke to the fruits of the jungle, asking them
their names. In those days the ancestors did not know the names of the
fruits and trees. First he asked the *puiam*, and then the *guluba*, and
then the *čakli*, but none of them replied to him. Then he found his
first arrow. It was stuck fast in a big yam (*gono*). He took the arrow
and said to the yam 'What is your name?' At first the yam did not
answer. *Teŋat* turned to go away. He had gone a few steps when the yam
called him back, saying 'My name is *gono*.' *Teŋat* replied 'Oh! I did
not know. Why did not you say so before?' He dug up the yam, which was a
very big one. He went off to look for his second arrow. As he went he
spoke to the stones of the jungle, asking their names, but none of them
replied. Then he found his second arrow fixed in a large lump of resin
(*tug*) <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37). He took the arrow, and as
he was going away

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the resin called him back, saying 'Here! my name is *tug*; you can take
me along with you.' So *Teŋat* took the resin. Then *Teŋat* found a
cicada (*rita*), and he took that also. When *Teŋat* got to the hut
(*bud*), everyone came to look at the things he had brought. He showed
them the yam. He told them its name and showed them how to cook it. This
was the first time that the ancestors ate *gono*. Then *Teŋat* took in
his hand the cicada and squashed it between his palms. As he killed it
the cicada uttered its cry and the whole world became dark. When the
people saw that it was dark they tried to bring back the daylight.
*Teŋat* took some of the resin and made torches. He taught the people
how to dance and sing. When *Da K<u>o</u>ŋoro* (Sir Ant) sang a song the
day came back. After that the day and night came alternately."

Mr Man records a different version of this story.

"The manner in which the world was illuminated at the beginning is not
clearly to be ascertained from theft legends, for one story states that
the sun and moon were subsequently created at Tome's request, as he
found that, under the then existing circumstances, it was impossible to
catch fish by night or to hunt by day; while, in direct disagreement
with this, another story tells us that night was a punishment brought
upon mankind by certain individuals who angered *Puluga* by killing a
caterpillar. The tale informs us that the sun, one day, burned so
fiercely as to cause great distress. Two women named *Čana Limi* and
*Čana J̌araŋud*, became exceedingly irritable, and while in this unhappy
frame of mind they discovered a caterpillar (*gurug*) and a certain
plant called *utura*. By way of venting their spleen, one crushed the
helpless grub, and the other destroyed the plant. These wanton acts so
displeased *Puluga* that he determined to punish them, and to teach them
to appreciate the privilege of daylight, which they had hitherto
uninterruptedly enjoyed. He accordingly visited the earth with a
long-continued darkness, which caused every one much inconvenience and
distress. At last their chief, *Maia K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*, to whom
reference has already been made, hit upon a happy expedient of inducing
*Puluga* to restore the former state of things by trying to assure him
that they were quite unconcerned, and could enjoy

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

themselves in spite of light being withheld from them. To accomplish
this, he invented the custom of dancing and singing, the result of which
was that *Puluga*, finding that they had frustrated his intention,
granted, as a first concession alternate periods of day and night, and
subsequently, moved by the difficulties often occasioned by the latter,
created the moon to mitigate their troubles. It is in this way that they
account for the same word being used to denote a caterpillar and
night <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)."

From the *Akar-Bale* tribe I obtained a legend about the origin of
death. No other version of the same legend was obtained.

"At *J̌<u>o</u>ŋo-l’ar-b<u>o</u>ŋ* lived *In Kalwadi* with her sons
*Yaramurud* and *Toau* <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39). *Yaramurud*
went to hunt pig for his mother, but was unsuccessful. When he came home
his mother brought him some pork that was in the hut. As he took his
knife from the back of his neck to cut the meat with it, he cut
himself <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40). Then his mother knew that
he was dead. She said to him 'You are dead now. You had better go away.
We do not want you here any more.' She took him up and carried him into
the jungle and buried him, returning home. Very soon *Yaramurud*
returned. His mother exclaimed 'Oh! I thought you had gone.' He replied
'Mother, I did not die. Why did you bury me?' But she knew he was dead,
so she took him and buried him again. He came back again. This happened
three times. Then *Kalwadi* took him into the jungle to a big *dumla*
tree (*Pisonia excelsa*), in which there was a big hole. She kicked the
tree with her foot and said 'You go in there.' *Yaramurud* went inside.
'Well! Have you gone?' his mother asked. He answered 'Yes!' 'Tell me how
the spirits (*čauga*) talk' she asked him, and he replied '*T<u>o</u>
kit* <span id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41).' Then his mother knew that he
was with the spirits, and said 'Oh! my child, you are

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

finished now. You will never come back again.' After a few days
*Yaramurud* came back (as a spirit) to see his brother *Toau*. *Toau*
was busy building a hut. When *Yaramurud* saw him he killed him. Before
this there had been no death. But *In Kalwadi* told the people, saying
'You see what has happened; well, we shall all of us die like this, like
these two have done'."

There is a widespread legend to account for the origin of creeks and
islands. The following is an *A-Pučikwar* version.

"At first there was only one big island with the sea all round it. There
were no small islands and no creeks. *Koŋoro* (a species of ant) made a
turtle net and went fishing. He caught a very big fish of the kind
called *k<u>o</u>ro-ŋiti-čau* in his net, and dived down and attached a
rope to its tail. The fish got very angry and made furious plunges to
get away, striking the land in its struggles, and each time knocking off
a bit of the land or making a long split. This is the origin of the
smaller islands and the creeks."

Mr Man records the same legend, but says it was *Tomo* who caught the
fish <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42). In an *Akar-Bale* version it
was *Da Pečer<u>o</u>l* who caught the fish (*k<u>o</u>roŋadi*).
*Pečer<u>o</u>l* is the bulbul (*Otocompsia emeria*). I have the name
*k<u>o</u>roŋadi* in my notes as being *Sphyraena acutipinnis*, but the
identification is a doubtful one. In the *Aka-Kede* tribe there is a
version in which it is stated that one of the ancestors captured a fish
called *talepo*. This does not seem to be the same species of fish as
that called *koro-ŋiti-čau* or *k<u>o</u>roŋadi* in the South. In the
North Andaman the legend is that *P<u>e</u>rǰido*, the son of *Biliku*,
shot a large eel (*bol*) with an arrow, and in its endeavours to get
free from the arrow the eel wriggled about till it made all the creeks.

In the Southern tribes there is a legend that relates how the pig first
got its senses. A version from the *A-Pučikwar* tribe is as follows.

"*Ta Mita* (Sir Dove) went into the jungle and found a lot of pigs. They
did not run away when he came because they had no eyes to see him, no
ears to hear, and no nostrils with which to smell. They had no mouths.
*Mita* made mouths for them and gave them tusks which he made of *tobur*
wood. He made

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

eyes and ears and nostrils in their heads and taught them how to grunt
and how to sneeze <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)."

Another version from the same tribe is as follows.

"At first the pigs had neither nose nor ears nor eyes. They used to
stand about at *Wota-emi* when the ancestors lived there. The people ate
a great many of them. They were such a nuisance that *Mita* (Dove), the
wife of *Tomo*, thought of a plan to get them out of the way. She bored
holes in their heads, two for eyes, two for ears, and two for nostrils.
The pigs ran off into the forest where they have been ever since."

I did not obtain any version of this legend from the Northern tribes.
The *Aka-Kede* have a different legend about the pigs.

"At first there were no pigs. One of the ancestors, *Mimi Čau* (Lady
Civet-cat), invented a new game, and made the ancestors run on all fours
and grunt. Those playing were turned into pigs, and went to live in the
jungle. *Mimi Čau* became a civet-cat (*čau*)."

In the North Andaman there is a legend connected with the pig which
explains the origin of the dugong.

"*P<u>e</u>rǰido* was the first man to catch a pig. He went into the
forest and found a pig. *P<u>e</u>rǰido* was hungry. He caught the pig
and took it home. The pig had no eyes nor ears nor mouth.
*P<u>e</u>rǰido* did not disembowel the pig, nor did he sever the joints
of its legs <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44). He made a fire and put
the pig on it. The pig swelled up in the heat of the fire and burst.
This made holes in the pig's head, two for ears, two for eyes, two for
nostrils. The pig perceived that it was being burnt. It jumped up from
the fire and ran away. *P<u>e</u>rǰido* threw a *kobo* (*Licuala*) leaf
at it. The pig ran into the sea and became a dugong. The leaf became its
flipper."

In the *Aka-Čari* tribe there is a legend describing the origin of
turtles.

"At first there was only one big turtle. He came to the camp of the
*Aka-Čari* people and called them, saying 'Bring your canoes and catch
me.' They got into their canoes and

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

followed the turtle. They could not catch him. The turtle swam away and
the canoes followed. When the canoes were far from land the big turtle
came and upset the canoes. The men were all turned into turtles of the
same kind and size as those that are seen now. The canoes (and the big
turtle?) were turned into a reef."

In the South Andaman it is supposed that the custom of scarifying the
skin was invented by the first ancestor of the Andamanese, the monitor
lizard. An *Akar-Bale* version of the story is as follows.

"*Duku* (Monitor Lizard) lived with his wife *Bain* (Civet-cat). *Duku*
said 'I am going to scarify myself' His wife tried to dissuade him. He
would not listen to her. He went into the jungle and found a piece of
*t<u>o</u>lma* (quartz) and scarified himself all over. His wife was
very angry and asked him why he had done it. *Duku* replied 'I look very
well like this, and you will see, all the other people will do the
same'."

Mr Man gives a version of the same legend.

"*Maia Duku*, who appears to be identical with *Tomo*, is said to have
been the first to tattoo himself. One day, while out on a fishing
expedition, he shot an arrow; missing its object it struck a hard
substance which proved to be a piece of iron, the first ever found. With
it *Duku* made an arrow-head and tattooed himself, after which he sang
the ditty:--

*Toŋ ma lir pireŋa? t<u>o</u>ŋ yitiken! t<u>o</u>ŋ yitiken!  
t<u>o</u>ŋ ma pireŋa? t<u>o</u>ŋ yitiken*!

the interpretation of which is

'What can now strike me?  
I am tattooed, I am tattooed!' etc. (Da capo) <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)."

It would seem that Mr Man, or else his informant, was not very clear
about the details of the legend. In the South Andaman scarification is
never performed with an arrow-head, nor with any instrument of iron, but
with a flake of quartz or glass. It is only in the North and Middle
Andaman that an arrow-head is used for such a purpose, and even then it
is only so used to make the big scars on the back and chest, the
ordinary scarification

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

being performed with a flake of stone or glass. The legend is certainly
a Southern one, and the song given is in the *Aka-Bea* language. The
accuracy of the transcription of the legend therefore seems very
doubtful.

Yams and honey, being two of the most important foods of the Andaman
Islanders, are the subject of several legends. A common belief about
yams is that they were made, or their qualities were first discovered,
by *Biliku* or *Puluga*. We have already seen that there is a special
connection between *Biliku* (or *Puluga*) and the yams and other edible
roots. There are also other legends, however, on the same subject. An
account of the first discovery of the yam called gono is contained in
the *Akar-Bale* legend of the origin of night, already given <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46).

In the North Andaman the following tale is told about the discovery of
one kind of yam.

"*Maia Dik* (Sir Prawn) discovered *k<u>o</u>nmo* (*Dioscorea* sp.). He
was very hungry and went to look for something to eat. He found a very
large *k<u>o</u>nmo*. There was only one *k<u>o</u>nmo*. He cooked it in
the fire and ate as much as he could. He dashed the remainder on a rock,
and the fragments scattered everywhere and grew into fresh plants. After
this there were plenty of *k<u>o</u>nmo* everywhere."

A legend is also told in the North Andaman about the first discovery of
another kind of yam.

"*Maia Pulimu* (Sir Fly) and *Maia M<u>o</u>ičo* (Sir Rail) went to hunt
pig. They killed one pig. There was nothing to tie up the pig (to carry
it home). *Maia Pulimu* went to look for a creeper (with which to tie up
the pig). He caught hold of a creeper and pulled it and found it was a
*mino* (*Dioscorea* sp.). *Maia Pulimu* was a long time away. *Maia
M<u>o</u>ičo* went and found some creeper for himself and tied up the
pig and carried it home. When *Maia Pulimu* came back he found that
*Maia M<u>o</u>ičo* had gone and taken the pig. He followed him and went
home. He showed the ancestors how to cook and eat *mino*."

I believe that there is a fuller version of this legend, which I was
unable, however, to obtain. Another of my informants told me the story
as follows.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

"*Mimi M<u>o</u>ičo* (Lady Rail) had a son *Pulimu* (Fly). *Pulimu*
found a *mino* in the forest and brought it to his mother. They roasted
it in the fire."

Mr Man gives a story from the South Andaman.

"Another of their antediluvian ancestors was famous for propagating
yams. This was *Maia Bumroag*, who in shooting an arrow, struck the
creeper belonging to the favourite variety called *gono*; his curiosity
being excited he dug up the root, and tasted it: the result being
satisfactory, he informed his friends of his discovery, and they all
feasted upon it; when they had had sufficient, he scattered the remains
in different directions; this apparent waste so angered his mother that,
on pretence of shaving him, she split his head open with a flint. After
his death it was found that the act for which he had suffered had tended
to the spread of the plant which is now plentiful <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)."

In the North Andaman it is supposed that honey was discovered by
*P<u>e</u>rǰido* the son of *Biliku*.

"*P<u>e</u>rǰido* was the first to eat honey. One day he went to shoot
fish. He saw a *nyuri* (*Plotosus* sp.). The *nyuri* disappeared amongst
the roots of the mangrove trees. *P<u>e</u>rǰido* was looking for the
fish. There was a honeycomb in a mangrove tree. *P<u>e</u>rǰido* saw its
reflection in the water. He took some fire and tried to get the honey
out of the water <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48). The water put out
the fire. He could not get the honey. He went home and told his mother
what he had been doing. She went with him and saw the honey. 'What a
fool you are' she said, 'don't you see that it is in the trees.'
*P<u>e</u>rǰido* took some fire and smoked out the bees and took the
honey. After that *P<u>e</u>rǰido* used to go and collect honey. He ate
it all himself. He did not tell the others (the ancestors) about it.
*Maia P<u>o</u>rubi* (Sir Frog) found out that *P<u>e</u>rǰido* was
getting honey and eating it. He went in to the forest to look for some.
He found five or six combs. He ate them all and brought none home to his
children. *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* (a smaller species of frog) was the
child of *P<u>o</u>rubi*. One day *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* said to his
father 'Bring us some honey.' The children went with their father and
showed him the combs in the trees.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *P<u>o</u>rubi* went up the tree, and each time
he ate the honey in the tree and did not bring any of it down for his
children. Then *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* saw another honeycomb in a very
tall tree. He pointed it out to his father. *P<u>o</u>rubi* went up to
get it. *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* cut the creeper up which his father had
climbed <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49). *P<u>o</u>rubi* wrapped up
the honeycomb to bring it down. *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* said 'Father, this
creeper is bad. How will you come down?' *P<u>o</u>rubi* replied 'How
can it be bad, when I have just climbed up it?' *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t*
made some sharp stakes of cone (Areca) wood, and put them round the
tree. *P<u>o</u>rubi* jumped (or fell) from the tree on to the stakes
and was killed. *B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t* took the honey and ran away home."

In the *Aka-Čari* tribe there is another legend connected with the frog
(*p<u>o</u>rubi*) which may conveniently be given here.

"The ancestors were at enmity with *Maia P<u>o</u>rubi*. They went to
kill him. They shot him with their arrows, but they could not kill him.
*Maia P<u>o</u>rubi* caught hold of them all in his arms, and jumped
into the sea. He jumped from the hill called *Čauanara*. He found a big
round stone (boulder) and put the people under it and left them there.
All the people turned into stone, and may be seen there now. The next
night some more of the people went to hunt turtle near *Maia
P<u>o</u>rubi's* place. They caught a turtle and shouted <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50). *Maia P<u>o</u>rubi* heard them shouting.
'They are coming again to kill me,' he said. While they were catching
turtle he threw a round stone at them. The stone sank the canoe. The
canoe and the people in it were turned to stone."

A story in which there is a connection between honey and a toad is given
by Mr Man.

"Another curious fable is told to account for a drought from which their
early ancestors suffered: it relates that once upon a time, in the dry
season, a woodpecker discovered a black honey-comb in the hollow of a
tree; while regaling himself on this dainty he observed a toad eyeing
him wistfully from below, so he invited him to join in the feast; the
toad gladly accepted, whereupon the woodpecker lowered a creeper, giving
instructions to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

his guest to fasten his bucket (*dakar*) thereto, and then to seat
himself in it, so that he might be drawn up. The toad complied with the
directions and the woodpecker proceeded to haul him up; but just when he
had brought him near the comb he mischievously let go the creeper, and
his confiding and expectant guest experienced an unpleasant fall. The
trick so exasperated him that he at once repaired to the streams far and
near in the island and drained them, the result of which was that great
distress was occasioned to all the birds, as well as to the rest of the
animate creation. The success of his revenge so delighted the toad that,
to show his satisfaction, and to add to the annoyance of his enemies, he
thoughtlessly began to dance, whereupon all the water flowed from him,
and the drought soon terminated <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)."

One of the incidents of the North Andaman story of the frog
(*P<u>o</u>rubi*) and his son (*B<u>e</u>r<u>e</u>t*) appears in a
different story from the South and Middle Andaman. The following is an
*Aka-K<u>o</u>l* version of this legend.

"*Ta Mita* (Sir Dove) and *Ta K<u>o</u>io* (a species of small bird)
went hunting together and got a great number of pigs. *Ta K<u>o</u>io*
told *Ta Mita* to get some canes to tie up all the pigs. As soon as *Ta
Mita* had gone to look for the cane, *Ta K<u>o</u>io* went up a big
Dipterocarpus tree, taking half the pigs with him. He came down and took
the rest of the pigs. He stayed up in the tree with the pigs. When *Ta
Mita* came back he found that the pigs had disappeared. He was very
angry and went home. As there was nothing to eat, *Mita* and his two
children, *Čada* and *Čoda* (two species of fish) went fishing.
*K<u>o</u>io* was still up the tree. He was cooking the pigs up there.
*Mita* and his children passed under the tree and some burning
resin <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) fell on them. In this way they
discovered that *K<u>o</u>io* was in the tree. *Mita* planned to punish
*K<u>o</u>io*. He cut a great number of sharp stakes of Areca wood and
fixed them all round the tree, pointing upwards. *K<u>o</u>io* was
asleep. Mita made the tree sink into the ground. As soon as it was low
enough he took some water and threw it into the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

ear of the sleeping *K<u>o</u>io*, who awoke in a fright and jumped from
the tree. He was impaled on the stakes of wood and so died."

Another version of the same tale was obtained from the *Akar-Bale*
tribe.

"*Da Bumu* (a species of bird) went hunting pig with *Da Berakwe*
(another species of bird), and they got a large number of pigs. Then
*Berakwe* said to *Bumu* 'We want some cane to tie up all these pigs.
You go and get it.' When *Bumu* had gone *Berakwe* climbed up into a big
*Dipterocarpus* tree, taking all the pigs with him, except one very
small one which he left behind. When *Bumu* came back with the cane he
found only one small pig, and he was very angry. He went home with the
pig. *Bumu's* wife *Yakoŋ* (a species of fish) said 'I am very hungry.
We will go and get some fish by night.' At night *Yakoŋ* went out to get
some fish and she passed under the tree where *Berakwe* was cooking his
pigs. Some burning resin fell on her and burnt her. She looked up and
saw *Berakwe* and said 'Oh! there you are; you stole all my husband's
pigs.' She went home and told *Bumu*. In the morning *Bumu* got up very
early and cut a number of pointed stakes of *Areca* (*čam*) wood, and
fixed them all round the tree where *Berakwe* was, with the sharp points
upwards. Then *Bumu* made the tree sink gradually into the ground.
*Berakwe* fell from the tree on to the stakes and so was killed. *Bumu*
and his wife got the pigs."

Mr Man records a version of the same story.

"The legend regarding the origin of the evil spirits known as
*Č<u>o</u>l* is as follows:--Their ancestor, *Maia Č<u>o</u>l*, one day
stole a pig which had been captured by *Maia K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t*, and
climbed up into a gurjon-tree with his prize. Now *Maia
K<u>o</u>lw<u>o</u>t* was remarkable for his great strength, and being
enraged, determined to revenge himself; he thereupon planted a number of
spikes all round the tree in which the thief had taken refuge, and then
proceeded to force it into the ground. On finding that if he remained
where he was, he must inevitably be buried alive, *Maia Č<u>o</u>l*
sprang off the tree, and thereby met a more terrible fate, for he was
impaled on the spikes, and perished miserably. His disembodied spirit
did not pass to *Čaitan* (Hades), but took up its abode on the invisible
bridge, where, by *Puluga's* orders, numbers of his

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

descendants were sent to join him, in the form of black birds with long
tails <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)."

In reference to this version it may be noted that the Col are not
"spirits" if that word is used to translate the native term *čauga* or
*lau*. *Č<u>o</u>l* is the name of a species of bird, which I believe is
the racket-tailed drongo. These birds, though according to Mr Man they
live on the rainbow, are to be seen every day in the jungle, and may be
heard calling *č<u>o</u>l*! *č<u>o</u>l*! *č<u>o</u>l*!

Throughout the Great Andaman there is a belief in a huge animal that
haunts the jungles, or that haunted them in the days of the ancestors.
In the North Andaman this beast is called *J̌irmu*. In the days of the
ancestors it is supposed to have lived at *Ulibi-taŋ*, where it attacked
and killed any men and women who came in its way. No detailed legend
about the *J̌irmu* was obtained.

In the *Akar-Bale* language *Kočurag-boa* is the name of the same or a
similar monster. In the *A-Pučikwar* language it is called *Uču*. This
is the name applied to two rocks of limestone which are situated about
two or three miles south of *Wota-emi*, one being in a mangrove swamp,
and the other some little way out in the sea. The following legend is
told about these rocks.

"In the early days of the Andamanese, *Ta P<u>e</u>tie* (Sir Monitor
Lizard), the first ancestor, went into the jungle and found a
*č<u>o</u>ti* tree, up which he climbed to eat the fruit. The other
people (who lived with him at *Wota-emi*) came and found him, and *Ta
P<u>e</u>tie* threw down some of the fruit to them, which they ate. The
people began to bully *P<u>e</u>tie* to make him throw down more of the
fruit. *P<u>e</u>tie* got angry and said 'If you bully me like that I
will call the *Uču*, and they will kill you all.' The people only
laughed at him. *P<u>e</u>tie* called the *Uču*, calling '*Dire*!
*dire*!' The *Uču* came, one male and one female. They caught all the
people and ate them. Only *P<u>e</u>tie* they did not eat because he was
up in the high tree. The *Uču* went off to cross the strait to
*T<u>o</u>l-l’oko-tima*. They had eaten so much that they were very
heavy and stuck in the sand and mud at the edge of the man-grove swamp.
When *P<u>e</u>tie* came down from the tree he found all the people
gone. He said 'Hallo! the *Uču* must have eaten

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

them all.' He went to look. He found the *Uču* stuck fast at the edge of
the mangrove swamp, so that they could not move. He cut open their
bellies and all the people came out, for the *Uču* had swallowed them
whole. The *Uču* are there to this day."

When elephants were first introduced into the Andamans for the use of
the Forest Department, they were named *Uču* by the natives, and have
ever since retained that name. Similarly the natives of the Northern
tribes call them *J̌irmu*.

In the *Akar-Bale* tribe there is a legend to account for the origin of
a rock standing in the sea at a place called *Kwaičo-bur*.

"*Ra-gumul Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* went fishing with his bow and arrows in
the sea. His bow and arrows and he himself were turned into stone, and
may be seen there to the present day."

*Kw<u>o</u>k<u>o</u>l* is the common tree-lizard. *Ra-gumul* is the term
applied to a youth or girl who has just passed through the pig-eating
ceremony described in Chap. II. A youth is not permitted to handle a bow
for some days after the ceremony in question. A version of the same
legend is recorded by Mr Man.

"The story regarding certain Tomola who failed to observe the rules for
neophytes, states that, on the day after they broke their fast of
*reg-ǰiri* (kidney-fat of pig), they left the encampment without giving
notice of their intention to their friends, and the result was that,
when they were missed and searched for, it was found that they had gone
to the shore to fish, and had there met a sad fate; the body of one was
discovered adhering to a large boulder, and turned into stone, while the
other, likewise in a state of petrifaction, was standing erect beside
it <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)."

A reef on the east side of Ritchie's Archipelago is said to have
originated as follows.

"The people of *Kwaičo* went to *J̌ila* to hunt turtle, taking two
canoes. While they were away their wives made up a big fire in the
evening at *Kwaičo*. The hunters and their canoes were turned to stone,
and formed the reefs that are now there."

I believe that the explanation of this story is the belief that the moon
is angry when a bright fire is visible at the time when he rises in the
evening shortly after sunset <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55).

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

There seems to be a legend relating to a large snake called
*<u>o</u>r-čubi* in the North Andaman, but I was not able to obtain a
detailed version. The following was told me in *Aka-J̌eru*.

"At *Dalamio*, in the time of the ancestors, there used to be a big
snake of the kind called *<u>o</u>r-čubi*. He used to catch men and
women when they were gathering honey, and kill them and eat them."

An *Akar-Bale* version is a little fuller.

"There was a man named *Biča* who went to look for honey in the jungle.
He saw a big snake (*wara-ǰobo*) and from its neck was hanging a
honeycomb. The snake was as big as a tree. 'Why don't you make your
honey in the trees?' *Biča* said to the bees. He went home and called
several of the men. They took their bows and arrows. They found the
snake, and shot it with a great many arrows. They could not kill the
snake, which ran away and was never seen again."

An *Akar-Bale* story relates how the first murder came to pass.

"*Da Ko* (Sir Crow) was the first of the Andamanese. He lived at
*Kared-čar-buaro* with his wife *In Mud* (Lady Dove). He had a friend,
*Badgi-beria* (Hawk). *Badgi-beria* had no wife and was jealous of *Da
Ko* and wanted to get his wife. When *Da Ko* knew this he was very
angry. He went into the jungle and hid himself. By and by he saw
*Badgi-beria* and *Mud* coming along the path together. He took his bow
and arrows and killed them."

Another *Akar-Bale* story about the dove is as follows. "*Mud* and
*Kulal* were cooking pig and got very hot. They went to bathe and were
turned into birds."

*Mud* is the bronze-winged dove, *Chalcophaps indica*, and *kulal* is
the teal, *Nettium albigulare*.

In the North Andaman there are tales about the sea-eagle
(*k<u>o</u>lo*). One is to the effect that at first he used
*k<u>o</u>bo* (*Licuala*) leaves to fly with. This was before he had
wings of his own. Another story is as follows.

"*Maia K<u>o</u>lo* (Sir Sea-eagle) lived at *Čona* in *Tau-’ra-miku*.
He had a hut in the top of a *t<u>o</u>r<u>o</u>ktato* tree. He was
unmarried.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When the men went fishing he used to steal their
wives. He would only take good-looking girls. He would call out to a
girl to come and catch hold of his foot, saying 'I have a fish for you.'
If an old or ugly woman came, he would say 'No! not you; go away.' When
a young woman came and caught hold of his foot he flew away with her to
his hut in the tree."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[190:1](tai04.htm#fr_0) Portman, Notes on the
Languages, etc. p. 97.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[190:2](tai04.htm#fr_1) The legend will be given
later.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[190:3](tai04.htm#fr_2) Man, *op. cit.* p. 169.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[191:1](tai04.htm#fr_3) The suffix -*la* is added
to personal names and to terms of address in order to express respect.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[192:1](tai04.htm#fr_4) The name seems to mean
"alone."

<span id="fn_5"></span>[192:2](tai04.htm#fr_5) The giant bamboo does not
grow in the Andamans, but pieces of it are often drifted ashore, having
come from the coast of Burma. The natives pick up these drift-wood
bamboos and make buckets of them. It is possible that the bamboo from
which the first man was born was just such a piece drifted up from the
sea. Unfortunately I neglected to enquire on this point when taking down
the legend.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[193:1](tai04.htm#fr_6) The meaning of the name
is "the cave of *Tarai*"; I believe that this is the name of a spot in
the *Aka-J̌eru* country.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[193:2](tai04.htm#fr_7) The meaning of the name
was not discovered.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[193:3](tai04.htm#fr_8) The lizard was caught in
some way by his genital organs, but I was' unable to understand the
story completely.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[194:1](tai04.htm#fr_9) This is the small
platform of sticks placed near or above the fire, on which the natives
keep their food, and on which they often place objects that they desire
to dry.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[194:2](tai04.htm#fr_10) *Notes on the
Languages*, etc. p. 227.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[195:1](tai04.htm#fr_11) When an old man of the
*A-Pučikwar* tribe was giving me the information repeated above, an
Andamanese man was with us who had been brought up as a Christian and
had some knowledge of the doctrines of that faith. He explained to me
that *Tomo* is the equivalent of the Christian God. This man belonged to
the *Akar-Bale* tribe.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[196:1](tai04.htm#fr_12) These names are common
personal names among the aborigines of the present day. Mr Portman
derives *Nyali* from *nam-da*, the name of a tree, and *Irap* from
*pira-da* meaning "scattered," but these derivations are far from being
authenticated. (Portman, *Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman
Group of Tribes*, p. 70.)

<span id="fn_13"></span>[196:2](tai04.htm#fr_13) The place called *Irap*
is at the north end of Havelock Island.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[197:1](tai04.htm#fr_14) Man, *op. cit.* p. 164.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[201:1](tai04.htm#fr_15) Until the settlement of
Europeans on the islands the Andamanese had no knowledge of any means of
producing fire. It is necessary to remember this to understand some of
their legends which relate how in the time of the ancestors the fire was
very nearly lost in a heavy storm.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[203:1](tai04.htm#fr_16) I understood that
*Lirtit*, by the loss of his wings and tail, became a man.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[203:2](tai04.htm#fr_17) Portman, *loc. cit*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[203:3](tai04.htm#fr_18) *Mom* is a title
indicating respect, and *Mirit* is the imperial pigeon.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[204:1](tai04.htm#fr_19) Portman, *loc. cit*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[204:2](tai04.htm#fr_20) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[205:1](tai04.htm#fr_21) Portman, *loc. cit*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[205:2](tai04.htm#fr_22) Man, *op. cit.* p. 164.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[205:3](tai04.htm#fr_23) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[206:1](tai04.htm#fr_24) Man, *op. cit.* p. 167.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[207:1](tai04.htm#fr_25) *Dik* was one of the
ancestors. He was a giant and was so big that he could go into the
deepest water and never needed a canoe. He used to shoot dugong and
porpoise with his bow and arrow. (The natives shoot small fish with a
bow and arrows, but large fish and dugong and porpoise they take with
harpoons.)

<span id="fn_26"></span>[208:1](tai04.htm#fr_26) *Karami* is the name of
a bird that was not identified.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[209:1](tai04.htm#fr_27) *Kočurag-boa* is the
*Akar-Bale* name for a huge legendary animal.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[209:2](tai04.htm#fr_28) When a man has killed
another, either in a personal or a tribal quarrel, he has to observe
several customs of which one is to keep himself painted with red paint
for several weeks.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[210:1](tai04.htm#fr_29) Man, *op. cit.* p. 171.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[211:1](tai04.htm#fr_30) Man, *op. cit.* pp.
167-169.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[212:1](tai04.htm#fr_31) *Notes on the
Languages*, etc. p. 27.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[213:1](tai04.htm#fr_32) Man, *op. cit.* p. 166.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[213:2](tai04.htm#fr_33) Ibid.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[213:3](tai04.htm#fr_34) Man, *op. cit.* p. 169.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[214:1](tai04.htm#fr_35) This is the name of
some creature that I did not identify, perhaps a kind of spider.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[214:2](tai04.htm#fr_36) An Andaman Islander
will often, when walking along the shore, shoot his arrows before him,
either aiming at some object, or trying to send each one as far as
possible. I have never seen them do this in the jungle, for they might
easily lose the arrows.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[214:3](tai04.htm#fr_37) The Andamanese classify
resin as a "stone" although they know its vegetable origin.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[216:1](tai04.htm#fr_38) Man, *op. cit.* p. 175.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[216:2](tai04.htm#fr_39) *Kalwadi* is a small
crab, *yaramurud* is the crow pheasant (*Centropus andamanensis*), and
*toau* is the hawksbill turtle.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[216:3](tai04.htm#fr_40) Knives are generally
carried slipped into a string that is tied round the neck, the knife,
with a skewer of sharpened wood that is attached to it, hanging at the
back of the neck, where it is easily accessible and not likely to get
lost.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[216:4](tai04.htm#fr_41) I could obtain no
explanation of the phrase, or word, *t<u>o</u> kit*. My informant only
said "That is the way the spirits talk."

<span id="fn_42"></span>[217:1](tai04.htm#fr_42) Man, *op. cit.* p. 165.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[218:1](tai04.htm#fr_43) The sneezing (the word
is translated literally) is a sort of whistling noise that the wild pigs
make when they suspect danger.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[218:2](tai04.htm#fr_44) The Andamanese always
disembowel a pig and sever the joints of its legs before they place it
on a fire.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[219:1](tai04.htm#fr_45) Man, *op. cit.* p. 170.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[220:1](tai04.htm#fr_46) Page 214.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[221:1](tai04.htm#fr_47) Man, *op. cit.* p. 170.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[221:2](tai04.htm#fr_48) In taking a honeycomb
the natives often drive away the bees with fire or smoke.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[222:1](tai04.htm#fr_49) In climbing a tall tree
the Andamanese choose a stout cane or other creeper depending from one
of the branches of the tree, and climb up it.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[222:2](tai04.htm#fr_50) The natives express
their joy at a success in hunting by shouting.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[223:1](tai04.htm#fr_51) Man, *op. cit.* p. 173.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[223:2](tai04.htm#fr_52) The narrator said
"resin." The *Dipterocarpus* tree does not produce resin, but a sort of
oil. The marks on the two fishes owe their origin to this incident.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[225:1](tai04.htm#fr_53) Man, *op. cit.* p. 173.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[226:1](tai04.htm#fr_54) Man, *op. cit.* p. 169.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[226:2](tai04.htm#fr_55) Vide supra, p. 142.

 
