[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osgp03)  [Next](osgp05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2WGY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid*, by C. Staniland
Wake, \[1882\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### EARLY EGYPTIAN CIVILIZATION

NOTWITHSTANDING the religious object of the erection of the Great
Pyramid, there is no ground for supposing that its erection required the
aid of Divine inspiration or guidance. Prof. Smyth affirms however, that
the Great Pyramid measures are quite different from those used by the
ancient Egyptians. They were the sacred measures of the Hebrews, but
this people could not, according to Prof. Smyth, have been its builders,
as they were dwellers in tents. Nor, on the same authority, were the
Egyptians more competent. Their wisdom was not sufficient to enable them
to design the Great Pyramid. The civilization of the Egyptians,
moreover, had a sudden beginning, so that they could not have gradually
acquired the necessary scientific knowledge for such a purpose. Prof.
Smyth further asserts that there is no evidence of the existence of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

an earlier race who could have designed the Great Pyramid, and he
affirms that it was erected by a people foreign to the land of Egypt,
whom he calls Cushites or Chaldeans, under Divine guidance. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md)

It is evident that the real argument of those who hold the theory of
divine inspiration in relation to the Great Pyramid is the supposed
absence of any people who could by their own knowledge design the
structure. Dr. Seiss, who finds a reference to the pyramid in the Book
of Job, says as to this ancient book, "In it we find a familiarity with
writing, engraving in stone, mining, metallurgy, building, shipping,
natural history, astronomy, and science in general, showing an advanced,
organised, and exalted state of society, answering exactly to what
pertains above all to the sons of Joktan, whose descendants spread
themselves from Upper Arabia to the South Seas, and from the Persian
Gulf to the Pillars of Hercules, tracking their course as the first
teachers of our modern world with the greatest monuments that antiquity
contains." <span id="fr_12"></span>[†](#fn_12.md)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> According to Dr.
Seiss, the Joktanites were the true Arabians, and they, and not the
Cushites, were the highly cultured people who erected those great
monuments. This writer, moreover, sees in Job the son of Joktan, and he
suggests the identity of the Patriarch with the Philition, whose name is
associated by Herodotus with the erection of the Great Pyramid. It will
be thought that as the Joktanites had the scientific qualifications
necessary for the erection of the Great Pyramid, there is no occasion to
call in the aid of divine inspiration. Not so Dr. Seiss, who terms this
great structure "a miracle in stone, a petrifaction of wisdom and truth
revealed of God, preserved among his people from the foundation of the
world, and thus memorialised by impulse and aid from Him." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13.md)

It is evident, however, that Dr. Seiss admits too much. If the
Joktanites had the scientific knowledge ascribed to them, they could
have built the Great Pyramid without divine guidance. How this knowledge
was originally acquired is another question, and one which does not now
concern us. Prof. Smyth, who ascribes the building of the pyramid to the
influence of the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cushites, makes an
equally fatal admission. He says, "The spirit, then, of the Egyptians at
the building of the Great Pyramid was the same which marked them, both
at the oppression of the children of Israel afterwards, and, in
conjunction with other peoples, at the building of the Tower of Babel
before. In so far as the Egyptians could accomplish it in their new work
on the banks of the Nile, and as they flattered themselves, too, for
ages that they had accomplished it even to the full,—the Great Pyramid
was a resurgence in a new land, and with a community speaking a new
language, of their thwarted ideas in another place; but through the
humble agency of the shepherd Philition their labours were made really
to tell against themselves." <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) The
reference made in this passage to the Tower of Babel is important. This
building appears to have struck the imagination of the ancient world by
its magnitude as much as the Great Pyramid has since done, and we may
well suppose that a people who could rear the one could erect the other
without supernatural aid. Moreover, if, as Prof. Smyth supposes, the
Egyptians sought to carry out in the later

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

building the ideas which they with other peoples had attempted to embody
in the Tower of Babel, there does not appear to be any object in calling
in such aid either for the designing or the erection of the Great
Pyramid.

It will be objected, however, that the Babylonian Tower could not have
formed the model for the great Egyptian edifice, as they were of
different construction; and that, as the Great Pyramid was not only the
largest but the earliest of the pyramids, its design could not have been
derived from the former through intermediate structures. This argument
would doubtless have great force if it were founded on fact. In reality,
however, the Pyramids of Ghizeh, although the largest, are not the
earliest Egyptian monuments of this description. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md) The best modern authorities believe that
the great Pyramid of Sakkarah was erected by one of the kings of the
First Dynasty, whereas the Pyramids of Ghizeh belong to the Fourth
Dynasty. If that was so, the fact is of great importance, since the
design of the Sakkarah pyramid, as shown by its name of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pyramid of
Degrees, evidently approaches that of the Tower of Babel. It might well
have formed the original on which the design of the Great Pyramid of
Ghizeh was modelled, notwithstanding that the internal features of the
two buildings differ considerably. The peculiarity of the Great Pyramid
is that its chambers and passages are chiefly formed in the structure
itself, instead of being cut out of the rock on which the building is
erected. Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson affirms, indeed, but not very
correctly, that the passages of the Second Pyramid are very similar to
those of the Great Pyramid; and Prof. Smyth remarks on the analogy
between the Sepulchral Room of the one and the so-called King's Chamber
of the other structure. This latter authority thinks the analogy not
real, however, as the King's Chamber is "140 feet above the ground
outside and in the midst of worked masonry,—or in a position whey e no
pyramid was ever yet known to have any chamber or to bury a man; while
the large chamber of the Second Pyramid is excavated in rock, and has
its floor below the level of the ground outside,—or in a position
suitable to burying." The shape and position of the sarcophagus

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

in this burial chamber, as compared with the coffer of the Great
Pyramid, are said to weaken still further the analogy, which Prof. Smyth
considers to be finally disposed of by the fact, not to be overlooked,
that "while the chamber of the Second Pyramid is directly led *to* by
the leading of the entrance passage and its conspicuously lined walls,
the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid is just as directly led *away
from* by the entrance-passage there, which seems rather to have been a
blind and shield to it, and a diversion to all who would come to seek
for that remarkable chamber. . . . . . Hence *the* chamber in the Great
Pyramid, which is truly the representative of the larger one in the
Second Pyramid, can be no other than that usually despised, but
nevertheless very large, subterranean chamber which is excavated in the
rock at the bottom of the long entrance passage, and equally with the
chambers excavated in other pyramids must have been intended to be
easily discovered, and looked on as sepulchral, while the so-called
King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid stands absolutely unique." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md) From this point of view, it might
probably be said that the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great Pyramid was,
like other structures of the same kind, intended for a sepulchral
monument, but that it had some other aim, denoted by the various
chambers and passages which mark its peculiar internal construction. As
a fact, however, the subterranean chamber of the Great Pyramid was never
completely excavated, from which perhaps may have arisen the tradition
that, owing to the opposition of the people, the body of Cheops, the
royal builder, was not after all deposited in the tomb prepared for it.

It is only in comparatively modern times that any doubt has been thrown
on the sepulchral aim of the Great Pyramid, and we will see what light
antiquity throws on the subject. But first as to the period of its
erection and the social and political condition which prevailed in Egypt
at that epoch. The building of the Pyramids of Ghizeh is universally
ascribed to the Fourth Dynasty, and that of the Great Pyramid in
particular to Khoufou or Souphis, commonly known as Cheops, the first
king of the dynasty. M. Lenormant, in the ninth edition of his important
work on the "Ancient History of the East," states, that "the first
reigns of the Fourth Dynasty marked the culminating point of the
primitive

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

history of Egypt. The splendour and the internal richness of the country
would appear to have been immense under these princes, and are
sufficiently attested by their prodigious constructions. The limits of
the kingdom extended as far as the first cataract; the capital was
always at Man-nofri, or Memphis, and the centre of the life of the
empire was in its environs." <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md) The
Egyptian monarchy was founded by Mena or Menes, who built the royal city
of Man-nofri, that is, the "good place," or "good port," and whose
dynasty occupied the throne for 253 years. The kings of the Second
Dynasty, which probably also belonged to the family of Menes, reigned
during a period of 302 years, and it was succeeded by a native Memphite
dynasty which endured for 214 years. The Egyptian monarchy had thus
existed for more than 75o years before the commencement of the Fourth
Dynasty, a period which was amply sufficient for the development of the
scientific and artistic knowledge necessary for the construction of even
the Great Pyramid itself. An English Egyptologist, Dr. S. Birch, has
given a very interesting account of the attainments of Egyptian
civilization at that epoch. He says,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Architecture, as
represented by the Pyramids, had become an advanced science, and
reflected the geometric and theoretical knowledge of mathematics which
their form and structure described for all future ages. The technical
masonry was unrivalled, the finish admirable and unsurpassed by any
later efforts of the Egyptian architect. The hardest materials, such as
the granite of Syene, were hewn into the requisite form of the truest
proportions, while the softer but more beautiful alabaster had been
discovered and worked. In sculpture a canon of proportion had been
discovered and laid down for the human figure, and granite, diorite, and
other hard stones conquered and moulded into shape by the efforts of the
chisel. The statue of Kephren is equal, if not superior, to the
subsequent efforts of Egyptian sculpture, while in the features is
clearly to be recognised a portrait of the monarch, showing that the
power of producing excellent representations of the living form in all
its details existed . . . In wood even greater excellence was attained,
for in that material the sculptor developed all his power. The wooden
statue of the Museum of Boulaq is an unrivalled work of ancient art . .
. The bas-reliefs

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

of the tombs are executed with a minute detail . . . The graphic system
of writing was complete; the language perfectly represented by the
hieroglyphs, which presented to the eye a lively picture on the painted
wall of tomb or sepulchre; while the inscriptions show that the religion
of the country was already reduced to a system, and the seasons marked
by a regular calendar of festivals. The political organization had also
attained a considerable degree of refinement. The court of Memphis
swarmed with sacerdotal personages, prophets and prophetesses of the
gods, and priests attached to the personal worship of the monarch.
Scribes and secretaries were attached to the Pharaoh, superintendents
were set over every branch of the public service. In private life the
Egyptian lord led a charmed life—his estate was cultivated by slaves,
his household full of domestics; the barber, the waiting-maid, the
nurse, appear as necessary adjuncts to his household as the steward who
presided over the distribution and the clerk who checked the expenses of
his daily life. Each priest or noble had in his establishment all the
trades necessary for his ease and comfort—the glass-blower, the
gold-worker, the potter, the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

tailor, the baker, and the butler. His leisure or *ennui* was charmed by
the acrobat and the dancer, the harpist and the singer; games of chance
and skill were played either by him or in his presence. The chief
occupation of the period, or at all events that most often represented
in the tombs, was inspection of the farm." After particularizing the
domesticated animals possessed by the noble of the Fourth Dynasty, the
food he ate, and the dress he wore, Dr. Birch continues, "Simple, but
elegant, furniture ministered to his requirements. Stools, chairs,
footstools, couches, and headrests, or wooden pillows—the use of these
rests is still retained in Africa,—appear in the furniture of his
elegantly-built house . . . He enjoyed all the pleasures of existence,
and delighted more in the arts of peace than war." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18.md)

This view of early Egyptian society agrees with the statements of other
writers. M. Lenormant affirms that the representations on a tomb of one
of the great officers under the Third Dynasty show us the Egyptian
civilization as completely organized as it was at the date of the
conquest by the Persians, or of that by the Macedonians, with a
physiognomy perfectly individual

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

and the marks of a long anterior existence. The inhabitants of the
valley of the Nile had then not only the same species of domestic
animals as those which they took with them in their migrations, but
certain species of indigenous mammalia which we find only in a savage
state, although the only beast of burden is the ass, neither the horse
nor the camel being yet known. According to Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson,
indeed, the Egyptians of the Fourth Dynasty had "the same settled habits
as in later times. We see no primitive mode of life; no barbarous
customs; not even the habit, so slowly abandoned by all peoples, of
wearing arms when not in military service, nor any archaic art." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md)

But what was the condition of the Egyptian civilization 750 years
earlier, at the commencement of the first Memphite Dynasty? Menes, the
founder of the dynasty, is said to have diverted the ancient course of
the Nile, and to have constructed a colossal dam to keep back the river,
so as to form a site for his capital—a work which still continues to
regulate the waters of that region. The city of Memphis with the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

neighbouring towns became, says M. Lenormant, quoting M. Maspero, "the
home of Egyptian civilization. It was at Memphis that literature
developed and flourished; at Memphis, in the palace of the kings, that
the exact sciences were cultivated with the greatest care; at Memphis,
finally, that the plastic arts produced their *chefs d’œuvre*." The
immediate successor of Menes began the construction of the palace at
Memphis, and is reputed to have composed books on medicine. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20.md)

The name of the succeeding monarch is given as the constructor of one of
the pyramids of Sakkarah. During the reign of the fifth monarch of the
dynasty, several chapters of the Book of the Dead are said to have been
found, and also a treatise of medicine, of which the text has been
preserved to us in the medical papyrus at Berlin. Menes himself is
referred to in official history as the perfect type of a monarch, a
constructor, a legislator, and a conqueror. The priests, whose power he
had broken, represented him as a corrupter of the simplicity of
primitive manners, and the introducer of habits of luxury and
effeminacy, among them being

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

that of reclining on a bed or couch at meals. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21.md) To one of his successors, the second king
of the Second Dynasty, is ascribed the erection of the Great Pyramid of
Sakkarah, known as the Pyramid of Degrees, which must have long preceded
the larger structure at Ghizeh. The form, and especially the underground
arrangement of the former structure, are evidence of its great
[antiquity](errata.htm#2.md), as they reproduce many of the features of
the. Egyptian tombs of the early Memphite period. These consist of a
deep pit, leading to an underground chamber, and surmounted by a
building which serves in great measure to conceal the entrance to the
proper tomb. The Pyramid of Degrees is formed of a series of such
buildings of decreasing size, placed one above the other, the ground
beneath it being excavated in various places, so as to form numerous
passages and chambers to be used for sepulchral purposes. The same
general plan is found in the Second Pyramid of Ghizeh, but in the latter
the deep pit is replaced by the long slanting passage.

The civilization which found its home at Memphis might thus well have
originated the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

science necessary for the formation of the Great Pyramid. The erection
of this building is, indeed, supposed by M. Lenormant to have been
preceded several centuries by that of the Sphinx, the image of the
reclining Sun-god, and also of the neighbouring temple, the structure of
which is described as prodigious even by the side of the Pyramids. An
inscription of the time of Khoufou, or Cheops, <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) speaks of this temple as having been
accidentally discovered buried in the sand of the desert, and the Sphinx
appears to have had need of repair during the reign of the same monarch.
But we cannot suppose the civilization of the founders of Memphis to
have been suddenly acquired. The overthrow of the priestly power, which
Menes accomplished, requires the prior existence of a culture differing
perhaps little, except in its milder and more peaceful character, from
that which afterwards developed itself in the Memphite region. Sir J.
Gardner Wilkinson, says, indeed, that all the facts lead to the
conclusion that the Egyptians had already "made very great progress in
the arts of civilization be-

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

fore the age of Menes, and perhaps before they immigrated into the
valley of the Nile." <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23.md)

Menes himself was a native of Teni, or Thinis, the chief city of that
part of Upper Egypt in which the priestly authority had established its
supremacy. In this region numerous cities existed before the foundation
of Memphis. "It was," says Lenormant, "the country of the great
prehistoric sanctuaries, seats of the sacerdotal dominion, which played
the most important part in the origin of civilization." The people
themselves were known as Schesou-Hor, "the servants of Horus," the
national god *par excellence* of the Egyptian people, and after death
they were said to become the conductors of the bark of the Sun in his
celestial voyage, and the cultivators of the happy fields of the other
life. M. Maspero affirms, that to this prehistoric race "belongs the
honour of having constituted Egypt, such as we know it, from the
commencement of the historic period. At first divided into a great
number of tribes, they commenced by establishing at several points small
independent states, each of which had its own laws and worship." They
founded

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the principal cities of Egypt and established the most important
sanctuaries. These primitive inhabitants of the Nile valley may have
been less highly cultured than their descendants of the Great Pyramid
epoch, but as they possessed the hieroglyphic form of writing special to
the Egyptians, they must have been already considerably advanced in
civilization. M. Maspero supposes, that when they first settled in
Egypt, the sands of the desert covered all the soil which was not
affected by the yearly inundation of the Nile. He adds, however, that
"little by little, the new comers learnt to regulate the course of the
river, to embank it, to carry by means of irrigating canals fertility
into the most distant corners of the valley. Egypt rose from the waters,
and became in the hand of man one of the countries the best adapted to
the peaceable development of a great civilization." <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[21:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_11.md) "Life and Work at the
Great Pyramid," Vol. iii. pp. 465, *seq*., 521 *seq*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[21:†](osgp04.htm#fr_12.md) "A Miracle in Stone,"
p. 210.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[22:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_13.md) "A Miracle in Stone,"
p. 226.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[23:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_14.md) "Life and Work at the
Great Pyramid," Vol. iii. p. 530.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[24:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_15.md) Sir J. Gardner
Wilkinson ascribes the Pyramid of Abouseir to Shuré (Soris), the
immediate predecessor of Cheops, according to Manetho. (See Appendix
II.)

<span id="fn_16"></span>[26:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_16.md) "Life and Work," etc.,
Vol. L p. 268.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[28:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_17.md) Tom. ii, p. 71.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_18.md) "Ancient History from
the Monuments."—*Egypt*, pp. 42-46.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[32:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_19.md) Rawlinson's
"Herodotus," vol. ii. p. 344.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[33:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_20.md) Tom. ii, p. 58.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[34:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_21.md) Tom. ii. p. 58, *seq*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[35:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_22.md) It should be
mentioned, however, that Egyptologists are not agreed in supposing this
inscription to be contemporaneous with Cheops.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[36:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_23.md) Rawlinson's
"Herodotus," Vol. ii. p. 345.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[37:\*](osgp04.htm#fr_24.md) Lenormant, Tom. ii. p.
51, *seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Tomb Theory](osgp05.md)
