[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](osgp09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2WGY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid*, by C. Staniland
Wake, \[1882\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### APPENDIX II

MASOUDI, who died in the year 967 A.D., professes to relate the Coptic
tradition, which says, "that Surid <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_103.md) Ben Shaluk Ben Sermuni Ben Termidun Ben
Tedresan Ben Sal, one of the kings of Egypt before the Flood, built the
two great pyramids; and notwithstanding they were subsequently named
after a person called Shed-dad Ben Ad, that they were not built by the
Adites, who could not conquer Egypt, on account of the powers which the
Egyptians possessed by means of enchantment; that the reason for

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

building the Pyramids was the following dream, which happened to Surid
three hundred years previous to the Flood. It appeared to him, that the
earth was overthrown, and that the inhabitants were laid prostrate upon
it; that the stars wandered confusedly from their courses, and clashed
together with a tremendous noise. The king, although greatly affected by
this vision, did not disclose it to any person, but was conscious that
some great event was about to take place." Soon afterwards the king had
another vision, which so much alarmed him that he repaired to the Temple
of the Sun, "where, with great lamentations, he prostrated himself in
the dust. Early in the morning he assembled the chief priests from all
the Nomes of Egypt, a hundred and thirty in number. No other persons
were admitted to this assembly, when he related his first and his second
vision. The interpretation was declared to announce, 'that some great
event would take place.'" The high-priest, whose name was Philimon, or
Iklimon, related a dream which he had had a year before, in which the
firmament descended till it overshadowed him and the king like a vault
as they sat upon the tower of Amasis. "The king then directed the
astrologers to ascertain, by taking the altitude,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

whether the stars foretold any great catastrophe, and the result
announced an approaching deluge. <span id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_104.md)
The king ordered them to inquire, whether or not this calamity would
befal Egypt; and they answered, Yes, the flood will overwhelm the land,
and destroy a large portion of it for some years. He ordered them to
inquire if the earth would again become fruitful, or if it would
continue to be covered with water. They answered that its former
fertility would return. The king demanded what would then happen. He was
informed that a stranger would invade the country, kill the inhabitants,
and seize upon their property; and that afterwards a deformed people,
coming from beyond the Nile, would take possession of the kingdom, upon
which the king ordered the Pyramids to be built, and the predictions of
the priests to be inscribed upon columns, and upon the large stones
belonging to them; and he placed within them his treasures, and all his
valuable property, together with the bodies of his ancestors. He also
ordered the priests to deposit within them written accounts of their
wisdom and acquirements in the different arts

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

and sciences. <span id="fr_105"></span>[\*](#fn_105.md) Subterraneous
channels were also constructed to convey to them the waters of the Nile.
He filled the passages with talismans, with wonderful things and idols,
and with the writings of the priests, containing all manner of wisdom,
the names and properties of medical plants, and the sciences of
arithmetic and geometry, that they might remain as records, for the
benefit of those who would afterwards comprehend them." After describing
the construction of the three pyramids, Masoudi, says, "In the eastern
(Great) Pyramid were inscribed the heavenly spheres, and figures
representing the stars and planets in the forms in which they were
worshipped. The king also deposited the instruments and the thuribula
with which his forefathers had sacrificed to the stars, and also their
writings; likewise, the position of the stars and their circles,
together with the history and chronicles of time past, of that which is
to come, and of every future event which would take place in Egypt. He
placed there, also, coloured basins (for lustration and sacrificial
purposes),

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

with pure water, and other matters." After referring to the deposit of
the bodies of the priests in the coloured (Third) Pyramid, Masoudi
describes the guardians assigned by the king to each pyramid. "The
guardian of the eastern pyramid was an idol of speckled granite,
standing upright, with a weapon like a spear in his hand; a serpent was
wreathed round his head, which seized upon and strangled whoever
approached, by twisting round his neck, when it again returned to its
former position upon the idol. . . . When everything was finished, he
caused the Pyramids to be haunted with living spirits; and offered up
sacrifices to prevent the intrusion of strangers, and of all persons
excepting those who by their conduct were worthy of admission." The
author then says, that, according to the Coptic account, the following
passage was inscribed, in Arabic, upon the Pyramids: I, Surid the King,
have built these Pyramids, and have finished them in sixty-one years.
Let him, who comes after me, and imagines himself a king like me,
attempt to destroy them in six hundred. To destroy is easier than to
build. I have clothed them with silk: let him try to cover them with
mats." <span id="fr_106"></span>[\*](#fn_106.md)

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[98:\*](osgp10.htm#fr_103.md) Surid may be the
same as Suphis or Cheops, as in a papyrus said to have been found in the
monastery of Abou-Hormeis, Surid is said to have been buried in the
eastern (Great) Pyramid, his brother Haukith in the western, and his
nephew Karwars in the smaller pyramid. (Vyse, "Operations," etc., vol.
ii. p. 332.)—Surid appears to be given in the list of Manetho, under the
name of Sôris, as the first king of the fourth dynasty. This king is,
however, treated by M. Lenormant as non-historical. (Sec List of the
Kings of Egypt, "Histoire Ancienne de l’Orient," tom. ii. p. 430), and
he refers to Khoufou (Suphis) the tablet at the mouth of the ancient
mine at Sinai, which English Egyptologists ascribe to Soris (Shuré). The
name of this king is also said to have been found in the tombs near
Ghizeh, and in the quarry marks of the northern pyramid of Abou-Seir,
which is, therefore, thought to be his tomb. (Sir J. G. 'Wilkinson, in
Rawlinson's "Herodotus," vol. ii. p. 344, 346).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[100:\*](osgp10.htm#fr_104.md) According to
Makrizi, fire was to proceed from the sign Leo, and to consume the
world.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[101:\*](osgp10.htm#fr_105.md) Masoudi says that
all these marvellous things were placed within the Pyramids; whilst
Makrizi, on the authority of Usted Ibrahim, particularises the
subterraneous passages as the depositories. On the margin of one of
Makrizi's MSS., we read that the inscriptions of the priests were on the
ceilings, roofs, etc., of the subterraneous passages.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[102:\*](osgp10.htm#fr_106.md) Col. Vyse,
"Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 322 *seq*.
