[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos09)  [Next](wos11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### THE DECLINE OF SERPENT-WORSHIP.

HAVING traced the origin and progress of Ophiolatreia, it may be useful
to ascertain the causes and periods of its decline. Such an inquiry,
though little more than a recapitulation of facts already mentioned,
will tend to give a clearer view of the subject as a *whole*; and to
meet an objection which might be urged against the legitimacy of some of
the preceding inferences. The argument of Ophiolatreia may in some cases
appear to have been grounded upon insufficient data: facts may have been
appealed to in support of the theory which may seem to have had their
origin in accident, or in superstitions apparently unconnected with the
worship of the serpent. But if reasons can be assigned for the partial
prevalence of Ophiolatreia in some countries, and its non-appearance in
others, and its total suppression in all where-ever

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

it once reigned in plentitude of power, the argument of this treatise
will be restored and established.

It is not to be expected that the worship of the serpent should be found
prevailing with the same degree of intensity in every country. Local
circumstances, at this distance of years impossible to be estimated, may
have caused many modifications, even if the idolatry had been originally
*uniformly* diffused. But I do not contend for *uniform* diffusion, the
argument is *universality*, and not *uniformity*.

The prevalence of this idolatry has been proved to be *so* general, that
we have a reasonable ground for considering it as at one time or other
*universal*. The principal causes to which the decline of
serpent-worship may be referred are *religious wars--hostile
invasions--mental improvement--the progress of Christianity--and the
Mohammedan conquests*.

In the infancy of mankind true religion was limited to the descendants
of Seth. The children of Cain carried with them from Paradise all that
the Tree of Knowledge could teach--the knowledge of worldly "*good*,"
and of moral "*evil*." The rapid development of the human

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

mind in every science which tended to the promotion of earthly comforts
was strongly exemplified in this apostate family, and proved that "the
children of this world" were always "in their generation wiser than the
children of light" in things which concern the gratification of the
senses.

Of the family of Seth little is recorded besides their names, and that
little assures us that they were "not of this world." But scarcely had
Cain departed from the garden of Eden before "he built him a city, and
called the name of the city after the name of his son Enoch <span
id="fr_541"></span>[1](#fn_540)." When the increase of his family
suggested separation, new inventions arose from the new necessity.
Jabal, his descendant in the fifth degree, introduced the use of tents,
and the arts of agricultural and pastoral life. "He was the father of
such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle <span
id="fr_542"></span>[2](#fn_541)." At the same time, as if to show that
simplicity of manners was not essentially the characteristic of a
pastoral life, his brother Jubal invented the elegant art of music. "He
was the father of them that handle the harp and organ <span
id="fr_543"></span>[3](#fn_542)." And

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

to complete the picture of worldly ease and comfort, as enjoyed by the
more godless of the sons of Adam, another brother, Tubalcain, became "an
instructer of every artificer in brass and iron <span
id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_543)." So that probably in less than three
hundred years from the creation of man civilization had arrived at such
a degree of perfection, that not only the necessaries, but even the
luxuries of life were to be found in the family of the fugitive Cain.

Nothing like this is recorded of the posterity of Seth. All that we know
of them is the simple but interesting fact, that "Enoch walked with God,
and was not, for God took him <span id="fr_545"></span>[2](#fn_544)."
How different from that Enoch, the son of Cain, remembered only by the
city which bore his name!

The awful extent of idolatry in those "days of rebuke and blasphemy" is
strongly depicted in the short but memorable record--"In those days
began men to call upon the name of the Lord <span
id="fr_546"></span>[3](#fn_545)." *Not* that they had never called upon
this name *before*, but that, induced by the wickedness which was
increasing around them, they "gave themselves *then* more earnestly to
prayer."

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Architecture, invented by their ungodly kinsmen,
had been abused to the erection of heathen temples. "Brass and iron,"
introduced for domestic purposes, had been prostituted to the service of
an insane idolatry: while a delirious multitude were dancing before its
altars to the sounds of licentious music. It was high time, then, for
the remnant of the sons of Seth to "call upon the name of the Lord,"
when rival superstitions disputed the dominion once held by the religion
of JEHOVAH.

At that time, probably, commenced the reigns of the two great Apostasies
which, for so many ages, divided and desolated the heathen world. The
worship of the SUN and the worship of the SERPENT--the one a
superstition of nature, the other a superstition of tradition--then,
probably, usurped the throne of true religion.

We have seen that these two were the most ancient of false religions,
and that there is every ground of conjecture for assigning to each an
antediluvian origin. The very form of the expression, "Then began men to
call upon the name of THE LORD," intimates that *some men* had called
upon other names. This distinction between truth and falsehood would
hardly have

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

been drawn had there been no false religions to furnish the distinction.
That some kinds of idolatry must have prevailed before the flood, is
probable, from the consideration that *moral* turpitude *only*, would
scarcely have been sufficient to draw down the curse of God upon a whole
world. Immorality, doubtless, was awfully prevalent: but *ungodliness*
also must have prevailed to an equal or greater degree. God would
scarcely have been so provoked, had not men prostituted their souls to
Satan as well as their bodies to carnal lusts.

Such being the case, no superstitions were more natural than the worship
of the SUN, the source of life and strength and vegetation; and the
worship of the SERPENT, the recorded author of the most wonderful
revolution in the moral world, which the tongues of men and angels could
ever record. A creature which, under the agency of an indwelling spirit,
could destroy the best work of God upon earth, seemed, to the ignorant
and carnal mind, possessed of a power almost, if not altogether, divine.
Hence the origin of serpent-worship.

Among the many arguments which prove the priority of these two
superstitions, not the least

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

available is *their constant hostility* in every country in the world.
Such an hostility would be the natural result of the position which they
occupied as the two earliest of superstitions. True religion being
obscured, (as we have every reason to believe it was,) the worshippers
of the sun would naturally arrogate to themselves the privilege of the
truth: and the Fall of Man being remembered as the work of the SERPENT,
they would as naturally regard the Ophites as worshippers of the
*Devil*, and feel themselves under a bond of eternal enmity against
them.

Hence the whole struggle, originating in the aggressions of the
worshippers of the sun, and carried on by the retaliation of the
worshippers of the serpent. Tradition is full of their perpetual feuds.
They enter into almost every leading fable; are depicted upon some of
the most ancient works of art, and recorded in some of the oldest
histories of man. For the verification of these assertions, it will be
expedient to take a survey of those countries in which Ophiolatreia has
principally prevailed.

 

1\. BABYLON. Of Babylon we know little beyond the fact, that "*they of
the city worshipped* 

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

*a dragon*," whom Daniel the prophet destroyed by his prayers. .In
consequence of this triumph, the idolatry was prohibited by a royal
decree. The date of this prohibition is assigned to the first year of
king Cyrus. The symbolical worship, however, continued for many years
afterwards, Diodorus Siculus having seen in the ruined temple of Bel,
images of silver serpents associated with the ordinary gods of the
Gentiles.

 

2\. PERSIA. Less accurate information as to circumstances, but equally
certain as to the principal fact, is found in the history of Persia. How
far the worship of the Host of Heaven may have superseded that of the
serpent in the time of Cyrus, who governed both Babylon and Persia, is
unknown. It is probable that the decree which suppressed Ophiolatreia in
the former, suppressed it also in the latter country. But the rise of
Zoroaster and the decisive success of his doctrines, unquestionably
overthrew every other false religion in the Persian empire. If this
philosopher was, as some suppose, a servant of the prophet Daniel, the
influence acquired by the master over the minds of the nation would

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

naturally impart some power to the disciple; and the royal decree having
opportunely abolished Ophiolatreia, an opening was made for any new
system of religion which an artful and influential teacher might desire
to inculcate. Zoroaster seized the favourable moment and met with no
resistance. His success was the more assured, since he appeared rather
as a reformer than an originator. The old Magian idolatry assumed, under
his hand, a more alluring appearance. Some of its metaphysical
absurdities were removed, and its simplicity of worship put on the
gorgeous apparel of a faith which appealed to the senses rather than to
the imagination. Fire temples arose above the naked "hill altars" of
their ruder ancestors; and the sacred flame which his hallowed or daring
hand was supposed to have brought down from heaven, was religiously
guarded by an appointed priesthood. So awful were the sanctions of this
new religion, that the whole nation gave way to the irresistible
evidence of its divine authority. The worshippers of the serpent, if any
remained, quailed under the genius of a prophet who had gazed upon the
true Schechinah; and the portion of fire which he exhibited, in token of
his ascent to heaven,

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

led captive the minds of a trembling people prepared to believe any
thing of the servant of Daniel. The worship of the serpent, therefore,
fell, and there was no blood upon the sword of the triumphant religion.

 

3\. HINDÛSTAN. Far different was the case in Hindûstan. *There* fable
and history alike teem with the perpetual conflicts of the sun and
serpent. Surya is ever the enemy of Budha. The latter, under the hateful
form of a *serpent*, had carried off the daughter of the son of Manna,
and stolen the sacred books of Crishna, the incarnate son of Brahma. One
of his family had also seized upon a horse which the son of Ramah had
designed to be sacrificed to the sun <span
id="fr_547"></span>[1](#fn_546). The race of Budha was therefore
proscribed; and the children of Surya, *i.e.* the worshippers of the
*sun*, and the children of Crishna, *i.e.* the votaries of the
*incarnate Son of God*, felt themselves called upon to execute the
sentence. The offences imputed to the *serpent* Budha are remarkable.
*The abduction of the woman*, and the *stealing of the sacred books of
the incarnate God*,

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

indicate the events in Paradise as the remote and traditional cause of
the animosity.

The effects of this hostility were soon apparent. Long before the fatal
irruption of the Mohammedans the vengeance of the allies had swept, like
a simoom, over the cities of the Ophites. Alexander the Great found this
unhappy remnant isolated in the range of mountains which lie to the west
of the Indus, in Caubul. Upon the mountain *Tak*, under their king and
priest *Taxiles*, a tribe of Hindûs securely worshipped the abomination
of Paradise. The Macedonian monarch was shown an enormous dragon, "five
acres in extent," which was the object of their adoration. This dragon,
we have seen, could have been nothing but a *dracontium*, for it is
measured by its *superficial extent in land measure*, which was the
universal method of describing serpent temples both in poetry and
historical prose. In these idolaters the invader of India found natural
and faithful allies against the common enemy Porus. But his retirement
left them at the mercy of their exasperated foes, who were not slow in
exacting vengeance. In the process of time they were expelled from the
fastnesses of Zabulistan and

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

and scattered through the Punjab. They remained in this broken condition
until the Mohammedan Afghans bursting in among them with the terrible
alternative of "the sword or the Koran," completed their destruction.

The ferocity with which the wars of Surya and Budha had been carried on,
may be estimated by the recital of a single fact. The Takshacs had slain
a king of Delhi, and his successor, in revenge, sacrificed in one
campaign twenty thousand of this small but devoted race <span
id="fr_548"></span>[1](#fn_547).

It ceases, therefore, to be a matter of surprise, that the idolatry of
the serpent very soon degenerated into the mere mythic and symbolical
worship which now characterizes the religion of the Brahmins.

 

4\. CHINA, BURMAH, and SIAM. These countries retain but few impressions
of their primeval superstitions. They were more under the influence of
Budhism than Hindûstan; but their present religions are so different
from the simplicity of Ophiolatreia, that we cannot help suspecting the
alterations to have been produced by

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

the gradual encroachments of the Brahminical doctrines. It is difficult,
at this distance of time, to assign all the reasons of the decline of
the serpent worship which, from the adoration of the mystical dragon, we
conclude must have once overspread these countries. In China, however,
the celebrated Confucius might have reformed the old idolatry, and
perhaps left it in its present form. That Confucius was *born* a
serpent-worshipper, is probable from the fable that *two serpents*
attended his mystical washing <span id="fr_549"></span>[1](#fn_548).

 

5\. In ARABIA, the worship of the serpent was very early overthrown, and
gave way to the adoration of the Host of Heaven. But if any traces of
this superstition lingered among the innumerable idolatries of a land
which was once divided between AUR and AUB, the sword and the Koran made
an equal end of all.

 

6\. SYRIA. The Syrian Ophites when scattered by the victorious arms of
Joshua <span id="fr_550"></span>[2](#fn_549), preferred, for the most
part, to resign their country rather than forsake their creed. Those of
the Hivites

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

of Mount Libanus, who could not hide themselves among their native rocks
(and thus fulfil the divine decree of being "left to prove" Israel),
carried their religion into the islands of the Archipelago, into Thrace,
into Macedonia, into Greece. Their subsequent history is to be found in
the fables of mythology, in which the synchronous march of Cadmus to the
Hellespont may indicate the retreat of a party of Kadmonites in that
direction. Thus was the Ophiolatreia of the Canaanites overthrown, and
the small remnant which remained, had their revenge by tempting the
Israelites to worship <span id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_550) the brazen
serpent of Moses, which had been preserved as one of the memorials of
their deliverances in the Wilderness. This small remnant of Hivites,
avowedly left by Jehovah to "prove Israel," was never entirely
exterminated: for the spirit of Ophiolatreia again manifested itself in
the early ages of Christianity in the form of the Ophite heresy, against
which the pens of Epiphanius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian, were
so powerfully directed <span id="fr_552"></span>[2](#fn_551).

 

7\. EGYPT. Ophiolatreia was never predominant

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

in Egypt. It formed but one of a multitude of superstitions, which
divided that country into as many religions as there were districts.
Their mutual animosity is well described by Juvenal in his nineteenth
Satire. The "immortale odium et nunquam sanabile vulnus" of religious
antipathy is illustrated by a tale of a battle between the Ombi, and the
people of Tentyra:--and doubtless the same spirit of discord was
universal. It was, however, all hushed by the hermetic seal of the
preachers of the Koran.

 

8\. ABYSSINIA. More distinct traces of the state of serpent-worship were
left in Æthiopia. On the borders of Abyssinia the serpent is still
worshipped by the Shangalla Negroes; but the glory of its overthrow in
the more civilized portions of the land of Habesh, is ascribed to nine
missionaries of the Christian church of Alexandria. Few facts in history
are more clearly recorded than the conversion of the Abyssinian Ophites.
It occurred during the Episcopacy of Athanasius, about the middle of the
fourth century.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

9\. WHIDAH. Equally circumstantial is the narrative of the suppression
of Ophiolatreia in Whidah. The fatal blow was given in 1726, by the
Dahomeys, who destroyed all the serpents which had been kept for
religious purposes. Captain Snelgrave visited the place only three weeks
after the event. In other parts of Africa the superstition sunk beneath
the scymetars of the Mohammedan Arabs: but if it still continue to
linger among the mountains of the interior, the same fatal enemy will
find it out <span id="fr_553"></span>[1](#fn_552).

 

10\. The worshippers of the serpent had as little rest in Europe. The
unremitting hostility of the children of the sun is indelibly stamped
upon the annals of Grecian fable. The contest of Apollo and Python for
the temple of Delphi, was a struggle of the sun-worshippers, for an
Ophite sanctuary. One remarkable feature, however, distinguishes the
fable. The promise of Paradise finds a singular parallel in the history
of Apollo <span id="fr_554"></span>[2](#fn_553): and this very
circumstance throws a light upon the *cause* of the hostility against
the serpent. It would appear by the

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

fable that the Zabeans took possession of the Dracontium of Delphi, and
substituted their own rites for those of the Ophites. But whether the
country was still favourably disposed towards the old religion, or
whether the usurpers desired to innovate gradually without too much
violence to the prejudices of the votaries of the serpent, they
preserved the general form and figure of the temple, together with some
of its peculiar customs. The serpentine avenue was therefore only so far
disturbed as to admit a central circular temple in honour of the
SUN <span id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_554); the *Pythoness* still gave
her oracles from the *dracontic tripod*; and *live serpents* were still
kept in the subterranean recesses. A similar policy was observed by the
triumphant children of the sun in other parts of Europe.

 

11\. The idolatry of the serpent lost its integrity in THRACE,
MACEDONIA, and EPIRUS, in a more peaceable manner. It gradually subsided
into the mysteries of Dionusus. There is a mention of an attempt to
unite it with the idolatry of the sun by a reformer whom history has
agreed to call "Orpheus." The real meaning

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

of this word is probably, "*The oracle of* OR." (*Or-phi*.) OR was the
same as the ORUS of the Egyptians, and the UR of the Chaldees; and was a
title of the sun taken from his attribute of *light*. Orpheus, then,
might have been some remarkable priest of the sun, who introduced many
innovations into the religion of Thrace. On this account he was probably
murdered by the Bacchantes in the horrible manner described by the
poets. The Bacchantes were priestesses of the Dionusan Ophiolatreia,
which he attempted to reform.

The persecution of Orpheus by the worshippers of the serpent, is
corroborated by a curious tradition preserved by Ovid, Metam. lib. xi.
which mentions the fate of his detruncated head. It was carried by the
Hebrus into the sea, and thrown upon the sands of the island of Lesbos,
where a *serpent* endeavouring to lacerate it was changed by *Apollo*
into *stone!* This metamorphosis relates probably to a *dracontium* at
Lesbos, which was an Ophite settlement: and the inference from the fable
is this--that the remnant of the followers of Orpheus, escaping from the
Thracian massacre, and landing at Lesbos, were inhospitably treated by
the Ophites of that

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

island, but had the good fortune to elude their violence. The fable of
Orpheus speaks also of his wife Eurydice having been previously slain by
a *serpent*. This incident may mean that some Orphic rite, personified
by this name, was destroyed by the serpent-worshippers. Orpheus,
however, seems to have regarded the general policy of the Zabeans. His
Institutes, which have been preserved under the title of the "Orphic
Hymns," enrol the serpent as the chief symbol of the Cabiri.

 

12\. The constant animosity of the rival religions of the sun and
serpent is strikingly illustrated by the Etruscan Vases, which have been
lately found at Canino, on the supposed site of the ancient Vitulonia.
Whether these vases were of native manufacture or not, the histories
which they record belong to Greece. The subjects seem chiefly to be
borrowed from the Grecian Mythology and the Trojan war. Upon several of
the vases are warriors fighting, some of whose shields are charged with
an *eagle*, the device of the sun-worshippers <span
id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_555), and others with a *serpent*, the emblem
of the Ophites. In all

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

of them the warrior with the eagle shield is represented as victorious.

One of the vases bears, what is named, a representation of *Hector*:
and, curiously enough, his device is a *serpent*. Now we know from other
sources that the Phrygians were Ophites, and this picture opportunely
illustrates the fact. Is it possible that the Trojan war may have been
undertaken upon a *religious* quarrel? It is certainly strange that in
all these historic pictures the Grecian warriors are denoted by the
emblem of the *sun*, and the Trojan by that of the mystic *serpent*. The
very cause of the quarrel assigned by tradition remarkably coincides
with the *Indian* story of the wars of Surya and Budha. *The abduction
of a woman* is stated to have been the origin of both the Indian and the
Trojan feuds.

 

13\. COLCHOS. But whatever may have been the true nature of the Trojan
war, another event in Grecian history, almost as celebrated, was
undoubtedly an expedition against the odious race of the serpent.

The voyage of the Argonauts had avowedly a religious object; and the
storming of the DRACONTIUM of Colchos cannot be mistaken. The crew of
the Argo might indeed have been what Bryant

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

supposes they were--ARKITES--worshippers of the personified ark of Noah:
but according to the principles of his own analysis, *Jason*, the leader
was the same name as *Æson*, and Æson was a compound of Æs, fire" and ON
the Solar God. The Argonauts may therefore have been under the guidance
of a warrior of the Sun--an inveterate and universal enemy of the family
of the Serpent.

It matters not, however, what was the religion of the navigators of the
Argo. Their expedition proves the *custom* of religious wars against the
Ophites; and their success determines the epoch of the overthrow of
Ophiolatreia in Colchos.

 

14\. BRITAIN--GAUL--BRITANY, &c. Changing the country we change only the
manner of telling the same story. The destruction of Ophiolatreia in the
west and north of Europe, though as complete as in the east, was brought
about in a more peaceable manner. In Britain, Gaul, Germany, and
Scandinavia, the original worship of the serpent had been much modified
by civilization before it was subverted by the missionaries of Christian
Rome.

In *Britany*, however, the idolaters maintained

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

a more determined opposition: and if we may judge from some of the
present superstitions of the peasantry, were never *thoroughly*
converted. The old Zabean policy of gradual conversion was adopted by
the first missionaries of the Christian church. Instead of striking a
decisive blow at once they deemed it more prudent to wink at a few
errors, than by precipitation incur the danger of a total failure. Hence
in the vicinity of CARNAC, which may be called the "Trachonitis" of
Europe, the oracle of BELUS is to be found in the parish of BELS; the
*serpent*, the universal emblem of consecration, decorates the exterior
of some of the oldest churches. The sacred mount of Fire near the
avenues of the Dracontium is a consecrated spot: the ancient dance of
BAAL, descriptive of the Ophite hierogram is annually exhibited at the
carnival of Erdeven: while the peasant still turns his face in prayer to
the Kebla of the Ophites--the Serpent's head at Kerzerho--which bears
accordingly the expressive name of "*the place of the stones of
prayer* <span id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_556)."

 

15\. There remains, then, only one portion of

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

the globe in which we have not accounted for the decline of
serpent-worship. But, remarkable as is the coincidence--we find in
AMERICA the same agent at work which overthrew Ophiolatreia in
Hindûstan, in Persia, in Greece--nay, in almost every country of the
known world.

We have remarked the prevalence of serpent worship in PERU: history has
preserved the cause of its extinction.

Tupac Yupanqui, the eleventh Inca, marched against the Ophites who
resided on the borders of his dominions, with the avowed object of
extermination or conversion. His success against two tribes of Indians
is recorded in Harris's Collection of Voyages, vol. i. p. 784.

Huayna Capac, the twelfth Inca, in like manner suppressed the
Ophiolatreia of the people of Manta <span
id="fr_558"></span>[1](#fn_557). It is probable that at one time the
worship of the serpent was the general religion of Mexico and Peru. The
Mexican hieroglyphics and statues abundantly illustrate this fact: and
the popular traditions of the Peruvians respecting Manco Capac relate
probably to the first successful missionary of the Sun <span
id="fr_559"></span>[2](#fn_558) who

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

arrived, as the legends state, from a foreign country.

The triumphant children of the Sun could never, however, succeed in
abolishing all traces of serpent-worship. Like the rest of the Zabeans
in other parts of the world, they were compelled to tolerate what they
could not extirpate. Many Ophite superstitions and practices were
therefore retained in the religions of Mexico and Peru, as we have seen
under the head of Ophiolatreia in those countries.

The victorious sun-worshippers could not even gain the absolute
ascendancy over the barbarous people of North America. The High Priest
of the Virginians wore, even to the days of Christian conquest, a
sacerdotal ornament of *snakes' skins* upon his head, analogous to the
customs of the priests of the Egyptian Isis; while the natives of the
country N.W. of Louisiana, (even down to the year 1741) had his body
tattooed with the united emblems of the SUN and the SERPENT, and carried
in his hand a sacrificial instrument carved with the representation of A
SERPENT UPON THE SUN <span id="fr_560"></span>[1](#fn_559)!

We have now taken a general and cursory

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

survey of the causes which produced the decline of serpent-worship: the
chief of which appears to have been the uniform hostility of the
worshippers of the sun. Whatever this hostility spared, was almost
annihilated by the preaching of the early Christians or the sword and
the Koran of the inflexible Mohammedans. The Mohammedans in the east,
and the Christians in the west, completed what had been begun by the
children of Surya, and carried on by the votaries of Crishna or
Apollo,--the adventurers of the heroic ages, and the arms of the host of
Joshua. So that few and almost imperceptible are the traces now existing
of an idolatry which once called the world its own. The subjects of the
poetical apostrophe of Lucan,--

"Vos quoque qui *cunctis* innoxia NUMINA terris  
Serpitis aurato nitidi fulgore DRACONES,"

are now coiled obscurely in the woods of the Abyssinian Shangalla, or
the almost inaccessible mountains of central Africa, protected only by
the impossibility or inutility of the pursuit.

But it is not for us to lament the feeble traces of a superstition which
only commemorates the victory of the evil spirit over the soul of the
fallen man. Idolatry has been permitted long

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

*enough to prove the divine origin of Christianity*; and this point
being established, it becomes every believer in the Gospel of Christ, to
pray that "the whole earth may be filled with the knowledge of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea;" and that "the kingdoms of this world may
become the kingdoms of GOD and of His CHRIST;" and "that they may
reign," with the HOLY SPIRIT, in one undivided Godhead, "FOR EVER AND
EVER."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_540"></span>[415:1](wos10.htm#fr_541) Gen. iv. 17.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[415:2](wos10.htm#fr_542) Ib. 20.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[415:3](wos10.htm#fr_543) Ib. 21.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[416:1](wos10.htm#fr_544) Gen. iv. 22.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[416:2](wos10.htm#fr_545) Ib. v. 29.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[416:3](wos10.htm#fr_546) Ib. iv. 26.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[422:1](wos10.htm#fr_547) Tod's Rajahstan, 535.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[424:1](wos10.htm#fr_548) Tod's Rajahstan, 536.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[425:1](wos10.htm#fr_549) Kœmpfer Japan, 246.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[425:2](wos10.htm#fr_550) Bochart. See also ch.
iii. *Greece*.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[426:1](wos10.htm#fr_551) 2 Kings xviii. 4.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[426:2](wos10.htm#fr_552) See ch. i. *Syria*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[428:1](wos10.htm#fr_553) Lander's Preface.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[428:2](wos10.htm#fr_554) See "Fables," ch. v.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[429:1](wos10.htm#fr_555) See ch. vi.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[431:1](wos10.htm#fr_556) Tod's Rajahstan, 535.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[434:1](wos10.htm#fr_557) These two latter
facts were communicated to me by my friend General de Penhouët.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[435:1](wos10.htm#fr_558) Garcilasso, lib. ix.
c. 8.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[435:2](wos10.htm#fr_559) Robertson's
*America*, ii. 293.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[436:1](wos10.htm#fr_560) See the Plate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Summary.](wos11)
