[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07044)  [Next](sbe07046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

# XLIII.

1\. Now follow the hells. (They are called:)

2\. Tâmisra (darkness);

3\. Andhatâmisra (complete darkness);

4\. Raurava (place of howling);

5\. Mahâraurava (place of much howling);

6\. Kâlasûtra (thread of time or death);

7\. Mahânaraka (great hell);

8\. Sañ*g*îvana (restoring to life);

9\. Avî*k*i (waveless);

\[XLIII. 1-22. M. IV, 88-90; Y. III, 222-224.--34. M. XII, 76.

4\. Nand. derives the term Raurava from 'ruru, a kind of serpent.' But
it seems preferable to connect it with the root ru, 'to howl.'

6\. This hell is defined by Nand. as a kind of threshing-place, made of
copper, burning hot, and measuring ten thousand Yo*g*anas.

8\. In this hell those who have perished in consequence of the tortures
which they had to undergo are restored to life and tortured anew.
(Nand.)\]

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

10\. Tâpana (burning);

11\. Sa*m*pratâpana (parching);

12\. Sa*m*ghâtaka, (pressing together)

13\. Kâkola (ravens);

14, Ku*d*mala (bud);

15\. Pûtim*ri*ttika (stinking clay);

16\. Loha*s*a<u>n</u>kti (iron-spiked);

17\. R*ik*îsha (frying-pan);

18\. Vishamapanthâna (rough or uneven roads);

19\. Ka*nt*aka*s*âlmali (thorny *S*âlmali trees);

20\. Dîpanadî (flame river);

21\. Asipattravana (sword-leaved forest);

22\. Loha*k*âraka (iron fetters);

23\. In each of those (hells) successively criminals in the highest
degree, who have not performed the penance (prescribed for their crime),
are tormented for the time of a Kalpa.

24\. Mortal sinners (who have not done penance) for a Manvantara;

25\. Minor offenders, for the same period;

\[12. in this hell a large number of individuals is packed up closely in
a very narrow space. (Nand.)

13\. In this hell the sinners are devoured by ravens. (Nand.)

14\. In this hell the sinners are put in sacks, which are tied up at the
end. (Nand.)

17\. In this hell the sinners are roasted. (Nand.)

20\. This river, which contains hot water, is called Vaitara*n*î, as it
is said, The river called Vaitara*n*î has a stinking odour, is full of
blood, and is moving on swiftly a torrent of hot water, carrying bones
and hair in its course.' (Nand.) A detailed description of the river
Vaitara*n*î may be found in the Gâru*d*a-purâ*n*a, p. 8 (Bombay ed.,
1863).

22\. 'The particle iti is added here, in order to include in the above
enumeration the hells called Savisha, Mahâpatha, Kumbhîpâka,
Taptabâluka, and the rest.' (Nand.) See Y. III, 223, 224; M. XII, 76.\]

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

26\. Criminals in the fourth degree, for the period of a *K*aturyuga;

27\. Those who have committed a crime effecting loss of caste, for a
thousand years;

28\. Those who have committed a crime degrading to a mixed caste, for
the same period;

29\. Those likewise who have committed a crime rendering unworthy to
receive alms and the like.

30\. And those who have committed a crime causing defilement;

31\. Those who have committed one of the miscellaneous crimes, for a
great number of years;

32\. All sinners who have committed (one of those nine kinds of) crimes
have to suffer terrible pangs, when they have departed life and entered
upon the path of Yama.

33\. Being dragged hither and thither (upon even and uneven roads), by
the dire ministers of Yama, they are conducted (to hell by them), with
menacing

34\. (There) they are devoured by dogs and jackals, by hawks, crows,
herons, cranes, and other (carnivorous animals), by (bears and other)
animals having fire in their mouth, and by serpents and scorpions.

35\. They are scorched by blazing fire, pierced by thorns, divided into
parts by saws, and tormented by thirst.

36\. They are agitated by hunger and by fearful troops of tigers, and
faint away. at every step on account of the foul stenches proceeding
from pus and from blood.

\[31. 'A great number of years' means three hundred years. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

37\. Casting wistful glances upon the food and drink of others, they
receive blows from ministers (of Yama), whose faces are similar to those
of crows, herons, cranes, and other horrid animals.

38\. Here they are boiled in oil, and there pounded with pestles, or
ground in iron or stone vessels.

39\. In one place they (are made to) eat what has been vomited, or pus,
or blood, or excrements, and in another place, meat of a hideous kind,
smelling like pus.

40\. Here, enveloped in terrible darkness, they are devoured by worms
and (jackals and other) horrible animals having flames in their mouth.

41\. There again they are tormented by frost, or have to step through
unclean things (such as excrements), or the departed spirits eat one
another, driven to distraction (by hunger).

42\. In one place they are beaten with their deeds in a former
existence, in another they are suspended (by trees and the like, with a
rope), or shot with heaps of arrows, or cut in pieces.

43\. In another place again, walking upon thorns, and their bodies being
encircled by snakes, they are tormented with (grinding) machines, and
dragged on by their knees.

44\. Their backs, heads, and shoulders are fractured, the necks of these
poor beings are not stouter than a needle, and their bodies, of a size
fit for a hut only, are unable to bear torments.

45\. Having thus been tormented (in the hells) and suffered most acute
pain, the sinners have to

\[43. The Gâru*d*a-purâ*n*a, (p. 17) also mentions that in one hell the
sinners are thrown into machines like the sugar-cane.\]

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

endure further pangs in their migration through animal bodies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV.](sbe07046)
