[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07027)  [Next](sbe07029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# XXVI.

1\. If a man has several wives of his own caste,

\[14. Nand. states that the self-immolation of widows (Sattee) is a
specially meritorious act, and not obligatory. Besides, he quotes
several passages from other Smritis and from the
B*ri*hannâradîyapurâ*n*a, to the effect that in case the husband should
have died abroad, a widow of his, who belongs to the Brâhma*n*a caste,
may not commit herself to the flames, unless she can reach the place,
where his corpse lies, in a day; and that one who is in her courses, or
pregnant, or whose pregnancy is suspected, or who has an infant child,
is also forbidden to burn herself with her dead husband. English
renderings of all the texts quoted by Nand. may he found in Colebrooke's
Essay on the Duties of a Faithful Hindu Widow. See also above, XX, 39.
Nand., arguing from a passage of Baudhâyana, takes the particle vâ,
'or,' to imply that the widow is at liberty to become a female ascetic
instead of burning herself.

XXVI\. 2. M. IX, 86.--4. M. IX; 87.--1-4. Colebrooke, Dig. {footnote p.
112} IV, 1, XLIX.--5-7. M. III, 12, 14, 15, 18; Y. I, 56; Weber, Ind.
Stud. X, 74.--7. Colebrooke, Dig. IV, 1, LII.\]

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

he shall perform his religious duties together with the eldest (or
first-married) wife.

2\. (If he has several) wives of divers castes (he shall perform them)
even with the youngest wife if she is of the same caste as himself.

3\. On failure of a wife of his own caste (he shall perform them) with
one belonging to the caste next below his own; so also in cases of
distress (i.e. when the wife who is equal in caste to him happens to be
absent, or when she has met with a calamity);

4\. But no twice-born man ever with a *S*ûdra wife.

5\. A union of a twice-born man with a *S*ûdra wife can never produce
religious merit; it is from carnal desire only that he marries her,
being blinded by lust.

6\. Men of the three first castes, who through folly marry a woman of
the lowest caste, quickly degrade their families and progeny to the
state of *S*ûdras.

7, If his oblations to the gods and manes and (his hospitable
attentions) to guests are offered principally through her hands, the
gods and manes (and the guests) will not eat such offerings, and he will
not go to heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII.](sbe07029)
