[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07023)  [Next](sbe07025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

# XXII.

1\. The impurity of a Brâhma*n*a caused by the birth or death of
Sapindas lasts ten days.

2\. In the case of a Kshatriya (it lasts) twelve days.

3\. In the case of a Vai*s*ya (it lasts) fifteen days.

4\. In the case of a *S*ûdra (it lasts) a month.

5\. The relationship of Sapi*nd*a ceases with the seventh man (in
descent or ascent).

6\. During the period of impurity oblations (to the Visvedevâs), gifts
and receiving of alms, and study have to be interrupted.

\[XXII. 1-4. M. V, 83; Y. III, 18, 22; Âpast. I, 5, 16, 18; Gaut. XIV,
1-4.--5. M. V, 60; Âpast. II, 6, 15, 2; Gaut. XIV, 13.--25. M. V, 66; Y.
III, 20; Gaut. XIV, 17.--27. Y. III, 23; Gaut. XIV, 44.--28. M. V, 69;
Y. III, I.--29, 30. M. V, 67; Y. III, 23.--35. M. V, 79; Y. III, 20;
Gaut. XIV, 6.--36, 37. Gaut. XIV, 7, 8.--38. M. V, 79; Y. III,
20.--39-41. M. V, 75, 76; Y. III, 21; Gaut. XIV, 19.--42. M. V, 80; Y.
III, 24.--43. Y. III, 25.--44. M. V, 80, 81; Y. III, 24; Gaut. XIV,
20.--45. M. V, 82; Y. III, 25.--46. M. V, 81; Gaut. XIV, 20.--47. M. V,
89; Y. III, 21, 27; Gaut. XIV, 10-12.--48-55. M. V, 93-95; Y. III,
27-29.--48, 49. Gaut. XIV, 45, 46.--56. M. V, 89; Y. III, 21; Gaut. XIV,
12.--63-65. M. V, 103; Y. III, 26; Gaut. XIV, 31--67. M. V, 144--69. M.
V, 85; Y. III, 30; Âpast. II, 1, 2, 8, 9; Gaut. XIV, 30.--70. M. V,
87.--75. M. V, 145; Y. I, 196; Âpast. I, 5, 16, 14; Gaut. I, 37.--81. M.
V, 135.--82. M. XI, 95.--84. M. XI, 96.--85. M. V, 65.--86. M. V,
91.--87. M. V, 88.--88-93. M. V, 105-110; Y. III, 31-34.\]

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

7\. No one must eat the food of one impure (unless he be a Sapi*nd*a of
his).

8\. He who eats but once the food of Brâhma*n*as or others, while they
are impure, will remain impure as long as they.

9\. When the (period of) impurity is over, he must perform a penance (as
follows):

10\. If a twice-born man has eaten (the food) of a member of his own
caste, while the latter was impure, he must approach a river and plunge
into it, mutter the (hymn of) Aghamarsha*n*a<sup>\[1\]</sup> three
times, and, after having emerged from the water, must mutter the
Gâya*tr*î<sup>\[2\]</sup> one thousand and eight times.

11\. If a Brâhma*n*a has eaten the food of a Kshatriya, while the latter
was impure, he is purified by performing the same penance and by fasting
(on the previous day).

12\. (The same penance is ordained for) a Kshatriya who has eaten the
food of a Vai*s*ya, while the latter was impure.

13\. (The same penance is ordained for) a Brâhma*n*a (who has eaten the
food) of an impure Vai*s*ya; but he must fast besides during the three
(previous) days.

14\. If a Kshatriya or a Vai*s*ya (have eaten the food) of a Brâhma*n*a
or a Kshatriya respectively, who were impure, they must approach a river
and mutter the Gâyatrî five hundred times.

15\. A Vai*s*ya, who has eaten the food of a Brâhma*n*a, while the
latter was impure, must (go to a river and) mutter the Gâyatrî one
hundred and eight times.

\[10. <sup>1</sup> Rig-veda X, 190.-- <sup>2</sup> Rig-veda III, 62,
10.\]

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

16\. A twice-born man (who has eaten the food), of a *S*ûdra, while the
latter was impure must (go to a river and) perform the Prâ*g*âpatya
(penance).

17\. A *S*ûdra (who has eaten the food) of an impure man of a twice-born
caste must bathe (in a river).

18\. A *S*ûdra (who has eaten the food) of another *S*ûdra, while the
latter was impure, must bathe (in a river) and drink Pañ*k*agavya.

19\. Wives and slaves in the direct order of the castes (i. e. who do
not belong to a higher caste than their lord) remain impure as long as
their lord.

20\. If their lord is dead (or if they live apart from him, they remain
impure) as long as (members of) their own caste.

21\. If Sapi*nd*as of a higher caste (are born or have died) the period
of impurity has for their lower caste relations the same duration as for
members of the higher caste.

22\. A Brâhma*n*a (to whom) Sapi*nd*as of the Kshatriya, Vai*s*ya, or
*S*ûdra castes (have been born or have died) becomes pure within six
nights, or three nights, or one night, respectively.

23\. A Kshatriya (to whom Sapi*nd*as of the) Vai*s*ya or *S*ûdra castes
(have been born or have died) is purified within six and three nights,
respectively.

24\. A Vai*s*ya (to whom Sapi*nd*as of the) *S*ûdra caste (have been
born or have died) becomes pure within six nights.

\[16. Regarding the Prâ*g*âpatya penance, see below, XLVI, 10.

18\. The Pañ*k*agavya, or fire productions of a cow, consists of milk,
sour milk, butter, urine, and cow-dung.\]

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

25\. In a number of nights equal to the number of months after
conception, a woman is purified from an abortion.

26\. The relatives of children that have died immediately after birth
(before the cutting of the navel-string), and of still-born children,
are purified at once.

27\. (The relatives) of a child that has died before having teethed (are
also purified) at once.

28\. For him no ceremony with fire is performed, nor offering of water.

29 . For a child that has teethed but has not yet been shorn, purity is
obtained in one day and night;

30\. For a child that has been shorn but not initiated, in three nights;

31\. From that time forward (i. e. for initiated persons) in the time
that has been mentioned above (in Sûtra 1 seq.)

32\. In regard to women, the marriage ceremony is (considered as their)
initiation.

33\. For married women there is no impurity for the relatives on the
father's side.

34\. If they happen to stay at their father's house during childbirth or
if they die there, (their distant relatives are purified) in one night,
and their parents (in three nights).

35\. If, while the impurity, caused by a birth lasts,

\[26. 'The meaning is, that the relatives of such children do not become
impure.' (Nand.)

28\. 'The meaning is, that he must not be burnt.', (Nand.)

32\. The import of this Sûtra is this, that the full period of impurity
is ordained on the death of women also, in case they were married, as
the marriage ceremony takes with them the place of the initiation of
males.\]

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

another impurity caused by childbirth intervenes, it ends when the
former impurity terminates.

36\. If it intervenes when one night (only of the period of impurity
remains, the fresh impurity terminates) two days later.

37\. If it intervenes when one watch (only of the last night remains,
the impurity ends) three days later.

38\. The same rule is observed if a relative dies during a period of
impurity caused by the death (of another relative).

39\. If a man, while staying in another country, hears of the birth or
death (of a relative), he becomes purified after the lapse of the period
still wanting (to the ten days).

40\. if the period of impurity, but not a whole year, has elapsed, (he
is purified in one night.)

41\. After that time (he is purified) by a bath.

42\. If his teacher or maternal grandfather has died, (he is purified)
in three nights.

43\. Likewise, if sons other than a son of the body have been born or
have died, and if wives who had another husband before have been
delivered of a child or have died.

\[40. 'Although the general term impurity is used in this Sûdra, it
refers to impurity caused by a death only.' (Nand.)

42\. 'The use of the particle *k*a implies, that this rule extends to
the death of a maternal grandmother, as ordained in the
Sha*d*a*s*îtism*ri*ti.' (Nand.)

43\. The twelve kinds of sons have been enumerated above, XV, 2-27. Of
these, the three species of adopted sons, the son bought, and the son
cast off cannot cause impurity, because their sonship dates from a
period subsequent to their birth; but their offspring may cause
impurity. (Nand.) Parapûrvâs, or 'wives who had another husband before,'
are either of the punarbhû or of the svairi*n*î kind. (Nand.) See XV, 8,
9, and Nârada XII, 46-54.\]

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

44\. (He becomes pure) in one day, if the wife or son of his teacher, or
his Upâdhyâya (sub-teacher<sup>\[1\]</sup>), or his maternal uncle, or
his father-in-law, or a brother-in-law, or a fellow-student, or a pupil
has died.

45\. The impurity has the same duration (as in the cases last
mentioned), if the king of that country in which he lives has died.

46\. Likewise, if a man not his Sapi*nd*a has died at his house.

47\. The relatives of those who have been killed by (falling from) a
precipice, or by fire, or (have killed themselves by) fasting, or (have
been killed by) water, in battle, by lightning, or by the king (on
account of a crime committed by them), do not become impure;

48\. Nor do kings (become impure) while engaged in the discharge of
their ditties (such as the protection of their subjects, the trial of
lawsuits, &c.)

49\. Devotees fulfilling a vow (also do not become impure);

50\. Nor do sacrificers engaged in a sacrificial ceremony;

51\. Nor workmen (such as carpenters or others) while engaged in their
work;

52\. Nor those who perform the king's orders, if the king wishes them to
be pure.

53\. Nor (can impurity arise) during the installation of the monument of
a deity, nor during

\[44. 'See XXIX, 2.

49\. The term vratin, 'a devotee fulfilling a vow,' may be referred to
students as well, who, however, become impure by the death of their
parents. (Nand.)

53\. A marriage ceremony is said to have actually begun when the
Nândîmukha, or *S*râddha preliminary to marriage, has taken place.
(Nand.)\]

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

a marriage ceremony, if those ceremonies have actually begun;

54\. Nor when the whole country is afflicted with a calamity;

55\. Nor in times if great public distress (such as an epidemic or a
famine).

56\. Suicides and outcasts do not cause impurity or receive offerings of
water.

57\. On the death-day of an outcast a female slave of his must upset a
pot with water with her feet, (saying, 'Drink thou this.')

58\. He who cuts the rope by which (a suicide) has hung himself, becomes
pure by performing the Taptak*rikkh*ra ('hot penance').

59\. So does he who has been (in any way) concerned with the funeral of
a suicide;

60\. And he who sheds tears for such.

61\. He who sheds tears for any deceased person together with the
relations of the latter (becomes pure) by a bath.

62\. If he has done so, before the bones (of the deceased) had been
collected, (he becomes pure) by bathing with his apparel.

63\. If a member of a twice-born caste has followed the corpse of a dead
*S*ûdra, he must go to a river, and having plunged into it, mutter the
Aghamarshana three times, and then, after having emerged from it, mutter
the Gâyatrî one thousand and eight times.

64\. (If he has followed) the corpse of a dead member of a twice-born
caste, (the same expiation

\[56. Giving or taking alms does not effect impurity in such cases.
(Nand.)\]

{p.94}

is ordained, but he must mutter the Gâyatrî) one hundred and eight times
only.

65\. If a *S*ûdra has followed the corpse of a member of a twice-born
caste, he must bathe.

66\. Members of any caste, who have come near to the smoke of a funeral
pile, must bathe.

67\. (Bathing is also ordained) after sexual intercourse, bad dreams (of
having been mounted upon an ass, or the like), when blood has issued
from the throat, and after having vomited or been purged;

68\. Also, after tonsure of the head;

69\. And after having touched one who has touched a corpse (a carrier of
a corpse), or a woman in her courses, or a *K*â*nd*âla (or other
low-caste persons, such as *S*vapa*k*as), or a sacrificial post;

70\. And (after having touched) the corpse of a five-toed animal, except
of those kinds that may be eaten<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or their bones still
moist with fat.

71\. In all such ablutions he must not wear his (defiled) apparel
without having washed it before.

72\. A woman in her courses becomes pure after four days by bathing.

73\. A woman in her courses having touched another woman in her courses,
who belongs to a lower caste than she does, must not eat again till she
is purified.

74\. If she has (unawares) touched a woman of her own caste, or of a
higher caste than her own, she becomes pure at once, after having taken
a bath.

75\. Having sneezed, having slept, having eaten,

\[70. <sup>1</sup> See LI, 6.

75\. Nand. argues from a passage of Yâ*g*ñavalkya (I, 196) and from
texts of Âpastamba (not found in his Dharma-sûtra) and of Pra*k*etas,
that the particle *k*a refers to repeated sipping of water.\]

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

going to eat or to study, having drunk (water), having bathed, having
spat, having put on his garment, having walked on the high road, having
discharged urine or voided excrements, and having touched the bones no
longer moist with fat of a five-toed animal, he must sip water;

76\. Likewise, if he has talked to a *K*ândâla or to a Mle*kkh*a
(barbarian).

77\. If the lower part of his body, below the navel, or one of his
fore-arms, has been defiled by one of the impure excretions of the body,
or by one of the spirituous liquors or of the intoxicating drinks
(hereafter mentioned), he is purified by cleansing the limb in question
with earth and water.

78\. If another part of his body (above the navel) has been defiled, (he
becomes pure by cleansing it) with earth and water, and by bathing.

79\. If his mouth has been defiled (he becomes pure) by fasting,
bathing, and drinking Pañ*k*agavya;

80\. Likewise, if his lip has been defiled.

81\. Adeps, semen, blood, dandruff, urine, fæces, earwax, nail-parings,
phlegm, tears, rheum, and sweat, are the twelve impure excretions of the
body.

82\. Distilled from sugar, or from the blossoms of the Madhûka. (Mâdhvi
wine<sup>\[1\]</sup>), or from flour: these three kinds of spirituous
liquor have to be discerned; as one, so are all: none of them must be
tasted by the twice-born.

83\. Again, distilled from the blossoms of the

\[76. Regarding the meaning of Mle*kkh*a, see LXXXIV, 4.

82, 83. <sup>1</sup> How the Mâhvî, Mâdhûka, and Mâdhvîka wines differ
from one another, does not become clear. Nand. explains the term Mâdhûka
as denoting an extract from Madhûka blossoms (bassia latifolia), and
Mâdhvî and Mâdhvîka as two different preparations from Madhu. Now Madhu
might be rendered by 'honey;' {footnote p. 96} but Kullûka, in his
comment on the term Mâdhvî (M. XI, 95), states expressly that it means
'Madhûka blossom,' and Hârîta (as quoted by Nand.) says that Mâdhûka,
Mâdhvî and Mâdhvîka are a preparations from Madhu, i.e. Madhûka
blossoms. Maireya, according to the lexicographer Vâ*k*aspati, as quoted
by Nand., is an intoxicating drink prepared from the flowers of the
grislea tormentosa, mixed with sugar, grain, and water, or, according to
the reading of the *S*abdakalpadruma (see the Petersburg Dictionary)
with sorrel.\]

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Madhûka tree (Madhûka wine), from molasses, from the fruits of the
*T*a<u>n</u>ka (or Kapittha tree), of the jujube tree, of the Khar*g*ûra
tree, or of the breadfruit tree, from wine-grapes, from Madhûka blossoms
(Mâdhvîka wine), Maireya, and the sap of the cocoanut tree:

84\. These ten intoxicating drinks are unclean for a Brâhma*n*a; but a
Kshatriya and a Vai*s*ya commit no wrong in touching (or drinking) them.

85\. A pupil having performed (on failure of other mourners) the funeral
of his dead Guru, becomes pure after ten nights, like those (kinsmen)
who carry out the dead.

86\. A student does not infringe the rules of his order by carrying out,
when dead, his teacher, or his sub-teacher, or his father, or his
mother, or his Guru.

87\. A student must not offer a libation of water to a deceased relative
(excepting his parents) till the term of his studentship has expired;
but if, after its expiration, he offers a libation of water, he becomes
pure after three nights.

88\. Sacred knowledge (see 92), religious austerities (see go), fire
(see XXIII, 33), holy food (Pañ*k*agavya), earth (see 91), the mind,
water (see 91), smearing (with cow-dung and the like, see XXIII, 56),
air (see XXIII, 40, (the morning and evening prayers and other)
religious acts, the sun

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

(see XXIII, 40), and time (by the lapse of the ten days of impurity and
the like) are purifiers of animate objects.

89\. Of all pure things, pure food is pronounced the most excellent; for
he who eats pure food only, is truly pure, not he who is only purified
with earth and water.

90\. By forgiveness of injuries the learned are purified; by liberality,
those who have done forbidden acts; by muttering of prayers, those who
have sinned in secret; by religious austerities, those who best know the
Veda.

91\. By water and earth is purified what should be purified (because it
has been defiled); a river is purified by its current (carrying away all
slime and mud); a woman, whose thoughts have been impure, by her
menses,; and the chief among the twice-born (the Brâhma*n*as), by
renouncing the world.

92\. Bodies (when defiled) are purified by water; the mind is purified
(from evil thoughts) by truth; the soul (is purified or freed from
worldly vanity) by sacred learning and austerities; the understanding
(when unable to resolve some doubt), by knowledge.

93\. Thus the directions for purifying animate bodies have been declared
to thee; hear now the rules for cleaning all sorts of inanimate objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII.](sbe07025)
