[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07046)  [Next](sbe07048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# XLV.

1\. Now after having undergone the torments inflicted in the hells, and
having passed through the animal bodies, the sinners are born as human
beings with (the following) marks (indicating their crime):

2\. A criminal in the highest degree shall have leprosy;

3\. A killer of a Brâhma*n*a, pulmonary consumption;

4\. A drinker of spirits, black teeth;

5\. A stealer of gold (belonging to a Brâhma*n*a), deformed nails;

6\. A violator of his spiritual teacher's bed, a disease of the skin;

7\. A calumniator, a stinking nose;

8\. A malignant informer, stinking breath;

9\. A stealer of grain, a limb too little;

10\. One who steals by mixing (i. e. by taking good grain and replacing
the same amount of bad grain in its stead), a limb too much;

11\. A stealer of food, dyspepsia;

12\. A stealer of words<sup>\[1\]</sup>, dumbness;

\[XLV. 2-31. M. XI, 49-52; Y. III, 209-211,--32, 33. M. XI, 53, 54.

2\. According to a text of *S*âtâtapa, which Nand. quotes in explanation
of this Sûtra, connection with the mother is punished with 'failing or
incurable epilepsy,' when the organ falls of, connection with a daughter
is punished with red epilepsy; connection with a daughter-in-law, with
black leprosy; and connection with a sister, with yellow leprosy.

12\. <sup>1</sup> I. e. according to Kullâka -and Nand., 'one who
studies the Veda without permission to do so;' or it may denote,
according to Nand., 'a stealer of a book,' or 'one who fails to
communicate information which he is able to give.'\]

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

13\. A stealer of clothes, white leprosy;

14\. A stealer of horses, lameness;

15\. One who pronounces an execration against a god or a Brâhma*n*a,
dumbness;

16\. A poisoner, a stammering tongue;

17\. An incendiary, madness;

18\. One disobedient to a Guru (father), the falling sickness;

19\. The killer of a cow, blindness;

20\. The stealer of a lamp, the same;

21\. One who has extinguished a lamp, blindness with one eye;

22\. A seller of tin, chowries, or lead, is born a dyer of cloth;

23\. A seller of (horses or other) animals whose foot is not cloven, is
born a hunter;

24\. One who eats the food of a person born from adulterous
intercourse<sup>\[1\]</sup>, is born as a man who suffers his mouth to
be abused;

25\. A thief (of other property than gold), is born a bard;

26\. A usurer becomes epileptic;

27\. One who eats dainties alone, shall have rheumatics;

28\. The breaker of a convention, a bald head;

\[19. Nand. quotes a text of *S*âtâtapa, from which he infers the use of
the particle tu to indicate here, that a killer of his mother shall also
be born blind.

21\. The particle *k*a, according to Nand., indicates here, that such
persons shall also be afflicted with the morbid affection of the eyes
called Timira, as stated by *S*âtâtapa.

24\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. says that ku*nd*â*s*in may also mean 'one who
eats food to the amount of a ku*nd*a.' See also Dr. Bühler's note on
Gaut. XV, 18.\]

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

29\. The breaker of a vow of chastity, swelled legs;

30\. One who deprives another of his subsistence, shall be poor;

31\. One who injures another (without provocation), shall have an
incurable illness.

32\. Thus, according to their particular acts, are men born, marked by
evil signs, sick, blind, humpbacked, halting, one-eyed;

33\. Others as dwarfs, or deaf, or dumb, feeble-bodied (eunuchs,
whitlows, and others). Therefore must penances be performed by all
means.
