[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07064)  [Next](sbe07066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

# LXIII.

1\. In order to obtain wealth and for the sake of security he shall
apply to a lord.

2\. He must not travel alone; 3. Nor with wicked companions; 4. Nor with
*S*ûdras; 5. Nor with enemies; 6. Nor too early in the morning; 7. Nor
too late in the evening; 8. Nor in the twilight; \[9. Nor at noon; 10.
Nor near water;\] 11. Nor in too great a hurry; 12. Nor at night

\[8. <sup>1</sup> See XXIII, 51.

LXIII\. I. M. IV, 33; Gaut. IX, 63.--2-9. M. IV, 140, 55, 60.--13-17,
19, 21. M. IV, 67, 131, 57.--24, 25. M. IV, 78; Y. I, 139; Âpast. II, 8,
20, 11; Gaut. IX, 15.--26-28. *S*â<u>n</u>kh. IV, 12, 15; M. IV, 39; Y.
I. 133; Gaut. IX, 66.--40. M, IV, 130.--41. M. IV, 132.--42. M. IV, 38;
Gaut. IX, 52.--43. M. IV, 38; Gobh. III, 5, 11.--46. Â*s*v. III, 9, 6;
M. IV, 77; Y. I, 139; Âpast. I, 11, 32, 26; Gaut. IX: 32.--47. Âpast. I,
11, 32, 27; Gaut. IX, 33.--49. Gobh. III, 5, 13; Pâr. II, 7, 6;
*S*â<u>n</u>kh. IV, 12, 28.--51. M. IV, 138, 139; Y. I, 117; Âpast. II,
5, 11, 5-7; Gaut. VI, 24, 25.

1\. 'A lord' (î*s*vara) means a king or another rich man, in his own
country, or in another country. (Nand.) See also Dr. Bühler's note on
Gaut. IX, 63, where the same Sûtra occurs.

9, 10. Sûtras 9 and 10 are wanting in Dr. Bühler's MS.\]

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

13\. Nor (let him travel) without cessation with (horses or other)
beasts of draught that are quite young, diseased, or (otherwise)
afflicted;

14\. Nor with such as are deficient in limb; 15. Nor with weak ones; 16.
Nor with young bulls; 17. Nor with untrained animals.

18\. He must not appease his hunger and allay his thirst without having
first given grass and water to the animals.

19\. He must not stop at a place where four ways meet; 20. Nor at night
at the root of a tree: 21. Nor in an empty house; 22. Nor upon a meadow;
23. Nor in a stable;

24\. Nor (must he stand) on hair, on the husks of grain, on potsherds,
on bones, on ashes, or coal;

25\. Nor on seeds of the cotton plant.

26\. When he passes by a place where four ways meet, let him turn his
right side towards it.

27\. And let him do the same in passing by the image of a deity;

28\. And in passing by well-known large trees.

29\. After having seen a fire, or a Brâhma*n*a (with his turban on), or
a public prostitute, or a jar filled (with water), or a looking-glass,
or an umbrella, or a flag, or a banner<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or a Bèl tree,
or a lid (or platter), or a palace built in the shape of a certain
diagram (or in the form of a quadrangle without a western
gate)<sup>\[2\]</sup>;

\[29. <sup>1</sup> 'More precisely the term patâkâ signifies "a staff,
by which a piece of cloth torn in the middle is fastened."'
(Nand.)--<sup>2</sup> 'The particle *k*a is added at the end of this
enumeration in order 'to include in it perfumes, lamps, and other
objects mentioned in a Sm*ri*ti.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

30\. Or a fan, or a chowrie, or a horse, or an elephant, or a goat, or a
cow (having a calf), or sour milk, or milk, or honey, or white mustard;

31\. Or a lute, or sandal-wood, or a weapon, or fresh cow-dung, or
fruit, or a flower, or a fresh pot-herb, or Goro*k*anâ, or blades of
Dûrvâ grass;

32\. Or a turban, or ornaments, or jewels, or gold, or silver, or
clothes, or a seat, or a vehicle, or (raw) meat;

33\. Or a golden vase, or cultivated land which is being carried away
(by a stream), or a single (bull or other) piece of cattle tied with a
rope, or an unmarried damsel (clad in white), or a (boiled) fish, (let
him turn his right side towards them and) go on.

34\. Having seen one intoxicated, or insane, deformed, he must or turn
back;

35\. (Also, if he has seen) one who has vomited, or one who has been
purged, or one who has had his head shorn, or one who wears all his hair
tied in one knot, or a dwarf;

\[30. 'The particle *k*a, which is added at the end of this Sûtra,
refers to a king, his ministers, his domestic priest, &C., as indicated
in a Sm*ri*ti passage.' (Nand.)

31\. Nand. infers from another Sm*ri*ti passage that *k*a here refers to
a crow and to a *S*ûdra or workman with his tools.

32\. Nand. here refers *k*a to shells and other objects mentioned in a
Sm*ri*ti.

33\. Nand. here refers *k*a to a dead body and other objects enumerated
in a Sm*ri*ti.

34\. The enumeration of auspicious objects in Sûtras 29-33 is followed
by an enumeration of inauspicious objects in Sûtras 34-38. (Nand.)

35\. The particle *k*a refers to enemies, outcasts, and others mentioned
in a Sm*ri*ti. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

36\. Or (if he has seen) one wearing a dress (of a reddish-yellow
colour) dyed with Kashâya<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or an ascetic, or one
smeared<sup>\[2\]</sup> (with ashes)<sup>\[3\]</sup>;

37\. Or (if he has seen) oil, or sugar, or dry cow-dung, or fire-wood,
or grass (other than Ku*s*a or Dûrvâ grass), or Palâ*s*a (and other
leaves, other than betel leaves), ashes, or coal<sup>\[1\]</sup>;

38\. Or (if he has seen) salt, or a eunuch, or (the spirituous liquor
called) Âsava, or an impotent man, or cotton cloth, or a rope, or an
iron chain for the feet, or a person with dishevelled hair.

39\. (If he sees), while about to begin a journey, a lute, or
sandal-wood, or fresh pot-herbs, or a turban, or an Ornament, or an
unmarried damsel, he must praise them.

\[36. <sup>1</sup> Nand. refers kâshâyin, 'wearing a dress dyed with
Kashâya,' to 'persons who wear the marks of an order to which they do
not belong.' But this interpretation is evidently wrong. Among the sects
that wear a dress dyed with Kashâya, Buddhists are the most prominent,
but it must not be overlooked that there are other important sects also,
as e. g. the Svâminârâya*n*îs of the present day, who wear such
dresses.--<sup>2</sup> The term malina, 'smeared,' no doubt refers to a
*S*aiva sect. Nand. interprets it by 'Kâpâlikas and the like;' but more
probably the Pâ*s*upatas are meant.--<sup>3</sup> The particle *k*a
further refers to the humpbacked, deaf, and blind, to barren women, and
to naked and hungry persons, as stated in a Sm*ri*ti. (Nand,)

37\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. refers the particle *k*a in this Sûtra to hares,
naked mendicants, snakes, iguanas, lizards, skins, and other
inauspicious objects and persons enumerated in a Sm*ri*ti.

38\. Nand. argues from a passage of Nârada (not found in his
Institutes), that the particle *k*a here refers to persons mounted upon
an ass, camel, or buffalo, and others.

39\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. mentions two explanations of this Sûtra: 1. he
must eulogise the above objects or persons if he sees them; 2. he must
gladden persons, who have those objects or persons with them, with
presents and the like.\]

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

40\. He must not (knowingly) step on (or step over, or stand on) the
shade of the image of a deity, of a (learned) Brâhma*n*a, of a spiritual
teacher, of a brown (bull or other animal), or of one by whom the
initiatory ceremony at a Soma-sacrifice has been performed.

41\. Nor (must he step) on anything spat out or vomited, nor on blood,
nor on fæces or urine, nor on water used for ablutions.

42\. He must not step over a rope to which a calf (or a cow) is tied.

43\. He must not walk quickly in the rain.

44\. He must not cross a river without need;

45\. Nor without having previously offered an oblation of water to the
gods and to the manes;

46\. Nor (swimming) with his arms;

47\. Nor in a leaky vessel.

48\. He must not stand on the bank (of a river).

49\. He must not gaze into a pool.

50\. He must not cross it (by swimming through it, or in any other way).

51\. Way must be made for an aged man, for one carrying a burden, for a
king, for a Snâtaka (of any of the three kinds<sup>\[1\]</sup>), for a
woman, for a sick person, for a bridegroom, and for one riding in a
carriage. Among those, should they all meet, a king must be

\[41. According to Nand., the particle vâ, 'or,' is added at the end of
this Sûtra, in order to include an officiating priest and others
mentioned by Yâ*g*ñavalkya I, 152.

51\. <sup>1</sup> The Snâtaka (see XXV III, 42, note) is of three kinds:
1. the Vidyâsnâtaka, who has studied the Vedas; 2. the Vratasnâtaka, who
has performed the Vratas or vowed observances of a student; 3. the
Ubhayasnâtaka, who has completed both the Vedas and the Vratas. (Nand.)
See the G*ri*hya-sûtras.\]

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

honoured by the rest (excepting the Snâtaka); but the king himself must
show honour to a Snâtaka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIV.](sbe07066)
