[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07010)  [Next](sbe07012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

# IX.

1\. Now follows (the rule regarding) the performance of ordeals.

\[39. Nand. takes the term dvi*g*ottama, 'the best among the
twice-born,' as an equivalent for 'Brâhma*n*as.' Kullûka (on M. VIII,
73) refers it to 'twice-born men, who are particularly active in the
discharge of their religious duties.'

IX\. 2. Y. II, 96, 99.--II. M. VIII, 114, 115; Y. II, 95.--20-22. Y. II,
95, 96, 99.--23. Y. II, 98.--33. Y. II, 97. The whole section on ordeals
(IX-XIV) agrees very closely with the corresponding section of the
Institutes of Nârada (5, 107-9, 8).\]

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

2\. In cases of a criminal action directed against the king, or of
violence<sup>\[1\]</sup> (they may be administered) indiscriminately.

3\. In cases of (denial of) a deposit or of (alleged.)

theft or robbery they must be administered each according to the value
(of the property claimed).

4\. In all such cases the value (of the object claimed) must be
estimated in gold.

5\. Now if its value amounts to less than one K*ri*sh*n*ala, a *S*ûdra
must be made to swear by a blade of Dûrvâ grass, (which he must hold in
his hand);

6\. If it amounts to less than two K*ri*sh*n*ala, by a blade of Tila;

7\. If it amounts to less than three K*ri*sh*n*ala, by a blade of
silver;

8\. If it amounts to less than four K*ri*sh*n*ala, by a blade of gold;

9\. If it amounts to less than five K*ri*sh*n*ala, by a lump of earth
taken from a furrow;

10\. If it amounts to less than half a Suvar*n*a, a *S*ûdra must be made
to undergo the ordeal by sacred libation;

11\. If it exceeds that amount, (the judge must administer to him) any
one of the (other) ordeals, viz. the ordeal by, the balance, by fire, by
water, or by poison, considering duly (the season, &c.)

12\. If the amount (of the matter in contest) is twice as high (as in
each of the last-mentioned cases), a Vai*s*ya must (in each case)
undergo that ordeal which has (just) been ordained (for a *S*ûdra);

13\. A Kshatriya (must undergo the same ordeals), if the amount is
thrice as high;

\[2. <sup>1</sup> See VIII, 2, note.\]

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

14\. A Brâhma*n*a, if it is four times as high. He is, however, not
subject to the ordeal by sacred libation.

15\. No judge must administer the (ordeal by) sacred libation to a
Brâhma*n*a;

16\. Except if it be done as a preliminary proof of his dealing fairly
in some future transaction.

17\. Instead of (administering the ordeal by) sacred libation to a
Brâhma*n*a (in suits regarding an object, the value of which amounts to
less than two Suvar*n*as), let the judge cause him to swear by a lump of
earth taken from a furrow.

18\. To one formerly convicted of a crime (or of perjury) he must
administer one of the ordeals, even though the matter in contest be ever
so trifling.

19\. But to one who is known (and esteemed) among honest men and
virtuous, he must not (administer any ordeal), even though the matter in
contest be ever so important.

20\. The claimant must declare his willingness to pay the fine (which
is, due in case of his being defeated);

21\. And the defendant must go through the ordeal.

22\. In cases of a criminal action directed against the, king, or of
violence (an ordeal may be administered) even without (the claimant)
promising to pay the fine (due in case of defeat in ordinary suits).

23\. To women, Brâhma*n*as, persons deficient in an organ of sense,
infirm (old) men, and sick persons, the (ordeal by the) balance must be
administered.

24\. But it must not be administered to them while a wind is blowing.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

25\. The (ordeal by) fire must not be administered to lepers, to infirm
persons, or to blacksmiths;

26\. Nor must it ever be administered in autumn or summer.

27\. The (ordeal by) poison must not be administered to lepers, bilious
persons, or Brâhma*n*as;

28\. Nor during the rainy season.

29\. The (ordeal by) water must not be administered to persons afflicted
with phlegm or (another) illness, to the timid, to the asthmatic, nor to
those who gain their subsistence from water (such as fishermen and the
like);

30\. Nor during (the two cold seasons) Hemanta and *S*i*s*ira (or from
middle of November to middle of March);

31\. The (ordeal by) sacred libation must not be administered to
atheists;

32\. Nor when the country is afflicted with disease or pestilence.

33\. Let the judge summon the defendant at the time of sunrise, after
having, fasted on the previous day and bathed in his clothes, and make
him go through all the ordeals in the presence of (images of) the gods
and of the (assessors and other) Brâhma*n*as.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X.](sbe07012)
