[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07086)  [Next](sbe07088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

# LXXXV.

1\. A *S*râddha offered at the (Tîrtha or place of pilgrimage called)
Pushkaras confers eternal bliss upon the giver;

2\. And so does the muttering of prayers, the offering of
burnt-oblations, and the practice of austerities in that place.

3\. Even by merely bathing at Pushkara he is purified from all his sins.

4\. The same effect may be produced at *G*ayâ*s*îrsha;

5\. And near Va*t*a (Akshayava*t*a);

6\. And on the Amaraka*nt*aka mountain;

7\. And on the Varâha mountain;

\[LXXXV. 1. Pushkara, according to the common acceptation of the term,
is the name of a celebrated place of pilgrimage near A*g*mîr, the modern
Pokur. See Lassen, Indian Antiquities, I, 113. Nand. quotes a Smriti
passage to the effect that there are three Pushkaras, and a passage of
the Mahâbhârata, in which it is stated that one Pushkara is sacred to
Brahman, another to Vish*n*u, and a third to Rudra.

3\. Nand. asserts with regard to the use of the name Pushkara in the
singular number in this Sûtra, that it means even a single bath has the
consequence here mentioned.

4\. Gayâ*s*îrsha is the name of a mountain near Gayâ in Bihâr, a
celebrated place of pilgrimage. Compare Yâ*g*ñavalkya I, 260.

5\. There exists one Akshayava*t*a in Bihâr (Nand.) and another in
Prayâga (Allahabad). The 'undecaying banyan-tree' (Aksbay Ba*t*) is an
object of worship at Allahabad even now, and was so already in the times
of Hwen Thsang. See Cunningham, Ancient Geography of India, p. 389; St.
Julien, Voyages des Pèlerins Bouddhistes, II, 278.

6\. Nand. states that both the Tîrtha called Amaraka*nt*aka on the
Mekalâ mountain in the Vindhya range and the whole mountain of that name
are meant.

7\. 'This is a certain boar shaped mountain.' (Nand.) It seems very
probable that the Tîrtha of Bâramûla, the ancient Varâhamûla {footnote
p. 257} in Ka*s*mîr, is meant. See Bühler, Ka*s*mîr Report, p. 12, where
a 'Varâha hill' is mentioned as adjacent to that town.\]

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

8\. And anywhere on the bank of the Narmadâ (Nerbudda) river;

9\. And on the bank of the Yamunâ (Jumna);

10\. And, particularly, on the Ga<u>n</u>gâ;

11\. And at Ku*s*âvarta;

12\. And at Binduka; 13. And upon the Nîlgiri hills; 14. And at
Kanakhala; 15. And at Kub*g*âmra; 16. And on the Bh*ri*gutu<u>n</u>ga
(mountain); 17. And at Kedâra; 18. And on the Mahâlaya (mountain); 19.
And on the Na*d*antikâ (river); 20. And on the Sugandhâ (river); 21. And
at *S*âkambharî; 22. And at Phalgutîrtha; 23. And on the

\[11. This Tîrtha 'is situated upon the mountain called Tryambaka, where
the Godâvarî river takes its rise.' (Nand.) Tryambaka is the modern
Trimbak (the name of a place of pilgrimage situated near Nâsik).

12\. 'Binduka is the name of a Tîrtha in the Dekhan. Bilvaka, as other
texts read (the MS. on which the two Calcutta editions are based among
the number), is the name of another Tîrtha in the Dekhan.' (Nand.)

14\. There is one Kanakhala in the Himâlayas, and another near Trimbak.
(Nand.)

15\. There is one plain of that name in Orissa, and another in Haridvâr.
(Nand.)

16\. This is the name of a sacred mountain near the Amaraka*nt*aka
range, according to Nand.; in the Himâlayas, according to others. See
the Petersburg Dictionary.

17\. Kedâra (the Kedâr mountains?) is in the Himâlayas. (Nand.)

18, 19. These two names are not defined by Nand.

20\. This is a river in the vicinity of the Saugandhika mountain.
(Nand.)

21\. *S*âkambharî is the modern Shâmbar, which lies 'in the desert of
Marude*s*a, on the salt lake.' (Nand.)

22\. 'Phalgutîrtha is a Tîrtha in Gayâ.' (Nand.)

23\. Mahâga<u>n</u>gâ, 'the great Ga<u>n</u>gâ,' is the Alakânandâ river
{footnote p. 258} (Nand.), which takes its rise in the Himâlayas and
falls into the Ganges.\]

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Mahâga<u>n</u>gâ; 24. And at Trihalikâgrâma; 25. And at Kumâradhârâ; 26.
And at Prabhâsa; 2 7. And particularly anywhere on (the bank of) the
Sarasvatî;

28\. At Ga<u>n</u>gâdvâra (Haridvâr), at Prayâga (Allahabad), where the
Ga<u>n</u>gâ falls into the ocean, constantly in the Naimisha forest,
and especially at Benares;

29\. And at Agastyâ*s*rama;

30\. And at Ka*n*vâ*s*rama (on the Mâlinî river);

31\. And on the Kau*s*ikî (Kosi river);

32\. And on the bank of the Sarayû (Surju river in Oudh);

33\. And on the confluence of the So*n*a (Sone) and Gyotisha rivers;

34\. And on the Srîparvata (mountain);

\[24. 'Trihalikâgrâma means *S*âlagrâma. There is another reading,
Ta*nd*ulikâ*s*rama.' (Nand.)

25\. This is the name of a lake in Ka*s*mîr, which the god Kumâra by a
mighty stroke caused to stream forth from the Krauñ*k*a mountain (see
Vâyu-purâ*n*a); or Kumâradhârâ is situated near the southern ocean in
the plain of Ishupâta. (Nand.)

26\. Prabhâsa is the name of a Tîrtha near Dvârakâ, on the western point
of Kattivar. (Nand.)

27\. Regarding the river Sarasvatî and its reputed holiness, see
particularly Cunningham, Ancient Geography of India, I, 331 seq., and
Manu II, 17.

28\. The Naimisha forest is in the northern country. (Nand.)

29\. 'Agastyâ*s*rama is situated near Pushkara (Sûtra 1), on the bank of
the Sarasvatî. There is another Agastyâ*s*rama in the south, near
Svâmisthâna.' (Nand.)

33\. The confluence of those two rivers is in the centre of the Vindhya
range. For the name of the second, another reading is *G*yotîratha.
(Nand.)

34\. The *S*rîparvata or *S*rî*s*aila, where the Mallikâr*g*una (symbol
of *S*iva) is worshipped, is in the Dekhan. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

35\. And at (the Tîrtha situated on the Yamunâ, which is called)
Kâlodaka.

36\. And at Uttaramânasa (in the Kedâr mountains, in the Himâlayas).

37\. And at Va*d*avâ (in the Dekhan).

38\. And at Mata<u>n</u>gavâpî (in the southern part of Gayâ);

39\. And at Saptârsha; 40. And at Vish*n*upada;

41\. And at Svargamârgapada (or Rathamârga);

42\. And on the Godâvarî river (in the Dekhan);

43\. And on the Gomatî (river);

44\. And on the Vetravatî (river);

45\. And on the Vipâ*s*â (river);

46\. And on the Vitastâ (river);

47\. And on the banks of the *S*atadru (river);

48\. And on the *K*andrabhâgâ (river);

49\. And on the Îrâvati (river);

50\. And on the banks of the Indus;

51\. And on the southern Pañ*k*anada;

52\. And at Ausa*g*a (?);

53\. And at other such Tîrthas;

\[39. Saptârsha, 'the Tîrtha of the seven *Ri*shis' (Nand.), is perhaps
the present Satara, in the country of the Mahrattas.

40\. Nand. places this Tîrtha in the centre of Gayâ. There is another of
the same name, which is placed on the Kailâsa mountain.

43\. The Gomatî (the Gunti, near Lucknow) rises in the Naimisha forest.
(Nand.) See 28.

44: The Vetravatî (the modern Betwah, near Bhilsah) is situated in
Ahi*kkh*attra. (Nand.)

45-49. The Vipâ*s*â (Beas), Vitastâ (Jhelum or Behut), *S*atadru
(Sutlej), *K*andrabhâgâ (Chenâb), and Îrâvati (Ravee) are the five
rivers of the Pañ*g*âb (Pañ*k*anada in Sanskrit).

51\. This is the name of the confluence of five rivers in the Dekhan:
the K*ri*shnâ, Ve*n*â, Tu<u>n</u>ga, Bhadrâ, and Ko*n*a. (Nand.)

52\. 'Ausa*g*a (v. 1. Au*g*asa; read Au*s*i*g*a?) means *S*ûrpâraka'
(Nand.), which was situated probably on the mouth of the K*ri*sh*n*â
(Kistna).\]

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

54\. And on the banks of (other) holy rivers;

55\. And anywhere at the birth-place of a deity, (such as Râma,
K*ri*sh*n*a, and others);

56\. And on sand-banks; 57. And near waterfalls; 58. And on mountains;
59. And in arbours (the sporting-places of K*ri*sh*n*a); 60. And in
woods; 61. And in groves; 62. And in houses smeared with cow-dung, 63.
And in 'pleasant spots.'

64\. There are some stanzas recited by the manes, which refer to this
subject:

65\. 'May that person be born to our race, who will give us libations of
water, taken from streams abounding with water, especially if their
floods (coming from the Himâlayas) are cool.

66\. 'May that excellent man be born to our race, who offers us a
*S*râddha attentively at Gayâ*s*îrsha or at Va*t*a.'

67\. A man must wish to have many sons, because if only one of them goes
to Gayâ (and offers a Srâddha to him after his death), or if he performs
a horse-sacrifice, or if he sets a dark-coloured bull at
liberty<sup>\[1\]</sup>, (he will acquire final emancipation through
him.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXVI.](sbe07088)
