[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07031)  [Next](sbe07033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

# XXX.

1\. After having performed the Upâkarman ceremony on the full moon of
the month *S*râva*n*a, or of the month Bhâdra, the student must (pass
over the two next days without studying, and then) study for four months
and a half.

2\. After that, the teacher must perform out of town the ceremony of
Utsarga for those students (that have acted up to this injunction); but
not for those who have failed to perform the ceremony of Upâkarman.

3\. During the period (subsequent upon the ceremony of Upâkarman and)
intermediate between it and the ceremony of Utsarga, the student must
read the Vedâ<u>n</u>gas.

4\. He must interrupt his study for a day and a night on the fourteenth
and eighth days of a month<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

5\. (He must interrupt his study for the next day

\[XXX. 1-33. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 130-134; Nakshatras II, 322, 338-339;
M. IV, 95-123; II, 71, 74; Y. 12 142-151; Âpast. I, 3, 9-11; Gaut. XVI;
I, 51, 53.--33-38. Â*s*v. III, 3, 3; M. II, 107; Y. I, 41-46.--41, 42.
M. II, 116.--43-46. M. II, 117, 146-148, 144.

1-3. The annual course of Vedic studies opens with a ceremony called
Upâkarman, and closes with a ceremony called Utsarga. The latter,
according to the rule laid down in Sûtra 1, would fall upon the first
day of the moon's increase, either in Pausha or in Mâgha. Nand. states
that those students who have not performed the Upâkarman ceremony in due
time must perform a penance before they can be admitted to the Utsarga;
nor must those be admitted to it who have failed to go on to the study
of another branch of the Veda at the ordinary time, after having
absolved one.

4\. <sup>1</sup> Nand., with reference to a passage of Hârîta, considers
the use of the plural and of the particle *k*a to imply that the study
must also be interrupted on the first and fifteenth days.

5\. <sup>1</sup> This refers to the second days of the months Phâlguna,
Âshâ*dh*a, and Kârttika. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

and night) after a season of the year has begun<sup>\[1\]</sup>, (and
for three nights) after an eclipse of the moon.

6\. (He must not study for a day and a night) when Indra's flag is
hoisted or taken down.

7\. (He must not study) when a strong wind is going,

8\. (He must not study for three days) when rain, lightning, and thunder
happen out of season<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

9\. (He must not study till the same hour next day) in the case of an
earthquake, of the fall of a meteor, and when the horizon is
preternaturally red, as if on fire.

10\. (He must not study) in a village in which a corpse lies;

11\. Nor during a battle;

12\. Nor while dogs are barking, jackals yelling. or asses braying;

13\. Nor while the sound of a musical instrument is being, heard;

14\. Nor while *S*ûdras or outcasts are near;

15\. Nor in the vicinity of a temple, of a burial-ground, of a place
where four ways meet, or of a high road;

16\. Nor while immersed in water;

17\. Nor with his foot placed upon a bench;

18\. Nor while riding upon an elephant, a horse, or a camel, (or in a
carriage drawn by any of those animals), or being borne in a boat, or in
a carriage drawn by oxen;

19\. Nor after having vomited;

\[8. <sup>1</sup> 'I.e. not during the rains.' (Nand.)

12\. Nand. considers the term *s*va, 'dog,' to include all the other
animals mentioned by Âpastamba, I, 3. 10, 17.

19-21. After having vomited or been purged he shall interrupt {footnote
p. 125} his study for a day and a night; when suffering, from
indigestion, till he has digested his food. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

20\. Nor after having been purged;

21\. Nor during an indigestion.

22\. When a five-toed animal has passed between the teacher and the
pupil (the latter must interrupt his study for a day and a night).

23\. When a king or a learned Brâhma*n*a (who has mastered one Veda), or
a cow, or a Brâhma*n*a (in general) has met with an accident (he must
not study).

24\. After the Upâkarman (he must not study for three days).

25\. And after the Utsarga, (he must interrupt his study for as many
days).

26\. And (he must avoid to study) the hymns of the Rig-veda, or those of
the Ya*g*ur-veda, while the Sâman melodies are being chanted.

27\. Let him not lie down to sleep again when he has begun to study in
the second half of the night.

28\. Let him avoid studying at times when there ought to be an
intermission of study, even though a question has been put to him (by
his teacher);

\[22. According to Nand., the interruption of study is to last for two
days, when a crow, or an owl, or a wild cock, or a mouse, or a frog, and
the like animals have passed; and for three days, when a dog, or an
ichneumon, or a snake, or a frog (sic), or a cat has passed. He quotes
Gaut. I, 59 in support of his interpretation. I have translated
according to M. W, 126; Y. I, 147.

23\. in these cases the study shall not be taken up again till the
accident has been appeased by propitiatory rites. If any of the persons
in question has died, the interruption is to last for a day and a night,
in case they were persons of little merit; but in case they should have
been very virtuous, it is to last for three days. (Nand.)

28\. Every lesson consists of questions put by the teacher and the
pupil's answers to them.\]

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

29\. Since to study on forbidden days neither benefits him in this nor
in the other world.

30\. To study on such days destroys the life of both teacher and pupil.

31\. Therefore should a teacher, who wishes to obtain the world of
Brahman, avoid improper days, and sow (on proper days) the seed of
sacred knowledge on soil consisting of virtuous pupils.

32\. At the beginning and at the end of the lecture let the pupil
embrace his teacher's feet;

33\. And let him pronounce the sacred syllable Om.

34\. Now he who studies the hymns of the *Ri*g-veda (regularly), feeds
the manes with clarified butter.

35\. He who studies the Ya*g*us texts, (feeds them) with honey.

36\. He who studies the Sâman melodies, (feeds them) with milk.

37\. He who studies the Atharva-veda, (feeds them) with meat.

38\. He who studies the Purâ*n*as, Itihâsas, Vedâ<u>n</u>gas, and the
Institutes of Sacred Law, feeds them with rice.

39\. He who having collected sacred knowledge, gains his substance by it
in this world, will derive no benefit from it in the world to come.

\[33. Nand., quoting a passage of Yama, states the particle *k*a to
imply that the pupil must touch the ground, after having pronounced the
syllable Om.

38\. Nand. considers the use of a Dvandva compound to imply that logic
(Nyâya) and the Mîmâ*m*sâ system of philosophy are also intended in this
Sûtra. Regarding the meaning of the terms Purâ*n*a and Itihâsa, see Max
Müller, Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 40 seq.

39\. This rule cannot refer to teaching for a reward, because {footnote
p. 127} that is a minor offence (upapâtaka; see below, XXXVII, 20); nor
can it refer to teaching in general, because it is lawful to gain one's
substance by it; but it refers to those who recite the Veda in behalf of
another, and live by doing so. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

40\. Neither will he (derive such benefit from it), who uses his
knowledge in order to destroy the reputation of others (by defeating
them in argument).

41\. Let no one acquire sacred knowledge, without his teacher's
permission, from another who is studying divine science.

42 . Acquiring it in that way constitutes theft of the Veda, and will
bring him into hell.

43\. Let (a student) never grieve that man from whom he has obtained
worldly knowledge (relating to poetry, rhetoric, and the like subjects),
sacred knowledge (relating to the Vedas and Vedâ<u>n</u>gas), or
knowledge of the Supreme Spirit.

44\. Of the natural progenitor and the teacher who imparts the Veda to
him, the giver of the Veda is the more venerable father; for it is the
new existence acquired by his initiation in the Veda, which will last
him both in this life and the next.

45\. Let him consider as a merely human existence that which he owes to
his father and mother uniting from carnal desire and to his being born
from his mother's womb.

46\. That existence which his teacher, who knows all the Vedas, effects
for him through the prescribed rites of initiation with (his divine
mother) the Gâyatrî, is a true existence; that existence is exempt from
age and death.

47\. He who fills his ears with holy truths, who

\[41. See XXVIII, 6, and the preceding note.\]

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

frees him from all pain (in this world and the next). and confers
immortality (or final liberation) upon him, that man let the student
consider as his (true) father and mother: gratefully acknowledging the
debt he owes him, he must never grieve him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXI.](sbe07033)
