[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bep06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0913510017/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch the Prophet*, tr. by Richard Laurence, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_C">C</span></span>

### CHAP. C.

1\. Attentively consider heaven, all ye progeny of heaven, and all ye
works of the Most High; fear him, nor conduct yourselves criminally
before him.

2\. If He shut up the windows of heaven, restraining the rain and dew,
that it may not descend upon earth on your account, what will you do?

3\. And if He send his wrath upon you, and upon all your deeds, you are
not they who can supplicate him; you who utter <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_276) against his righteousness, language
proud and powerful. <span id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_277) To you there
shall be no peace.

4\. Do you not see the commanders <span id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_278)
of ships, how their vessels are tossed about by the waves, torn to
pieces by the winds, and exposed to the greatest peril?

5\. That they therefore fear, because their whole property is embarked
with them on the ocean; and}

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

that they forbode evil <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_279) in their
hearts, because it may swallow them up, and they may perish in it?

6\. Is not the whole sea, all its waters, and all its commotion, the
work of him, the Most High; of him who has sealed up all its exertions,
and girded it on every side with sand?

7\. *Is it not* at his rebuke dried up, and alarmed; while all its fish
with everything contained in it die? And will not you, ye sinners, who
are on earth, fear him? Is not He the maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things which are in them?

8\. And who has given erudition and wisdom to all that move
*progressive* upon the earth, and over the sea?

9\. Are not the commanders of ships terrified at the ocean? And shall
not sinners be terrified at the Most High?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_CII">CII</span></span>

### CHAP. CII <span id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_280)

1\. In those days, when He shall cast the calamity of fire upon you,
whither will you fly, and where will you be safe?

2\. And when He sends forth his word against you, are you not spared,
and terrified?

3\. All the luminaries are agitated with great

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

fear; and all the earth is spared, while it trembles, and suffers
anxiety.

4\. All the angels fulfil the commands *received* by them, and are
desirous of being concealed from the presence of the great Glory; while
the children of the earth are alarmed and troubled.

5\. But you, ye sinners, are for ever accursed; to you there shall be no
peace.

6\. Fear not, ye souls of the righteous; but wait with patient hope for
the day of your death in righteousness. Grieve not, because your souls
descend in great trouble, with groaning, lamentation, and sorrow, to the
receptacle of the dead. In your lifetime your bodies have not received a
recompense in proportion to your goodness, <span
id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_281) but in the period of your existence have
sinners existed; in the period of execration and of punishment.

7\. And when you die, sinners say concerning you, "As we die, the
righteous die. What profit have they in their works? Behold, like us,
they expire in sorrow and in darkness. What advantage have they over us?
Henceforward are we equal. What will be within their grasp, and what
before their eyes <span id="fr_284"></span>[2](#fn_282) for ever? For
behold they are dead; and never will they again <span
id="fr_285"></span>[3](#fn_283) perceive the light." I say unto you, ye
sinners, You have been satiated

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

with meat and drink, with human plunder and rapine, with sin, with the
acquisition of wealth and with the sight of good days. Have you not
marked the righteous, how their end is in peace? for no oppression is
found in them even to the day of their death. They perish, and are as if
they were not, while their souls descend in trouble to the receptacle of
the dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_CIII">CIII</span></span>

### CHAP. CIII.

1\. But now I swear to you, ye righteous, by the greatness of his
splendour and his glory; by his illustrious kingdom and by his majesty,
to you I swear, that I comprehend this mystery; that I have read the
tablet of heaven, have seen the writing of the holy Ones, and have
discovered what is written and impressed on it concerning you.

2\. *I have seen* that all goodness, joy, and glory has been prepared
for you, and been written down for the spirits of them who die eminently
righteous and good. <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_284) To you it
shall be given in return for your troubles; and your portion *of
happiness* shall far exceed the portion of the living.

3\. The spirits of you who die in righteousness shall exist and rejoice.
Their spirits shall exult;

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

and their remembrance shall be before the face of the mighty One from
generation to generation. Nor shall they now fear disgrace.

4\. Woe to you, sinners, when you die in your sins; and they, who are
like you, say respecting you, Blessed are these sinners. They have lived
out their whole period; <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_285) and now
they die in happiness <span id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_286) and in
wealth. Distress and slaughter they knew not <span
id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_287) while alive; in honour they die; nor
ever in their lifetime did judgment overtake them.

5\. *But* has it not been shown to them, that, when to the receptacle of
the dead t heir souls shall be made to descend, their evil deeds shall
become their greatest torment? Into darkness, into the snare, and into
the flame, which shall burn to the great judgment, shall their spirits
enter; and the great judgment shall take effect for ever and for
ever. <span id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_288)

6\. Woe to you; for to you there shall be no peace. Neither can you say
to the righteous, and to the good who are alive, "In the days of our
trouble have we been afflicted; every *species of* trouble have we seen,
and many evil things have suffered. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_289)

7\. Our spirits have been consumed, lessened, and diminished.

8\. We have perished; nor has there been a possibility

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

of help for us in word or in deed: we have found none, but have been
tormented and destroyed.

9\. We have not expected to live <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_290)
day after day.

10\. We hoped indeed to have been the head;

11\. But we have become the tail. We have been afflicted, when we have
exerted ourselves; but we have been devoured by sinners <span
id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_291) and the ungodly; their yoke has been
heavy upon us.

12\. Those have exercised dominion over us who detest and who goad us;
and to those who hate us have we humbled our neck; but they have shown
no compassion towards us.

13\. We have been desirous of escaping from them, that we might fly away
and be at rest; but we have found no place to which we could fly, and be
secure from them. We have sought an asylum with princes in our distress,
and have cried out to those who were devouring us; but our cry has not
been regarded, nor have they been disposed to hear our voice;

14\. But rather to assist those who plunder and devour us; those who
diminish us, and hide their oppression; who remove not their yoke from
us, but devour, enervate, and slay us; who conceal our slaughter, nor
remember that they have lifted up their hands against us."

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_CIV">CIV</span></span>

### CHAP. CIV.

1\. I swear to you, ye righteous, that in heaven the angels record your
goodness before the glory of the mighty One.

2\. Wait with patient hope; for formerly you have been disgraced with
evil and with affliction; but now shall you shine like the luminaries of
heaven. You shall be seen, and the gates of heaven shall be opened to
you. Your cries have cried for judgment; and it has appeared to you: for
an account of all your sufferings shall be required from the princes,
and from every one who has assisted your plunderers.

3\. Wait with patient hope; nor relinquish your confidence; for great
joy shall be yours, like that of the angels in heaven. Conduct
yourselves as you may, still you shall not be concealed in the day of
the great judgment. You shall not be found like sinners; and eternal
condemnation shall be far from you, so long as the world exists. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_292)

4\. And now fear not, ye righteous, when you see sinners flourishing and
prosperous <span id="fr_295"></span>[2](#fn_293) in their ways.

5\. Be not associates with them; but keep yourselves at a distance from
their oppression; be you associated with the host of heaven. You, ye
sinners, say, All our transgressions shall not be taken

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

account of, and be recorded. But all your transgressions shall be
recorded daily.

6\. And be assured by me, <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_294) that
light and darkness, day and night, behold all your transgressions. Be
not impious in your thoughts; lie not; surrender not the word of
uprightness; lie not against the word of the holy and the mighty One;
glorify not your idols; for all your lying and all your impiety is not
for righteousness, but for great crime.

7\. Now will I point out a mystery: Many sinners shall turn and
transgress against the word of uprightness.

8\. They shall speak evil things; they shall utter falsehood; execute
great undertakings; <span id="fr_297"></span>[2](#fn_295) and compose
books in their own words. But when they shall write all my words
correctly in their own languages,

9\. They shall neither change or diminish them; but shall write them all
correctly; all which from the first I have uttered concerning them.

10\. Another mystery also I point out. To the righteous and the wise
shall be given books of joy, of integrity, and of great wisdom. To them
shall books be given, in which they shall believe;

11\. And in which they shall rejoice. And all the righteous shall be
rewarded, who from these shall acquire the knowledge of every upright
path.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_CIVb">CIVb</span></span>

### CHAP. CIV. <span id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_296)

1\. In those days, saith the Lord, they shall call to the children of
the earth, and make them listen to their wisdom. Show them that you are
their leaders;

2\. And that renumeration *shall take place* over the whole earth; for I
and my Son will for ever hold communion with them in the paths of
uprightness, while they are still alive. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_297) Peace shall be yours. Rejoice, children
of integrity, in the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_CV">CV</span></span>

### CHAP. CV.

1\. After a time, <span id="fr_300"></span>[3](#fn_298) my son Mathusala
took a wife for his son Lamech.

2\. She became pregnant by him, and brought forth a child, the flesh of
which was as white as snow, and red as a rose; the hair of whose head
was white like wool, and long; and whose eyes were beautiful. When he
opened them, he illuminated all the house, like the sun; the whole house
abounded with light.

3\. And when he was taken from the hand of the midwife, opening also his
mouth, he spoke to the

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord of
righteousness. Then Lamech his father was afraid of him; and flying away
came to his own father Mathusala, and said, I have begotten a son,
unlike *to other children*. <span id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_299) He is
not human; but, resembling the offspring of the angels of heaven, is of
a different nature *from ours*, being altogether unlike to us.

4\. His eyes are *bright* as the rays of the sun; his countenance
glorious, and he looks not as if he belonged to me, but to the angels.

5\. I am afraid, lest something miraculous should take place on earth in
his days.

6\. And now, my father, let me entreat and request you to go to our
progenitor Enoch, and to learn from him the truth; for his residence is
with the angels.

7\. When Mathusala heard the words of his son, he came to me at the
extremities of the earth; for he had been informed that I was there: and
he cried out.

8\. I heard his voice, and went to him saying, Behold, I am *here*, my
son; since thou art come to me.

9\. He answered and said, On account of a great event have I come to
thee; and on account of a sight difficult *to be comprehended* have I
approached thee.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

10\. And now, my father, hear me; for to my son Lamech a child has been
born, who resembles not him; and whose nature is not like the nature of
man. His colour is whiter than snow; he is redder than the rose; the
hair of his head is whiter than white wool; his eyes are like the rays
of the sun; and when he opened them he illuminated the whole house.

11\. When also he was taken from the hand of the midwife, he opened his
mouth, and blessed the Lord of heaven.

12\. His father Lamech feared, and fled to me, believing not that *the
child* belonged to him, but that he resembled the angels of heaven. And
behold I am come to thee, that thou mightest point out to me the truth.

Then I, Enoch, answered and said, The Lord will effect a new thing upon
the earth. This have

I explained, and seen in a vision. I have shown thee that in the
generations of Jared my father, those who were from heaven disregarded
the word of the Lord. Behold they committed crimes; laid aside their
class, and intermingled with women. With them also they transgressed;
married with them, and begot children.

14\. A great destruction therefore shall come upon all the earth; a
deluge, a great destruction, shall take place in one year.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

15\. This child which is born to you shall survive on the earth, and his
three sons shall be saved with him. When all mankind who are on earth
shall die, he shall be safe.

16\. And his posterity shall beget on the earth giants, not spiritual,
but carnal. Upon the earth shall a great punishment be inflicted, and it
shall be washed from all corruption. Now therefore inform thy son
Lamech, that he who is born is his child in truth; and he shall call his
name *Noah*, for he shall be to you a survivor. He and his children
shall be saved from the corruption which shall take place in the world;
from all the sin and from all the iniquity which shall be consummated on
earth in his days. Afterwards shall greater impiety take place than that
which had been before consummated on the earth; for I am acquainted with
holy mysteries, which the Lord himself has discovered and explained to
me; and which I have read in the tablets of heaven.

17\. In them I saw it written, that generation after generation shall
transgress, until a righteous race shall arise; until transgression and
crime perish from off the earth; until all goodness come upon it.

18\. And now, my son, go tell thy son Lamech,

19\. That the child which is born is his child in truth; and that there
is no deception.

20\. When Mathusala heard the word of his father

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Enoch, who had
shown hint every secret thing, he returned with understanding, <span
id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_300) and called the name of that child Noah;
because he was to console the earth on account of all its destruction.

21\. Another book, which Enoch wrote for his son Mathusala, and for
those who should come after him, and preserve their purity of
conduct <span id="fr_303"></span>[2](#fn_301) in the latter days. You,
who have laboured, shall wait in those days, until the evil doers be
consumed, and the power of the guilty be annihilated. Wait, until sin
pass away; for their names shall be blotted out of the holy books; their
seed shall be destroyed, and their spirits slain. They shall cry out and
lament in the invisible waste, and in the bottomless fire shall they
burn. <span id="fr_304"></span>[3](#fn_302) There I perceived, as it
were, a cloud which could not be seen through; for from the depth of it
I was unable to look upwards. I beheld also a flame of fire blazing
brightly, and, as it were, glittering mountains whirled around, and
agitated from side to side.

22\. Then I inquired of one of the holy angels who was with me, and
said, What is this splendid *object?* For it is not heaven, but a flame
of fire alone which blazes; and *in it there is* the clamour of
exclamation, of woe, and of great suffering.

23\. He said, There, into that place which thou

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

beholdest, shall be thrust the spirits of sinners and blasphemers; of
those who shall do evil, and who shall pervert all which God has spoken
by the mouth of the prophets; all which they ought to do.

For respecting these things there shall be writings and impressions
above in heaven, that the angels may read them and know what shall
happen both to sinners and to the spirits of the humble; to those who
have suffered in their bodies, but have been rewarded by God; who have
been injuriously treated by wicked men; who have loved God; who have
been attached neither to gold nor silver, nor to any good thing in the
world, but have given their bodies to torment;

24\. To those who from the period of their birth <span
id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_303) have not been covetous of earthly
riches; but have regarded themselves as a breath passing away.

25\. Such has been their conduct; <span id="fr_306"></span>[2](#fn_304)
and much has the Lord tried them; and their spirits have been found
pure, that they might bless his name. All their blessings have I related
in a book; and He has rewarded them; for they have been found to love
heaven with an everlasting aspiration. *God has said*, While they have
been trodden down by wicked men, they have heard from them revilings and
blasphemies; and have been ignominiously treated, while they were
blessing me. And now will

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I call the spirits
of the good from the generation of light, and will change those who have
been born in darkness; who have not in their bodies been recompensed
with glory, as their faith may have merited.

26\. I will bring them into the splendid light of those who love my holy
name: and I will place each of them on a throne of glory, of glory
*peculiarly* his own, and they shall be at rest during unnumbered
periods. Righteous is the judgment of God;

27\. For to the faithful shall he give faith in the habitations of
uprightness. <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_305) They shall see those,
who having been born in darkness unto darkness shall be cast; while the
righteous shall be at rest. Sinners shall cry out, beholding them, while
they exist in splendour and proceed forwards to the days and periods
prescribed to them. <span id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_306)

 

Here ends the vision of Enoch the prophet. May the benediction of his
prayer, and the gift of his appointed period, be with his beloved! Amen.

 

 

 

<span class="small"><span class="small">PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND
SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.</span></span>

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[166:1](bep07.htm#fr_278) *for you utter*.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[166:2](bep07.htm#fr_279) *great and powerful
things*.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[166:3](bep07.htm#fr_280) *kings*.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[167:1](bep07.htm#fr_281) *think not good*.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[167:2](bep07.htm#fr_282) There is no chap. ci.
in the MSS.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[168:1](bep07.htm#fr_283) *your flesh has not
found according to your goodness*.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[168:2](bep07.htm#fr_284) *What will they
obtain, and what behold*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[168:3](bep07.htm#fr_285) *henceforward for
ever*.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[169:1](bep07.htm#fr_286) *in righteousness and
in much goodness*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[170:1](bep07.htm#fr_287) *They have seen all
their days*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[170:2](bep07.htm#fr_288) *in goodness*.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[170:3](bep07.htm#fr_289) *they saw not*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[170:4](bep07.htm#fr_290) *shall be for every
generation, even for ever*.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[170:5](bep07.htm#fr_291) *found*.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[171:1](bep07.htm#fr_292) *to see life*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[171:2](bep07.htm#fr_293) *food for sinners*.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[172:1](bep07.htm#fr_294) *during every
generation of the world*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[172:2](bep07.htm#fr_295) *strong and worthy*.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[173:1](bep07.htm#fr_296) *I will show you*.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[173:2](bep07.htm#fr_297) *create a great
creation*.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[174:1](bep07.htm#fr_298) This chapter occurs
twice.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[174:2](bep07.htm#fr_299) *we will for ever mix
with them in the paths of uprightness in their lives*.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[174:3](bep07.htm#fr_300) *after days*.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[175:1](bep07.htm#fr_301) *a changed son*.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[178:1](bep07.htm#fr_302) *seeing*.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[178:2](bep07.htm#fr_303) *their state of
life*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[178:3](bep07.htm#fr_304) *in the fire shall
they burn, where there is no earth*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[179:1](bep07.htm#fr_305) *from the time they
were*.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[179:2](bep07.htm#fr_306) *And this have they
kept*.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[180:1](bep07.htm#fr_307) *of upright ways*.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[180:2](bep07.htm#fr_308) *written down for
them*.

 
