[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bep02)  [Next](bep04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0913510017/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch the Prophet*, tr. by Richard Laurence, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXI">XXI</span></span>

### CHAP. XXI.

1\. Then I made a circuit to a place in which nothing was completed.

2\. And there I beheld neither the tremendous workmanship of an exalted
heaven, nor of an established earth, but a desolate spot, prepared, and
terrific.

3\. There, too, I beheld seven stars of heaven bound in it together,
like great mountains, and like a blazing fire. I exclaimed, For what
species of crime have they been bound, and why have they been removed to
this place? Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, and who
conducted me, answered: Enoch, wherefore dost thou ask; wherefore reason
with thyself, and anxiously inquire? These are those of the stars which
have transgressed the commandment of the most high God; and are here
bound, until the infinite number of the days of their crimes be
completed.

4\. From thence I afterwards passed on to another terrific place;

5\. Where I beheld the operation of a great fire blazing and glittering,
in the midst of which there

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

was a division. Columns of fire struggled together to the end of the
abyss, and deep was their descent. But neither its measurement nor
magnitude was I able to discover; neither could I perceive its origin.
Then I exclaimed, How terrible is this place, and how difficult to
explore!

6\. Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, answered and said:
Enoch, why art thou alarmed and amazed at this terrific place, at the
sight of this *place of* suffering? This, he said, is the prison of the
angels; and here they are kept for ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXII">XXII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXII. \[SECT. V. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65)\]

1\. From thence I proceeded to another spot, where I saw on the west a
great and lofty mountain, a strong rock, and four delightful places.

2\. Internally it was deep, capacious, and very smooth; as smooth as if
it had been rolled over: it was both deep and dark to behold.

3\. Then Raphael, one of the holy angels who were with me, answered and
said, These are the delightful places where the spirits, the souls of
the dead, will be collected; for them were they formed; and here will be
collected all the souls of the sons of men.

4\. These places, in which they dwell, shall they

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

occupy until the day of judgment, and until their appointed period.

5\. Their appointed period will be long, even until the great judgment.
And I saw the spirits of the sons of men who were dead; and their voices
reached to heaven, while they were accusing. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66)

6\. Then I inquired of Raphael, an angel who was with me, and said,
Whose spirit is that, the voice of which reaches *to heaven*, and
accuses?

7\. He answered, saying, This is the spirit of Abel, who was slain by
Cain his brother; and who will accuse that brother, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_67) until his seed be destroyed from the face
of the earth;

8\. Until his seed perish from the seed of the human race.

9\. At that time therefore I inquired respecting him, and respecting the
general judgment, saying, Why is one separated from another? He
answered, Three *separations* have been made between the spirits of the
dead, and thus have the spirits of the righteous been separated.

10\. Namely, *by* a chasm, *by* water, and *by* light above it.

11\. And in the same way likewise are sinners separated when they die,
and are buried in the earth; judgment not overtaking them in their
lifetime.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

12\. Here their souls are separated. Moreover, abundant is their
suffering until the time of the great judgment, the castigation, and the
torment of those who eternally execrate, whose souls are punished and
bound there for ever.

13\. And thus has it been front the beginning of the world. Thus has
there existed a separation between the souls of those who utter
complaints, and of those who watch for their destruction, to slaughter
them in the day of sinners.

14\. A receptacle of this sort has been formed <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68) for the souls of unrighteous men, and of
sinners; of those who have completed crime, and associated with the
impious, whom they resemble. Their souls shall not be annihilated in the
day of judgment, neither shall they arise from this place. Then I
blessed God,

15\. And said, Blessed be my Lord, the Lord of glory and of
righteousness, who reigns over all for ever and for ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXIII">XXIII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXIII.

1\. From thence I went to another place, towards the west, unto the
extremities of the earth.

2\. Where I beheld a fire blazing and running along without cessation,
which intermitted its course

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

neither by day nor by night; but continued always the same.

3\. I inquired, saying, What is this, which never ceases?

4\. Then Raguel, one of the holy angels who were with me, answered,

5\. And said, This blazing fire, which thou beholdest running towards
the west, is *that of* all the luminaries of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXIV">XXIV</span></span>

### CHAP. XXIV.

1\. I went from thence to another place, and saw a mountain of fire
flashing both by day and night. I proceeded towards it; and perceived
seven splendid mountains, which were all different from each other.

2\. Their stones were brilliant and beautiful; all were brilliant and
splendid to behold; and beautiful was their surface. Three *mountains*
were towards the east, and strengthened by being placed one upon
another; and three were towards the south, strengthened in a similar
manner. There were likewise deep valleys, which did not approach each
other. And the seventh mountain was in the midst of them. In length they
all resembled the seat of a throne, and odoriferous trees surrounded
them.

3\. Among these there was a tree of an unceasing

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

smell; nor of those which were in Eden was there one of all the fragrant
trees which smelt like this. Its leaf, its flower, and its bark never
withered, and its fruit was beautiful.

4\. Its fruit resembled the cluster of the palm. I exclaimed, Behold!
this tree is goodly in aspect, pleasing in its leaf, and the sight of
its fruit is delightful to the eye. Then Michael, one of the holy and
glorious angels who were with me, and one who presided over them,
answered,

5\. And said: Enoch, why dost thou inquire respecting the odour of this
tree?

6\. *Why* art thou inquisitive to know it?

7\. Then I, Enoch, replied to him, and said, Concerning everything I am
desirous of instruction, but particularly concerning this tree.

8\. He answered me, saying, That mountain which thou beholdest, the
extent of whose head resembles the seat of the Lord, will be the seat on
which shall sit the holy and great Lord of glory, the everlasting King,
when he shall come and descend to visit the earth with goodness.

9\. And that tree of an agreeable smell, not one of carnal
*odour*, <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69) there shall be no power to
touch, until the period of the great judgment. When all shall be
punished and consumed for ever, this shall be bestowed on the righteous
and humble. The fruit

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of this *tree* shall be given to the elect. For towards the north life
shall be planted in the holy place, towards the habitation of the
everlasting King.

10\. Then shall they greatly rejoice and exult in the Holy One. The
sweet odour shall enter into their bones; and they shall live a long
life on the earth, as thy forefathers have lived; neither in their days
shall sorrow, distress, trouble, and punishment afflict them.

11\. And I blessed the Lord of glory, the everlasting King, because He
has prepared *this tree* for the saints, formed it, and declared that He
would give it to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXV">XXV</span></span>

### CHAP. XXV.

1\. From thence I proceeded to the middle of the earth, and beheld a
happy and fertile spot, which contained branches continually sprouting
from the trees which were planted in it. There I saw a holy mountain,
and underneath it water on the eastern side, which flowed towards the
south. I saw also on the east another mountain as high as that; and
between them there were deep, but not wide valleys.

2\. Water ran towards the mountain to the west of this; and underneath
there was likewise another mountain.

3\. There was a valley, but not a wide one, below it; and in the midst
of them were other deep and

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

dry valleys towards the extremity of the three. All these valleys, which
were deep, but not wide, consisted of a strong rock, with a tree which
was planted in them. And I wondered at the rock and at the valleys,
being extremely surprised.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXVI">XXVI</span></span>

### CHAP. XXVI.

1\. Then I said, What means this blessed land, all these lofty trees,
and the accursed valley between them?

2\. Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who were with me, replied, This
valley is the accursed of the accursed for ever. Here shall be collected
all who utter with their mouths unbecoming language against God, and
speak harsh things of His glory. Here shall they be collected. Here
shall be their territory.

3\. In the latter days an example of judgment shall be made of them in
righteousness before the saints: while those who have received mercy
shall for ever, all their days, bless God, the everlasting King.

4\. And at the period of judgment shall they bless Him for his mercy, as
He has distributed it to them. Then I blessed God, addressing myself to
Him, and making mention, as was meet, of His greatness.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXVII">XXVII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXVII.

1\. From thence I proceeded towards the east, to the middle of the
mountain in the desert, the level surface only of which I perceived.

2\. It was full of trees of the seed alluded to; and water leaped down
upon it.

3\. There appeared a cataract composed as of many cataracts both towards
the west and towards the east. Upon one side were trees; upon the other
water and dew.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXVIII">XXVIII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXVIII.

1\. Then I went to another place from the desert, towards the east of
that mountain *which* I had approached.

2\. There I beheld choice trees, particularly *those which produce* the
sweet-smelling drugs, frankincense and myrrh; <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70) and trees unlike to each other.

3\. And over it, above them, was the elevation of the eastern mountain
at no great distance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXIX">XXIX</span></span>

### CHAP. XXIX.

1\. I likewise saw another place with valleys of water which never
wasted,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

2\. *Where* I perceived a goodly tree, which in smell resembled
Zasakinon.

3\. And towards the sides of these valleys I perceived cinnamon of a
sweet odour. Over them I advanced towards the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXX">XXX</span></span>

### CHAP. XXX.

1\. Then I beheld another mountain containing trees, from which water
flowed like Neketro. Its name was Sarira, and Kalboneba. And upon this
mountain I beheld another mountain, upon which were trees of Alva.

2\. These trees were full, like almond trees, anal strong; and when they
produced fruit, it was superior to all perfume.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXI">XXXI</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXI.

1\. After these things, surveying the entrances of the north, above the
mountains, I perceived seven mountains replete with pure nard,
odoriferous trees, cinnamon and papyrus.

2\. From thence I passed on above the summits of those mountains to some
distance eastwards, and went over the Erythræan sea. And when I was
advanced far beyond it, I passed along above the angel Zateel, and
arrived at the garden of righteousness.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this garden I
beheld, among other trees, some which were numerous and large, and which
flourished there.

3\. Their fragrance was agreeable and powerful, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_71) and their appearance both varied and
elegant. The tree of knowledge also was there, of which if any one eats,
he becomes endowed with great wisdom.

4\. It was like a species of the tamarind tree, bearing fruit which
resembled grapes extremely fine; and its fragrance extended to a
considerable distance. I exclaimed, How beautiful is this tree, and how
delightful is its appearance!

5\. Then holy Raphael, an angel who was with me, answered and said, This
is the tree of knowledge, of which thy ancient father and thy aged
mother ate, who were before thee; and who, obtaining knowledge, their
eyes being opened, and knowing themselves to be naked, were expelled
from the garden.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXII">XXXII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXII.

1\. From thence I went on towards the extremities of the earth; where I
saw large beasts different from each other, and birds various in their
countenances and forms, as well as with notes of different sounds.

2\. To the east of these beasts I perceived the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

extremities of the earth, where heaven ceased. The gates of heaven stood
open, and I beheld the celestial stars come forth. I numbered them as
they proceeded out of the gate, and wrote them all down, as they came
out one by one according to their number. *I wrote down* their names
altogether, their times and their seasons, as the angel Uriel, who was
with me, pointed them out to me.

3\. He showed them all to me, and wrote down *an account of* them.

4\. He also wrote down for me their names, their regulations, and their
operations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXIII">XXXIII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXIII.

1\. From thence I advanced on towards the north, to the extremities of
the earth.

2\. And there I saw a great and glorious wonder at the extremities of
the whole earth.

3\. I saw there heavenly gates opening into heaven; three of them
distinctly separated. The northern winds proceeded from them, blowing
cold, hail, frost, snow, dew, and rain.

4\. From one of the gates they blew mildly; but when they blew from the
two *other gates*, it was with violence and force. They blew over the
earth strongly.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXIV">XXXIV</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXIV.

1\. From thence I went to the extremities of the world westwards;

2\. Where I perceived three gates open, as I had seen in the north; the
gates and passages through them being of equal magnitude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXV">XXXV</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXV.

1\. Then I proceeded to the extremities of the earth southwards; where I
saw three gates open to the south, from which issued dew, rain, and
wind.

2\. From thence I went to the extremities of heaven eastwards; where I
saw three heavenly gates open to the east, which had smaller gates
within them. Through each of these small gates the stars of heaven
passed on, and proceeded towards the west by a path which was seen by
them, and that at every period *of their appearance*.

3\. When I beheld *them*, I blessed; every time *in which they
appeared*, I blessed the Lord of glory, who had made those great and
splendid signs, that they might display the magnificence of his works to
angels and to the souls of men; and that these might glorify all his
works and operations; might see the effect of his power; might glorify
the great labour of his hands; and bless him for ever.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXVII">XXXVII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXVII. <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72) \[SECT. VI. <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_73)\]

1\. The vision which he saw, the second vision of wisdom, which Enoch
saw, the son of Jared, the son of Malaleel, the son of Canan, the son of
Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam. This is the commencement of the
word of wisdom, which I received to declare and tell to those who dwell
upon earth. Hear from the beginning, and understand to the end, the holy
things which I utter in the presence of the Lord of spirits. Those who
were before *us* thought it good to speak;

2\. And let not us, who come after, obstruct the beginning of wisdom.
Until the present period never has there been given before the Lord of
spirits that which I have received, wisdom according to the capacity of
my intellect, <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_74) and according to the
pleasure of the Lord of spirits; that which I have received from
him, <span id="fr_76"></span>[4](#fn_75) a portion of life eternal.

3\. And I obtained three parables, which I declared to the inhabitants
of the world.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXVIII">XXXVIII</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXVIII.

1\. Parable the first. When the congregation of the righteous shall be
manifested; and sinners be judged for their crimes, and be troubled in
the sight of the world;

2\. When righteousness shall be manifested in the presence of the
righteous themselves, who will be elected for their *good* works *duly*
weighed by the Lord of spirits; and when the light of the righteous and
the elect, who dwell on earth, shall be manifested; where will the
habitation of sinners be? and where the place of rest for those who have
rejected the Lord of spirits? It would have been better for them, had
they never been born.

3\. When, too, the secrets of the righteous shall be revealed, then
shall sinners be judged; and impious men shall be afflicted in the
presence of the righteous and the elect.

4\. From that period those who possess the earth shall cease to be <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76) powerful and exalted. Neither shall they
be capable of beholding the countenances of the holy; for the light of
the countenances of the holy, the righteous, and the elect, has been
seen by the Lord of spirits.

5\. Yet shall not the mighty kings of that period

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

be destroyed; but be delivered into the hands of the righteous and the
holy.

6\. Nor thenceforwards shall any obtain commiseration from the Lord of
spirits, because their lives *in this world* will have been completed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XXXIX">XXXIX</span></span>

### CHAP. XXXIX.

1\. In those days shall the elect and holy race descend from the upper
heavens, and their seed shall then be with the sons of men. Enoch
received books of indignation and wrath, and books of hurry and
agitation.

2\. Never shall they obtain mercy, saith the Lord of spirits.

3\. A cloud then snatched me up, and the wind raised me above the
surface of the earth, placing me at the extremity of the heavens.

4\. There I saw another vision; I *saw* the habitations and couches of
the saints. There my eyes beheld their habitations with the angels, and
their couches with the holy ones. They were entreating, supplicating,
and praying for the sons of men; while righteousness like water flowed
before them, and mercy like dew *was scattered* over the earth. And thus
*shall it be* with them for ever and for ever.

5\. At that time my eyes beheld the dwelling <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77) of the elect, of truth, faith, and
righteousness.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

6\. Countless shall be the number of the holy and the elect, in the
presence of God <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_78) for ever and for
ever.

7\. Their residence I beheld under the wings of the Lord of spirits. All
the holy and the elect sung before him, in appearance like a blaze of
fire; their mouths being full of blessings, and their lips glorifying
the name of the Lord of spirits. And righteousness incessantly *dwelt*
before him,

8\. There was I desirous of remaining, and my soul longed for that
habitation. There was my antecedent inheritance; for thus had I
prevailed <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_79) before the Lord of
spirits.

9\. At that time I glorified and extolled the name of the Lord of
spirits with blessing and with praise; for he has established it with
blessing and with praise, according to his own good pleasure. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_80)

10\. That place long did my eyes contemplate. I blessed and said,
Blessed be he, blessed from the beginning for ever. In the beginning,
before the world was created, and without end is his knowledge. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[4](#fn_81)

11\. What is this world? Of every existing generation those shall bless
thee who do not sleep *in the*

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

*dust*, but stand before thy glory, blessing, glorifying, exalting thee,
and saying, The holy, holy, Lord of spirits, fills the whole world of
spirits.

12\. There my eyes beheld all who, without sleeping, stand before him
and bless him, saying, Blessed be thou, and blessed be the name of God
for ever and for ever. Then my countenance became changed, until I was
incapable of seeing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_XL">XL</span></span>

### CHAP. XL.

1\. After this I beheld thousands of thousands, and myriads of myriads,
and an infinite number of people, standing before the Lord of spirits.

2\. On the four wings likewise of the Lord of spirits, on the four
sides, I perceived others, besides those who were standing *before him*.
Their names, too, I know; because the angel, who proceeded with me,
declared them to me, discovering to me every secret thing.

3\. Then I heard the voices of those upon the four sides magnifying the
Lord of glory.

4\. The first voice blessed the Lord of spirits for ever and for ever.

5\. The second voice I heard blessing the elect One, and the elect who
suffer <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82) on account of the Lords of
spirits.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

6\. The third voice I heard petitioning and praying for those who dwell
upon earth, and supplicate the name of the Lord of spirits.

7\. The fourth voice I heard expelling the impious angels, <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_83) and prohibiting them from entering into
presence of the Lord of spirits, to prefer accusations against the
inhabitants of the earth.

8\. After this I besought the angel of peace, who proceeded with me, to
explain all that was concealed. I said to him, Who are those *whom* I
have seen on the four sides, and whose words I have heard and written
down? He replied, The first is the merciful, the patient, the holy
Michael.

9\. The second is he who *presides* over every suffering and every
affliction <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_84) of the sons of men, the
holy Raphael. The third, who *presides* over all that is powerful, is
Gabriel. And the fourth, who *presides* over repentance, and the hope of
those who will inherit eternal life, is Phanuel. These are the four
angels of the most high God, and their four voices, which at that time I
heard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[28:1](bep03.htm#fr_66) Paris MS.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[29:1](bep03.htm#fr_67) *blaming or reproving*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[29:2](bep03.htm#fr_68) *and he will accuse
him*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[30:1](bep03.htm#fr_69) *Thus has it been made*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[32:1](bep03.htm#fr_70) *of flesh*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[35:1](bep03.htm#fr_71) *trees of judgment,
particularly furniture of the sweet smell of frankincense and myrrh*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[37:1](bep03.htm#fr_72) *good and great*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[40:1](bep03.htm#fr_73) Chap. xxxvi. does not
occur in the MS.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[40:2](bep03.htm#fr_74) Paris MS. and Bodleian
MS.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[40:3](bep03.htm#fr_75) *according as I have
thought*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[40:4](bep03.htm#fr_76) *which has been given to
me by him*.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[41:1](bep03.htm#fr_77) *shall not be*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[42:1](bep03.htm#fr_78) *place*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[43:1](bep03.htm#fr_79) *in his presence*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[43:2](bep03.htm#fr_80) *There was my portion
before; for thus had it been prevailed respecting me*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[43:3](bep03.htm#fr_81) *according to the will
of the Lord of spirits*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[43:4](bep03.htm#fr_82) *without end he knows*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[44:1](bep03.htm#fr_83) *are crucified* or
*tormented*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[45:1](bep03.htm#fr_84) *the Satans*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[45:2](bep03.htm#fr_85) *wound*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters XLI-LX](bep04)
