[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm100)  [Next](hm102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXXVQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Hermetic Museum, Vol. I*, by Arthur Edward Waite, \[1893\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

### TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

THE HERMETIC MUSEUM RESTORED AND ENLARGED was published in Latin at
Frankfort, in the year 1678, and, as its title implies, it was an
enlarged form of an anterior work which, appearing in 1625, is more
scarce, but, intrinsically, of less value. Its design was apparently to
supply in a compact form a representative collection of the more brief
and less ancient alchemical writers; in this respect, it may be regarded
as a supplement to those large storehouses of Hermetic learning such as
the *Theatrum Chemicum*, and that scarcely less colossal of Mangetus,
the *Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa*, which are largely concerned with the
cream of the archaic literature, with the works of Geber and the adepts
of the school of Arabia, with the writings attributed to Hermes, with
those of Raymond Lully, Arnold de Villa Nova, Bernard Trevisan, and
others.

THE HERMETIC MUSEUM would also seem to represent a distinctive school in
Alchemy, not altogether committed to certain modes and terminology which
derived most of their prestige from the past, and sufficiently
enigmatical as it was, still inclined to be less obscure and misleading
than was the

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

habit of the older masters. For it belonged to a period which had
inherited a bitter experience of the failures, impostures, and misery
surrounding the Magnum Opus and its mystical quest, which was weary of
unequipped experiment, weary of wandering "multipliers," and pretentious
"bellows-blowers," while it was just being awakened to the conviction
that if Alchemy were true at all, it was not to be learned from books,
or, at least, from any books which had hitherto been written on the
subject. Running through all the tracts which are comprised in the
following volumes, the reader will recognize traces of a central claim
in alchemical initiation—that the secrets, whatever they were, must be
understood as the property of a college of adepts, pretending to have
subsisted from time almost immemorial, and revealing themselves to the
select and the few, while the literature, large as it is, appears
chiefly as an instrument of intercommunication between those who knew.
At the same time, it may also be regarded as a sign and omen to the
likely seeker, an advertisement that there was a mystery, and that he
must go further who would unravel it.

While the treatises now translated are for the most part anonymous, as
befits veiled masters, the literary reader will remember that the name
of John de Meung connects the allegorical "Romance of the Rose" with the
parables of Alchemy; Flamel will be familiar to all Hermetic students as
the most celebrated of the French adepts; the saintly name of Basil
Valentine, investigator of the properties of antimony, will not even now
be unhonoured by the chemist; Eirenaeus Philalethes, equally revered and
unknown by all devout Spagyrites, is supposed to have been the most
lucid

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of hierophants, and the "Open Entrance" to be the clearest of all his
works. Helvetius was an illustrious chemist, and Michael Maier is a
person of some repute in the Rosicrucian controversy. Michael
Sendivogius was an uninstructed disciple of Alexander Seton, and the
"New Chemical Light," which he published and claimed as his own, was
really the work of his master, who has been called the chief martyr of
Alchemy. It may be added in this connection that some critics have cast
doubt upon the genuine nature of the "Testament of John Cremer," and it
is true that the annals of Westminster do not include an abbot of that
name.

It should be understood that the writer of this brief note must not be
accredited with the translation which it seeks to introduce. That is the
work of a gentleman who is said to have had a life-long acquaintance
with alchemical literature; it has been subjected to a searching
revision at the hands of the present editor, who may himself be
permitted to claim some experience in Hermetic antiquities; the version
as it stands does not uncreditably represent both the spirit and the
sense of the original without the original's prolixity. While affording
to the modern student of secret doctrines an unique opportunity for
acquiring in English a collection of alchemical writers, this edition of
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM also claims consideration at the hands of the
historian as a contribution of real value to the early history of
chemistry.

ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to Latin Original](hm102)
