<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](xft04)  [Next](xft06) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kaffir (Xhosa) Folk-Lore*, by George McCall Theal, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE STORY OF THE BIRD THAT MADE MILK. II.

The following is another version of this story of the Bird that made
Milk, as current among the Barolongs, a tribe speaking the Sechuana
language, and residing beyond the Orange River. It was written down for
me by an educated grandson of the late chief Moroko.

IT is said that there was once a great town in a certain place, which
had many people living in it. They lived upon grain only. One year there
was a great famine. There was in that town a poor man, by name Masilo,
and his wife. One day they went to dig in their garden, and they
continued digging the whole day long. In the evening, when the digging
companies returned home, they returned also. Then there came a bird and
stood upon the house which was beside the garden, and began to whistle,
and said:

"Masilo's cultivated ground, mix together."

The ground did as the bird said. After that was done the bird went away.

In the morning, when Masilo and his wife went to the garden, they were
in doubt, and said:

"Is it really the place we were digging yesterday?"

They saw that it was the place by the people working on each side. The
people began to laugh at them, and mocked them, and said It is because
you are very lazy."

They continued to dig again that day, and in the evening they went home
with the others.

Then the bird came and did the same thing.

When they went back next morning, they found their ground altogether
undug. Then they believed that they were bewitched by some others.

They continued digging that day again. But in the evening when the
companies returned, Masilo said to his wife:

"Go home; I will stay behind to watch and find the thing which eats our
work."

Then he went and laid himself down by the head of the garden, under the
same house which the bird used always to stand upon.

While he was thinking, the bird came. It was a very beautiful bird. He
was looking at it and admiring it, when it began to speak.

It said:

"Masilo's cultivated ground, mix together."

Then he caught it, and said: "Ah! is it you who eat the work of our
hands?"

He took out his knife from the sheath, and was going to cut the head of
the bird off.

Then the bird said: "Please don't kill me, and I will make some milk for
you to eat."

Masilo answered: "You must bring back the work of my hands first."

The bird said: "Masilo's cultivated ground, appear," and it appeared.

Then Masilo said: "Make the milk now," and, behold, it immediately made
thick milk, which Masilo began to eat. When he was satisfied, he took
the bird home. As he approached his house, he put the bird in his bag.

When he entered his house, he said to his wife, "Wash all the largest
beer pots which are in the house," but his wife was angry on account of
her hunger, and she answered

"What have you to put in such large pots?"

Masilo said to her: "just hear me, and do as I command you, then you
will see."

When she was ready with the pots, Masilo took his bird out of his bag,
and said: "Make milk for my children to eat."

Then the bird filled all the beer pots with milk.

They commenced to eat, and when they were finished, Masilo charged his
children, saying-,

Beware that you do not tell anybody of this, not one of your
companions."

They swore by him that they would not tell anybody.

Masilo and his family then lived upon this bird. The people were
surprised when they saw him and his family. They said:

"Why are the people at Masilo's house so fat? He is so poor, but now
since his garden has appeared he and his children are so fat!"

They tried to watch and to see what he was eating, but they never could
find out at all.

One morning Masilo and his wife went to work in their garden, and about
the middle of the same day the children of that town met together to
play. They met just before Masilo's house. While they were playing the
others said to Masilo's children:

"Why are you so fat while we remain so thin? "

They answered: "Are we then fat? We thought we were thin just as you
are."

They would not tell them the cause. The others continued to press them,
and said: "We won't tell anybody."

Then the children of Masilo said: "There is a bird in our father's house
which makes milk."

The others said: "Please show us the bird."

They went into the house and took it out of the secret place where their
father had placed it. They ordered it as their father used to order it,
and it made milk, which their companions drank, for they were very
hungry.

After drinking they said: "Let it dance for us," and they loosened it
from the place where it was tied.

The bird began to dance in the house, but one said: "This place is too
confined," so they took it outside of the house. While they were
enjoying themselves and laughing, the bird flew away, leaving them in
great dismay.

Masilo's children said: "Our father will this day kill us, therefore we
must go after the bird."

So they followed it, and continued going after it the whole day long,
for when they were at a distance it would sit still for a little while,
and when they approached it would fly away.

When the digging companies returned from digging, the people of that
town cried for their children, for they did not know what had become of
them. But when Masilo went into the house and could not find his bird,
he knew where the children were, but he did not tell any of their
parents. He was very sorry for his bird, for he knew that he had lost
his food.

When evening set in, the children determined to return to their home,
but there came a storm of rain with heavy thunder, and they were very
much afraid. Among them was a brave boy, named Mosemanyanamatong, who
encouraged them, and said:

"Do not be afraid; I can command a house to build itself."

They said: "Please command it."

He said: "House appear," and it appeared, and also wood for fire. Then
the children entered the house and made a large fire, and oegan to roast
some wild roots which they dug out of the ground.

While they were roasting the roots and were merry, there came a big
cannibal, and they heard his voice saying: "Mosemanyanamatong, give me
some of the wild roots you have."

They were afraid, and the brave boy said to the girls and to the other
boys, "Give me some of yours."

They gave to him, and he threw the roots outside. While the cannibal was
still eating, they went out and fled. He finished eating the roots, and
then pursued them. When he approached they scattered some more roots
upon the ground, and while he was picking them up and eating, they fled.

At length they came among mountains, where trees were growing. The girls
were already very tired, so they all climbed up a tall tree. The
cannibal came there, and tried to cut the tree down with his sharp and
long nail.

Then the brave boy said to the girls: "While I am singing you must
continue saying, 'Tree be stroncr, Tree be strong!'"

He sang this song:

"It is foolish,  
It is foolish to be a traveller,  
And to go on a journey  
With the blood of girls upon one!  
While we were roasting wild roots  
A great darkness fell upon us.  
It was not darkness,  
It was awful gloom!"

While he was singing, there came a great bird and hovered over them, and
said Hold fast to me."

The children held fast to the bird, and it flew away with them, and took
them to their own town.

It was midnight when it arrived there, and it sat down at the gate of
Mosemanyanamatong's mother's house.

In the morning, when that woman came out of her house, she took ashes
and cast upon the bird, for she said: "This bird knows where our
children are."

At midday the bird sent word to the chief, saying, "Command all your
people to spread mats in all the paths."

The chief commanded them to do so. Then the bird brought all the
children out, and the people were greatly delighted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story Of Five Heads](xft06)

</div>
