<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](xft33)  [Next](xft35) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kaffir (Xhosa) Folk-Lore*, by George McCall Theal, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE STORY OF DEMANE AND DEMAZANA.

Among the natives of South Africa relationship is viewed differently
from what it is by Europeans. I have more than once heard Kaffirs
accused of falsehood because they asserted one person to be their father
or mother at one time and a different person at another time. Yet they
were telling the truth according to their ideas. A common complaint
concerning native servant girls is that they claim every other person
they meet as a brother or a sister. Now, from their point of view, what
we should term cousins are really brothers and sisters. It is not
poverty of language, for they have words to express shades of
relationship where we have none, but a difference of ideas, that causes
them to use the same word for father and paternal uncle, for brother and
cousin, etc. *Bawo* is the word used in addressing father, father's
brother, or father's half-brother. Little children say *Tata*. But there
are three different words for father, according as a person is speaking
of his own father or uncle, of the father or uncle of the person he is
speaking to, or of the father or uncle of the person he is speaking of.
Speaking of my father, *bawo* is the word used: of your father,
*uyihlo*; of his father, *uyise*. *Malume* is the brother of any one
called mother. *Ma* is the word used in addressing mother, any wife of
father, or the sister of any of these. The one we should term mother can
only be distinguished from the others, when speaking of her, by
describing her as *uma wam kanye*-*i.e.*, my real mother; or *uma
ondizalayo*-*i.e.*, the mother who bore me. Speaking of my mother, *ma*
is the word used: of your mother, *unyoko*; of his or her mother,
*unina*. A paternal aunt is addressed as *dadebobawo*-*i.e.*, sister of
my father. *Mnakwetu* is the word used by females in addressing a
brother, half-brother, or male cousin. Males, when addressing any of
these relations older than themselves, use the word *mkuluwa*; and when
addressing one younger than themselves say *mninawe*. *Dade* is used in
addressing a sister, a half-sister, or a female cousin. Females, when
speaking to any of these relations younger than themselves, usually say
*msakwetu*. *Mtakama* is an endearing form of expression, meaning child
of my mother. *Bawomkula* is the address of a grandfather. *Makulu* is
grandmother. *Mtshana* is the son of a sister.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes: The Runaway Children](xft35)

</div>
