[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft01)  [Next](eft03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

## INTRODUCTION

THESE stories were collected in various parts of Greenland, taken down
from the lips of the Eskimo story-tellers themselves, by Knud Rasmussen,
the Danish explorer.

 No man is better qualified to tell the story of Greenland, or the
stories of its people. Knud Rasmussen is himself partly of Eskimo
origin; his childhood was spent in Greenland, and to Greenland he
returned again and again, studying, exploring, crossing the desert of
the inland ice, making unique collections of material, tangible and
otherwise, from all parts of that vast and little-known land, and his
achievements on these various expeditions have gained for him much
honour and the appreciation of many learned societies.

 But it is as an interpreter of native life, of the ways and customs of
the Eskimos, that he has done his greatest work. "Kunúnguaq"—that is his
native name—is known throughout the country and possesses the confidence
of the natives to a superlative degree, forming himself, as it were, a
link between them and the rest of the world. Such work, as regards its
hither side, must naturally consist to a great extent of scientific
treatises, collections of facts and specimens, all requiring previous
knowledge of the subject for their proper comprehension. These have
their great value as additions to the sum of human knowledge, but they
remain unknown to the majority of men. The present volume is designed to
be essentially a popular, as distinct from a scientific work.

 The original collection of stories and legends made by Knud Rasmussen
under the auspices of the Carlsberg Foundation has never yet been
published. In making the present selection, I have endeavoured to choose
those which are most characteristic and best calculated to give an idea
of the life and thought of the people. The clearest variants have been
chosen, and vague or doubtful passages omitted, so as to render the
narratives easily understandable for the <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>
ordinary reader. In many cases also, the extreme outspokenness of the
primitive people concerned has necessitated further editing, in respect
of which, I can confidently refer any inclined to protest, to the
unabridged English version, lodged with the Trustees of the Carlsherg
Foundation in Copenhagen, for my defence. For the rest, I have
endeavoured to keep as closely as possible to the spirit and tone of the
originals, working from the Eskimo text and Knud Rasmussen's Danish
version side by side.

 The illustrations are by native Eskimo artists. They are not drawn to
illustrate the particular stories, but represent typical scenes and
incidents such as are there described. In the selection of these,
preference has been given to those of unusual character, as for instance
those dealing with the "tupilak" theme, and matters of wizardry or
superstition generally, which the reader would find more difficult to
visualize for himself than ordinary scenes of daily life.

 As regards their contents, the stories bring before us, more clearly,
perhaps, than any objective study, the daily life of the Eskimos, their
habit of thought, their conception of the universe, and the curious
"spirit world" which forms their primitive religion or mythology.

 In point of form they are unique. The aim of the Eskimo storyteller is
to pass the time during the long hours of darkness; if he can send his
hearers to sleep, he achieves a triumph. Not infrequently a story-teller
will introduce his *chef-d'œuvre* with the proud declaration that "no
one has ever heard this story to the end." The telling of the story thus
becomes a kind of contest between his power of sustained invention and
detailed embroidery on the one hand and his hearers' power of endurance
on the other. Nevertheless, the stories are not as interminable as might
be expected; we find also long and short variants of the same theme. In
the present selection, versions of reasonable length have been
preferred. The themes themselves are, of course, capable of almost
infinite expansion.

 In the technique of an ordinary novel there is a certain balance, or
just proportion, between the amount of space devoted to the various
items, scenes and episodes. The ordinary reader does not notice it as a
rule, for the simple reason that it is always there. The Eskimo stories
are magnificently heedless of such proportion. Any detail, whether of
fact or fancy, can be expanded at will; a journey of <span
id="page_7">p. 7</span> many hundred miles may be summarized in a dozen
words: "Then he went away to the Northward, and came to a place." Thus
with the little story of the Man who went out to search for his Son; the
version here employed covers no more than a few pages, yet it is a
record of six distinct adventures, threaded on to the main theme of the
search. It is thus a parallel in brief to the "Wandering" stories
popular in Europe in the Middle Ages, when any kind of journey served as
the string on which to gather all sorts of anecdote and adventure. The
story of Atungait, who goes on a journey and meets with lame people,
left-handed people, and the like, is an example of another well-known
classical and mediæval type.

 The mythical stories present some interesting features when compared
with the beliefs and folk-lore of other peoples. The legend of the Men
who travelled round the World is based on a conception of the world *as
round*. There is the tradition of a deluge, but here supported by
geological evidence which is appreciated by the natives themselves: i.e.
the finding of mussel shells on the hills far inland. The principle of
the tides is recognized in what is otherwise a fairy tale; "There will
be no more ebb-tide or flood if you strangle me," says the Moon Man to
the Obstinate One.

 The constellation of the Great Bear is explained in one story, the
origin of Venus in another. The spirits of the departed are "stellified"
as seen in "The Coming of Men." There seems to be a considerable
intermingling of Christian culture and modern science in the general
attitude towards life, but these foreign elements are coated over, as it
were, like the speck of grit in an oyster, till they appear as
concentrations of the native poetic spirit that forms their environment.

 We find, too, constant evidence of derivation from the earliest, common
sources of all folk-lore and myth; parallels to the fairy tales and
legends of other lands and other ages. There is a version of the
Bluebeard theme in Ímarasugssuaq, "who, it is said, was wont to eat his
wives." Instances of friendship and affection between human beings and
animals are found, as in the tale of the Foster-mother and the Bear.
Various resemblances to well-known fairy tales are discernible in such
stories as that of the Eagle and the Whale, where the brothers set out
to rescue their sisters from the husbands who hold them captive. Here
too, we encounter that <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> ancient and
classical expedient of fugitives; throwing out objects behind to check
pursuit.

 The conception of the under-world, as shown in the story of Kúnigseq
and others, is a striking example of this kinship with ancient and
well-known legends. Kúnigseq comes to the land of shades, and meets
there his mother, who is dead. But she must not kiss him, for "he is
only here on a visit." Or again: "If you eat of those berries, you will
never return." The under-world is partly an Elysium of existence without
cares; partly Dantesque: "Bring ice when you come again, for we thirst
for cold water down here." And the traveller who has been away from
earth for what seems an hour, finds that years of earthly time have
passed when he returns.

 Spirits of the departed appearing to their kin upon earth do so with an
injunction "not to tell." (In England we write to the newspapers about
them.) Magic powers or gifts are lost by telling others how they came.
Spirit gifts are made subject to some condition of restraint: "Choose
only one and no more." "If you kill more than one seal to-day, you will
never kill seal again hereafter."

 The technique of the fairy tale is frequently apparent. One test
fulfilled is followed by the demand for fulfilment of another.
Qujâvârssuk, having found the skeleton as instructed, is then sent off
to search for a lamb stone. This, of course, apart from its æsthetic
value as retardation, is particularly useful to the story-teller aiming
principally at length. We also find the common progression from one
great or splendid thing to other greater or more splendid; a woman
appears "even more finely dressed than on the day before." English
children will perhaps remember Hans Andersen's dog with "eyes as big as
saucers . . . eyes as big as *Rundetaarn*."

 The use of "magic power" is of very frequent occurrence; it seems,
indeed, to be the generally accepted way of solving any difficulty. As
soon as the hero has been brought into a situation from which no
ordinary way of escape appears, it then transpires—as an
afterthought—that he is possessed of magic powers, when the rest, of
course, is easy. A delightful instance of the extent to which this
useful faculty can be watered down and yet remain effective is seen in
the case of the village where no wizard can be found to help in time of
famine, until it is "revealed" that Íkardlítuarssuk "had formerly <span
id="page_9">p. 9</span> sat on the knee of one of those present when the
wizards called up their helping spirits." In virtue of which very
distant connection he proceeds to magic away the ice.

 There is a general tendency towards anthropomorphic conception of
supernatural beings. The Moon Man has his stock of harpoons like any
mortal hunter; the Mountain Spirit has a wife and children. The life and
domestic arrangements of "spirits" are mostly represented as very
similar to those with which the story-teller and his hearers are
familiar, much as we find, in early Italian paintings, Scriptural
personages represented in the costume and environment of the artist's
own place and period.

 The style of narrative is peculiar. The stories open, as a rule, with
some traditionally accepted gambit. "There was once a man . . ." or "A
fatherless boy lived in the house of the many brothers." The ending may
occasionally point a sort of moral, as in the case of Ukaleq, who after
having escaped from a Magic Bear, "never went out hunting bear again."
But the usual form is either a sort of equivalent to "lived happily ever
after," or a frank and direct intimation: "Here ends this story," or
"That is all I know of so-and-so." Some such hint is not infrequently
necessary, since the "end" of a story often leaves considerable scope
for further development.

 It is a characteristic feature of these stories that one never knows
what is going to happen. Poetic justice is often satisfied, but by no
means always (Kâgssagssuk). One or two of them are naïvely weak and
lacking in incident; we are constantly expecting something to happen,
but nothing happens . . . still nothing happens . . . and the story ends
(Puagssuaq). It is sometimes difficult to follow the exact course of a
conversation or action between two personages, owing to the inadequate
"he" which is used for both.

 The story-teller, while observing the traditional form, does not always
do so uncritically. Occasionally he will throw in a little interpolation
of his own, as if in apology: "There was once a wifeless man—*that is
the way a story always begins*." Or the entertainer starts off in a
cheerfully familiar style: "Well, it was the usual thing; there was a
Strong Man, and he had a wife. And, of course, he used to beat her . .
."

 Here and there, too, a touch of explanation may be inserted. "This
happened in the old days," or "So men thought in the olden <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> time." There is a general recognition of the
difference between old times and new. And the manner in which this
difference is viewed reveals two characteristic attitudes of mind, the
blending of which is apparent throughout the Eskimo culture of to-day.
There is the attitude of condescension, the arrogant tolerance of the
proselyte and the parvenu: "So our forefathers used to do, for they were
ignorant folk." At times, however, it is with precisely opposite view,
mourning the present degeneration from earlier days, "when men were yet
skilful rowers in 'kayaks,' or when this or that might still be done 'by
magic power.'"

 And it is here, perhaps, that the stories reach their highest poetic
level. This regret for the passing of "the former age," whether as an
age of greater strength and virtue, greater courage and skill, or as the
Golden Age of Romance, is a touching and most human trait. It gives to
these poor Eskimo hunters, far removed from the leisure and security
that normally precede the growth of art, a place among the poets of the
world.

 W. W. WORSTER.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CONTENTS](eft03)
