[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft15)  [Next](eft17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### THE DWARFS

A MAN who was out in his kayak saw another kayak far off and rowed up to
it. When he came up with it, he saw that the man in it was a very little
man, a dwarf.

 "What do you want," asked the dwarf, who was very much afraid of the
man.

 "I saw you from afar and rowed up," said the man.

 But the dwarf was plainly troubled and afraid.

 "I was hunting a little fjord seal which I cannot hit," he said.

 "Let me try," said the other. And so they waited until it came up to
breathe. Hardly had it come up, when the harpoons went flying towards
it, and entered in between its shoulder-blades.

 "Ai, ai—what a throw!" cried the dwarf in astonishment. And the man
took the seal and made a tow-line fast.

 Then the two kayaks set off together in towards land.

 "Hum-hum. Wouldn't care to . . . come and visit us?"<span
id="page_60_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_60_note_*) said the dwarf suddenly.

 But this the man would gladly do.

 "Hum—hum. I've a wife . . . and a daughter . . . very beautiful
daughter . . . hum—hum. Many men wanted her . . . wouldn't have them . .
. can't take her by force . . . very strong. Thought of taking her to
wife myself . . . hum—hum. But she is too strong for me . . . own
daughter."

 They rowed on a while, and then the little one spoke again.

 "Hum-hum. Might perhaps do for you . . . you could manage her . . .
what?"

 "Let us first see her," said the man. And now they rowed into a great
deep fjord.

 When they came to the place, they landed and went up at once to the
house of the little old man. And those in the house <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> did all they could that the stranger might be
well pleased. When they had been sitting there a while, the old man
said:

 "Hum—hum . . . our guest has made a catch . . . he comes to us bringing
game."

 Now it was easy to see that they would gladly have tasted the flesh of
that little seal. And so the guest said:

 "If you care to cook that meat, then set to work and cut it up as soon
as you please. Cut it up and give to those who wish to eat of it."

 The little old man was delighted at this, and sent out his two
women-folk to cut up that seal. But they stayed away a long while, and
no one came in with any meat. So the little old man went out to look for
them.

 And there stood the two women, hauling at the little fjord seal, which
they could not manage to drag up from the shore. They could not even
manage it with the old man's help. They hauled away, all three of them,
bending their bodies to the ground in their efforts, but the seal would
not move. Then at last the stranger came out, and he took that seal by
the flipper with one hand, and carried it up that way.

 "What strength, what strength! The man is a giant indeed," cried the
little folk. And they fell to work cutting up the seal, but to them it
seemed as if they were cutting up a huge walrus, so hard did they find
it to cut up that little seal.

 And people came hurrying down from the houses up above, and all wished
to share. The women of the house then shared out that seal. Each of the
guests was given a little breastbone and no more, but this to them was a
very great piece of meat. When they held such a piece in their hands, it
reached to the ground, and their hands and clothes were covered with
fat.

 Inside on the bench sat an old hag who now began trying to make herself
agreeable to the guest. She squeezed up close to him and kept on talking
to him, and looking at him kindly. She was old and ugly, and the man
would have nothing to do with her. Suddenly he gave a loud whistle.

 "Ugh—ugh!" cried the old hag in a fright, and fell down from the bench.
Then she stumbled down into the passage way, and disappeared.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

 And now after they had feasted on the seal meat, those from the houses
up above cried out:

 "Let the guest now come up here; we have foxes' liver to eat!"

 And as he did not come at once, they cried again. And then he went up.
The house was full of people, all busy eating foxes' liver.

 "It is very hard to cut," said the dwarfs. "It is dried."

 And the dwarfs worked away as hard as they could, but could not cut it
through. But the guest took and munched and crunched as if it had been
fresh meat.

 "Ai, ai—see how he can eat," cried some.

 But all those in the house were very kind to him, and would gladly have
seen him married into their family. And the young women had dressed
their hair daintily with mussel shells, that the guest might think them
the finer. But he cared for none of them, for the little old man's
daughter was the most beautiful.

 And therefore he went down to that house again when it was time to go
to rest. And he said he would have her to wife.

 And so they lived happily together, and soon they had a child. And now
the man began to long for his own place and kin. He thought more and
more of his old mother, who was still alive when he started off.

 And so one day he said he was going to visit his home.

 "We will all go with you," said the little old man; "we will visit your
kinsfolk."

 And so they made ready for the journey, and set out.

 Now when they came to the place of real people, all these were greatly
astonished to find their old comrade still alive. For they had thought
him dead long since.

 And the dwarf people lived happily enough among the real men, and after
a little time they forgot to be troubled and afraid.

 But one day when the little dwarf grandmother was sitting at the
opening of the passage way with the little child, she dropped the child
in the passage.

 "Hlurp—hlurp—hlurp," was all she heard. A great dog, his face black on
one side and white on the other, lay there in the passage, and it ate up
the child on the spot.

 "Ai—ai," she cried. "Nothing is left but a little smear on the ground."

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

 And now the dwarf folk were filled with horror, and the little old man
was for setting off at once. So they gathered their belongings together
and set out.

 And whenever they came to a village, they went up on shore, and the old
man always went up with his tent-skins on his back.

 "Are there any dogs here? Is there a great beast with a black-and-white
face?" was always the first thing he asked.

 "Yes, indeed." And before they could turn round, the old man was back
in his boat again, so great was his fear of dogs.

 And at last the skin was worn quite away from his forehead with
carrying of tent-skins up on to the shore in vain.<span
id="page_63_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_63_note_*)

 One day they were lying-to, when a wind began to blow from the north.

 "Are there dogs here?" asked the old man, and groaned, for his forehead
was flayed and smarting, so often had he borne those tent-skins up and
down. But before any could answer, he heard the barking of the dogs
themselves. And in a moment he was back in his boat again.

 The wind had grown stronger. The seas were frothing white, and the foam
was scattered about.

 Then the old dwarf stood up in his boat and cried:

 "The sky is clearing to the east with crested clouds."

 Now this was a magic song, and as soon as he had sung it, the sea was
calm and bright once more.

 Then the old man went on again. So great was the power of his magic
words that he could calm the sea. But for all that he had no peace, by
reason of the dogs.

 And he went on his way again, but whither he came at last I do not
know.

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_60">p. 60</span>

<span id="page_60_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_60_fr_*) The story-teller
speaks the dwarf's part throughout in a hurried and jerky manner, to
illustrate the little man's shyness.

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="page_63_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_63_fr_*) A heavy burden
carried on the back is supported by a strap or thong passing over the
forehead.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE BOY FROM THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA, WHO FRIGHTENED THE PEOPLE OF
THE HOUSE TO DEATH](eft17)
