[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft09)  [Next](eft11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### THE WOMAN WHO HAD A BEAR AS A FOSTER-SON

THERE was once an old woman living in a place where others lived. She
lived nearest the shore, and when those who lived in houses up above had
been out hunting, they gave her both meat and blubber.

 And once they were out hunting as usual, and now and again they got a
bear, so that they frequently ate bear's meat. And they came home with a
whole bear. The old woman received a piece from the ribs as her share,
and took it home to her house. After she had come home to her house, the
wife of the man who had killed the bear came to the window and said:

 "Dear little old woman in there, would you like to have a bear's cub?"

 And the old woman went and fetched it, and brought it into her house,
shifted her lamp, and placed the cub, because it was frozen, up on to
the drying frame to thaw. Suddenly she noticed that it moved a little,
and took it down to warm it. Then she roasted some blubber, for she had
heard that bears lived on blubber, and in this way she fed it from that
time onwards, giving it greaves to eat and melted blubber to drink, and
it lay beside her at night.

 And after it had begun to lie beside her at night it grew very fast,
and she began to talk to it in human speech, and thus it gained the mind
of a human being, and when it wished to ask its foster-mother for food,
it would sniff.

 The old woman now no longer suffered want, and those living near
brought her food for the cub. The children came sometimes to play with
it, but then the old woman would say:

 "Little bear, remember to sheathe your claws when you play with them."

 In the morning, the children would come to the window and call in:

 "Little bear, come out and play with us, for now we are going to play."

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 And when they went out to play together, it would break the children's
toy harpoons to pieces, but whenever it wanted to give any one of the
children a push, it would always sheathe its claws. But at last it grew
so strong, that it nearly always made the children cry. And when it had
grown so strong the grown-up people began to play with it, and they
helped the old woman in this way, in making the bear grow stronger. But
after a time not even grown men dared play with it, so great was its
strength, and then they said to one another:

 "Let us take it with us when we go out hunting. It may help us to find
seal."

 And so one day in the dawn, they came to the old woman's window and
cried:

 "Little bear, come and earn a share of our catch; come out hunting with
us, bear."

 But before the bear went out, it sniffed at the old woman. And then it
went out with the men.

 On the way, one of the men said:

 "Little bear, you must keep down wind, for if you do not so, the game
will scent you, and take fright."

 One day when they had been out hunting and were returning home, they
called in to the old woman:

 "It was very nearly killed by the hunters from the northward; we hardly
managed to save it alive. Give therefore some mark by which it may be
known; a broad collar of plaited sinews about its neck."

 And so the old foster-mother made a mark for it to wear; a collar of
plaited sinews, as broad as a harpoon line.

 And after that it never failed to catch seal, and was stronger even
than the strongest of hunters, and never stayed at home even in the
worst of all weather. Also it was not bigger than an ordinary bear. All
the people in the other villages knew it now, and although they
sometimes came near to catching it, they would always let it go as soon
as they saw its collar.

 But now the people from beyond Angmagssalik heard that there was a bear
which could not be caught, and then one of them said:

 "If ever I see it, I will kill it."

 But the others said:

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

 "You must not do that; the bear's foster-mother could ill manage
without its help. If you see it, do not harm it, but leave it alone, as
soon as you see its mark."

 One day when the bear came home as usual from hunting, the old
foster-mother said:

 "Whenever you meet with men, treat them as if you were of one kin with
them; never seek to harm them unless they first attack."

 And it heard the foster-mother's words and did as she had said.

 And thus the old foster-mother kept the bear with her. In the summer it
went out hunting in the sea, and in winter on the ice, and the other
hunters now learned to know its ways, and received shares of its catch.

 Once during a storm the bear was away hunting as usual, and did not
come home until evening. Then it sniffed at its foster-mother and sprang
up on to the bench, where its place was on the southern side. Then the
old foster-mother went out of the house, and found outside the body of a
dead man, which the bear had hauled home. Then without going in again,
the old woman went hurrying to the nearest house, and cried at the
window:

 "Are you all at home?"

 "Why?"

 "The little bear has come home with a dead man, one whom I do not
know."

 When it grew light, they went out and saw that it was the man from the
north, and they could see he had been running fast, for he had drawn off
his furs, and was in his underbreeches. Afterwards they heard that it
was his comrades who had urged the bear to resistance, because he would
not leave it alone.

 A long time after this had happened, the old foster-mother said to the
bear:

 "You had better not stay with me here always; you will be killed if you
do, and that would be a pity. You had better leave me."

 And she wept as she said this. But the bear thrust its muzzle right
down to the floor and wept, so greatly did it grieve to go away from
her.

 After this, the foster-mother went out every morning as soon as dawn
appeared, to look at the weather, and if there were but a cloud as big
as one's hand in the sky, she said nothing.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

 But one morning when she went out, there was not even a cloud as big as
a hand, and so she came in and said:

 "Little bear, now you had better go; you have your own kin far away out
there."

 But when the bear was ready to set out, the old foster-mother, weeping
very much, dipped her hands in oil and smeared them with soot, and
stroked the bear's side as it took leave of her, but in such manner that
it could not see what she was doing. The bear sniffed at her and went
away. But the old foster-mother wept all through that day, and her
fellows in the place mourned also for the loss of their bear.

 But men say that far to the north, when many bears are abroad, there
will sometimes come a bear as big as an iceberg, with a black spot on
its side.

 Here ends this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ÍMARASUGSSUAQ, WHO ATE HIS WIVES](eft11)
