[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft20)  [Next](eft22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### ASALÔQ

ASALÔQ, men say, had a foster-brother. Once when he had come home after
having been out in his kayak, his foster-brother had disappeared. He
sought for him everywhere, but being unable to find him, he built a big
umiak, and when it was built, he covered it with three layers of skins.

 Then he rowed off southwards with his wife. And while they were rowing,
they saw a black ripple on the sea ahead. When they came to the place,
they saw that it was the sea-lice. And the outermost layer of skins on
the boat was eaten away before they got through them.

 Now they rowed onwards again, and saw once more a black ripple ahead.
When they came to the place, they saw that it was the sea-serpents. And
once again they slipped through with the loss of one layer of skins.

 Having now but one layer of skins left, they went in great fear of what
they might chance to meet next. But without seeing anything strange,
they rounded a point, and came in sight of a place with many houses.
Hardly had they come into land when the strangers caught hold of their
boat, and hauled it up, so that Asalôq had no need to help.

 And now it was learned that these were folk who had a strong man in
their midst. Asalôq had been but a short time in one of the houses, when
they heard the sound of one coming from outside and in through the
passage way; it was the strong man's talebearer boy, and to make matters
worse, a boy with a squint.

 And now the people of the house said:

 "Now that wretched boy will most certainly tell him you are here." And
indeed, the boy was just about to run out again, when they caught hold
of him and set him up behind the lamp. But hardly had they turned their
backs on him for a moment, when he slipped out before any could move,
and they heard the sound of his running <span id="page_72">p. 72</span>
footsteps in the snow without. And after a while, the window grew red
with a constant filling of faces looking in to say:

 "We are sent to bid the stranger come."

 And since there was no help for it, Asalôq went up there with them.
When he came into the house, it was full of people, and he looked round
and saw the strong man far in on the big bench. And at the moment Asalôq
caught sight of him, the strong man said in a deep voice:

 "Let us have a wrestling match."

 And as he spoke, the others drew out a skin from under the bench, and
spread it on the floor. And after the skin had been spread out, food was
brought in. And Asalôq ate till there was no more left.

 But as he rose, all that he had eaten fell out of his stomach. And then
they began pulling arms.

 And now Asalôq began mightily pulling the arms of all the men there,
until the skin was worn from his arm, leaving the flesh almost bare.

 And when he had straightened out all their arms, he went out of that
house the strongest of all, and went out to his umiak and rowed away
southwards with his wife. And when they had rowed a little way, they
came to a little island, and pitched their tent on the sunny side. And
when Asalôq then went up on the hillside to look out, he saw many umiaks
coming from the northward, and they camped on the shady side. Then he
heard them say:

 "Now search carefully about." And others said:

 "He can hardly be on such a little island."

 And now Asalôq sang magic songs over them from the top of the hill, and
at last he heard them say:

 "We may as well go home again."

 Now Asalôq stood and watched them row away, and not until they were out
of sight did he set off again to the southward. At last they reached
Aluk, and there their bones still rest.

 Here ends this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: UKALEQ](eft22)
