[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft53)  [Next](eft55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

### ANARTEQ

THERE was once an old man, and he had only one son, and that son was
called Anarteq. But he had many daughters.

 They were very fond of going out reindeer hunting to the eastward of
their own place, in a fjord. And when they came right into the base of
the fjord, Anarteq would let his sisters go up the hillside to drive the
reindeer, and when they drove them so, those beasts came out into a big
lake, where Anarteq could row out in his kayak and kill them all.

 Thus in a few days they had their umiak filled with meat, and could go
home again.

 One day when they were out reindeer hunting, as was their custom, and
the reindeer had swum out, and Anarteq was striking them down, he saw a
calf, and he caught hold of it by the tail and began to play with it.
But suddenly the reindeer heaved up its body above the surface of the
water, and kicked at the kayak so that it turned over. He tried to get
up, but could not, because the kayak was full of water. And at last he
crawled out of it.

 The women looked at him from the shore, but they could not get out to
help him, and at last they heard him say:

 "Now the salmon are beginning to eat my belly."

 And very slowly he went to the bottom.

 Now when Anarteq woke again to his senses, he had become a salmon.

 But his father was obliged to go back alone, and from that time, having
no son, he must go out hunting as if he had been a young man. And he
never again rowed up to those reindeer grounds where they had hunted
before.

 And now that Anarteq had thus become a salmon, he went with the others,
in the spring, when the rivers break up, out into the sea to grow fat.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

 But his father, greatly wishing to go once more to their old hunting
grounds, went there again as chief of a party, after many years had
passed. His daughters rowed for him. And when they came in near to the
base of the fjord, he thought of his son, and began to weep. But his
son, coming up from the sea with the other salmon, saw the umiak, and
his father in it, weeping. Then he swam to it, and caught hold of the
paddle with which his father steered. His father was greatly frightened
at this, and drew his paddle out of the water, and said:

 "Anarteq had nearly pulled the paddle from my hand that time."

 And for a long while he did not venture to put his paddle in the water
again. When he did so at last, he saw that all his daughters were
weeping. And a second time Anarteq swam quickly up to the umiak. Again
the father tried to draw in his paddle when the son took hold of it, but
this time he could not move it. But then at last he drew it quite slowly
to the surface, in such a way that he drew his son up with it.

 And then Anarteq became a man again, and hunted for many years to feed
his kin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE GUILLEMOT THAT COULD TALK](eft55)
