[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft49)  [Next](eft51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

### ÁNGÁNGŬJUK

IT is said that Ángángŭjuk's father was very strong. They had no other
neighbours, but lived there three of them all alone. One day when the
mother was going to scrape meat from a skin, she let the child play at
kayak outside in the passage, near the entrance. And now and again she
called to him: "Ángángŭjuk!" And the child would answer from outside.

 And once she called in this way, and called again, for there came no
answer. And when no answer came again, she left the skin she was
scraping, and began to search about. But she could not find the child.
And now she began to feel greatly afraid, dreading her husband's return.
And while she stood there feeling great fear of her husband, he came out
from behind a rock, dragging a seal behind him.

 Then he came forward and said:

 "Where is our little son?"

 "He vanished away from me this morning, after you had gone, when he was
playing kayak-man out in the passage."

 And when she had said this, her husband answered:

 "It is you, wicked old hag, who have killed him. And now I will kill
you."

 To this his wife answered:

 "Do not kill me yet, but wait a little, and first seek out one who can
ask counsel of the spirits."

 And now the husband began eagerly to search for such a one. He came
home bringing wizards with him, and bade them try what they could do,
and when they could not find the child, he let them go without giving
them so much as a bite of meat.

 And seeing that none of them could help him, he now sought for a very
clever finder of hidden things, and meeting such a one at last, he took
him home. Then he fastened a stick to his face, and made him lie down on
the bedplace on his back.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

 And now he worked away with him until the spirit came. And when this
had happened, the spirit finder declared:

 "It would seem that spirits have here found a difficult task. He is up
in a place between two great cliffs, and two old inland folk are looking
after him."

 Then they stopped calling spirits, and wandered away towards the east.
They walked and walked, and at last they sighted a lot of houses. And
when they came nearer, they saw the smoke coming out from all the smoke
holes. It was the heat from inside coming out so. And the father looked
in through a window, and saw that they were quarrelling about his child,
and the child was crying.

 "Who is to look after him?"

 So he heard them saying inside the house; each one was eager to have
the child. When the father saw this, he was very angry.

 And the people inside asked the child:

 "What would you like to eat?"

 "No," said the child.

 "Will you have seal meat?"

 "No," said the child.

 And there was nothing he cared to have. Therefore they asked him at
last:

 "Do you want to go home very much?"

 Ángángŭjuk answered quickly: "Yes." And his father was very greatly
angered by now. And said to those with him:

 "Try now to magic them to sleep."

 And now the wizard began calling down a magic sleep upon those in the
hut, and one by one they sank to sleep and began to snore. And fewer and
fewer remained awake; at last there were only two. But then one of those
two began to yawn, and at last rolled over and snored.

 And now the great finder of hidden things began calling down sleep with
all his might over that one remaining. And at last he too began to move
towards the sleeping place. Then he began to yawn a little, and at last
he also rolled over.

 Now Ángángŭjuk's father went in quickly, and now he caught up his son.
But now the child had no clothes on. And looking for them, he saw them
hung up on the drying frame. But the house was so high that they had to
poke down the clothes with poles.

<span id="img_140"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Wizard calling up a
''helping spirit.''](tn/140.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/140.jpg)  
Wizard calling up a ''helping spirit.''  
</span>

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 At last they came out, and walked and walked and came farther on. And
it was now beginning to be light. As soon as they came to the place,
they cut the moorings of the umiak, and hastily made all ready, and
rowed out to the farthest islands. They had just moved away from land
when they saw a number of people opposite the house.

 But when the inland folk saw they had already moved out from the land,
they went up to the house and beat it down, beating down roof and walls
and all that there was of it.

 After that time, Ángángŭjuk's parents never again took up their
dwelling on the mainland.

 Here ends this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ÂTÂRSSUAQ](eft51)
