[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft55)  [Next](eft57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### KÁNAGSSUAQ

KÁNAGSSUAQ, men say, went out from his own place to live on a little
island, and there took to wife the only sister of many brothers. And
while he lived there with her, it happened once that the cold became so
great that the sea between the islands was icebound, and they could no
longer go out hunting. At last they had used up their store of food, and
when that store of food was used up, and none of them could go out
hunting, they all remained lying down from hunger and weakness.

 Once, when there was open water to the south, where they often caught
seal, Kánagssuaq took his kayak on his head and went out hunting. He
rowed out in a northerly wind, with snow falling, and a heavy sea. And
soon he came upon a number of black seal. He rowed towards them, to get
within striking distance, but struck only a little fjord seal, which
came up between him and the others. This one was easier to cut up, he
said.

 Now when he had got this seal, he took his kayak on his head again and
went home across the ice. And his house-fellows shouted for joy when
they saw the little creature he sent sliding in. Next day he went out
again, and caught two black seal, and after that, he never went out
without bringing home something.

 The north wind continued, and the snow and the cold continued. When he
lay out waiting for seal, as was now his custom, he often wished that he
might meet with Kilitêraq, the great hunter from another place, who was
the only one that would venture out in such weather. But this did not
come about.

 But now there was great dearth of food also in the place where
Kilitêraq lived. And therefore Kilitêraq took his kayak on his head and
went out across the ice to hunt seal. And coming some way, he sighted
Kánagssuaq, who had already made his catch, and was just getting his
tow-line out. As soon as he came up, Kánagssuaq cut away the whole of
the belly skin and gave to him. And Kilitêraq <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> felt now a great desire for blubber, and took some good big
pieces to chew.

 And while he lay there, some black seal came up, and Kánagssuaq said:

 "Row in to where they are."

 And he rowed in to them and harpooned one, and killed it on the spot
with that one stroke. He took his bladder float, to make a tow-line
fast, and wound up the harpoon line, but before he had come to the
middle, a breaking wave came rolling down on him. And it broke over him,
and it seemed indeed as if there were no kayak there at all, so utterly
was it hidden by that breaking wave. Then at last the bladder showed up
behind the kayak, and a little after, the kayak itself came up, with the
paddles held in a balancing position. Now for the second time he took
his bladder and line, and just as he came to the place where the
tow-line is made fast, there came another wave and washed over him so
that he disappeared. And then he came up a second time, and as he came
up, he said:

 "I am now so far out that I cannot make my tow-line fast. Will you do
this for me?"

 And then Kánagssuaq made his tow-line fast, and as soon as he had taken
the seal in tow, he rowed away in the thickly falling snow, and was soon
lost to sight. When he came home, his many comrades in the village were
filled with great thankfulness towards him. And thereafter it was as
before; that he never came home without some catch.

 A few days later, they awoke and saw that the snow was not falling near
them now, but only far away on the horizon. And after that the weather
became fine again. And when the spring came, they began hunting
guillemots; driving them together in flocks and killing them so. This
they did at that time.

 And now one day they had sent their bird arrows showering down among
the birds, and were busy placing the killed ones together in the kayaks.
And then suddenly a kayak came in sight on the sunny side. And when that
stranger came nearer, they looked eagerly to see who it might be. And
when Kilitêraq came nearer—for it was Kilitêraq who came—he looked round
among the kayaks, and when he saw that Kánagssuaq was among them, he
thrust his way through and came close up to him, and stuck his paddle in
between the thongs <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> on Kánagssuaq's
kayak, and then loosened the skin over the opening of his own kayak, and
put his hand in behind, and drew out a splendid tow-line made of walrus
hide and beautifully worked with many beads of walrus tooth. And a
second time he put in his hand, and took out now a piece of bearskin
fashioned to the seat of a kayak. And these things he gave to
Kánagssuaq, and said:

 "Once in the spring, when I could not make my tow-line fast to a seal,
you helped me, and made it fast. Here is that which shall thank you for
that service."

 And then he rowed away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sources of Legends](eft57)
