<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act015)  [Next](act017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 16:0</span></span>

([Act 16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)) Paul takes Timothy to be
his assistant.

([Act 16:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006)) Paul proceeds to
Macedonia, The conversion of Lydia.

([Act 16:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016)) An evil spirit cast
out, Paul and Silas scourged and imprisoned.

([Act 16:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)) The conversion of the
jailer at Philippi.

([Act 16:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#035)) Paul and Silas
released.

[Acts 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 16:1</span></span>

Well may the church look for much service from youthful ministers who
set out in the same spirit as Timothy. But when men will submit in
nothing, and oblige in nothing, the first elements of the Christian
temper seem to be wanting; and there is great reason to believe that the
doctrines and precepts of the gospel will not be successfully taught.
The design of the decree being to set aside the ceremonial law, and its
carnal ordinances, believers were confirmed in the Christian faith,
because it set up a spiritual way of serving God, as suited to the
nature both of God and man. Thus the church increased in numbers daily.

[Acts 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 16:6</span></span>

The removals of ministers, and the dispensing the means of grace by
them, are in particular under Divine conduct and direction. We must
follow Providence: and whatever we seek to do, if that suffer us not, we
ought to submit and believe to be for the best. People greatly need help
for their souls, it is their duty to look out for it, and to invite
those among them who can help them. And God's calls must be complied
with readily. A solemn assembly the worshippers of God must have, if
possible, upon the sabbath day. If we have not synagogues, we must be
thankful for more private places, and resort to them; not forsaking the
assembling together, as our opportunities are. Among the hearers of Paul
was a woman, named Lydia. She had an honest calling, which the historian
notices to her praise. Yet though she had a calling to mind, she found
time to improve advantages for her soul. It will not excuse us from
religious duties, to say, We have a trade to mind; for have not we also
a God to serve, and souls to look after? Religion does not call us from
our business in the world, but directs us in it. Pride, prejudice, and
sin shut out the truths of God, till his grace makes way for them into
the understanding and affections; and the Lord alone can open the heart
to receive and believe his word. We must believe in Jesus Christ; there
is no coming to God as a Father, but by the Son as Mediator.

[Acts 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 16:16</span></span>

Satan, though the father of lies, will declare the most important
truths, when he can thereby serve his purposes. But much mischief is
done to the real servants of Christ, by unholy and false preachers of
the gospel, who are confounded with them by careless observers. Those
who do good by drawing men from sin, may expect to be reviled as
troublers of the city. While they teach men to fear God, to believe in
Christ, to forsake sin, and to live godly lives, they will be accused of
teaching bad customs.

[Acts 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 16:25</span></span>

The consolations of God to his suffering servants are neither few nor
small. How much more happy are true Christians than their prosperous
enemies! As in the dark, so out of the depths, we may cry unto God. No
place, no time is amiss for prayer, if the heart be lifted up to God. No
trouble, however grievous, should hinder us from praise. Christianity
proves itself to be of God, in that it obliges us to be just to our own
lives. Paul cried aloud to make the jailer hear, and to make him heed,
saying, Do thyself no harm. All the cautions of the word of God against
sin, and all appearances of it, and approaches to it, have this
tendency. Man, woman, do not ruin thyself; hurt not thyself, and then
none else can hurt thee; do not sin, for nothing but that can hurt thee.
Even as to the body, we are cautioned against the sins which do harm to
that. Converting grace changes people's language of and to good people
and good ministers. How serious the jailer's inquiry! His salvation
becomes his great concern; that lies nearest his heart, which before was
furthest from his thoughts. It is his own precious soul that he is
concerned about. Those who are thoroughly convinced of sin, and truly
concerned about their salvation, will give themselves up to Christ. Here
is the sum of the whole gospel, the covenant of grace in a few words;
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy
house. The Lord so blessed the word, that the jailer was at once
softened and humbled. He treated them with kindness and compassion, and,
professing faith in Christ, was baptized in that name, with his family.
The Spirit of grace worked such a strong faith in them, as did away
further doubt; and Paul and Silas knew by the Spirit, that a work of God
was wrought in them. When sinners are thus converted, they will love and
honour those whom they before despised and hated, and will seek to
lessen the suffering they before desired to increase. When the fruits of
faith begin to appear, terrors will be followed by confidence and joy in
God.

[Acts 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 16:35</span></span>

Paul, though willing to suffer for the cause of Christ, and without any
desire to avenge himself, did not choose to depart under the charge of
having deserved wrongful punishment, and therefore required to be
dismissed in an honourable manner. It was not a mere point of honour
that the apostle stood upon, but justice, and not to himself so much as
to his cause. And when proper apology is made, Christians should never
express personal anger, nor insist too strictly upon personal amends.
The Lord will make them more than conquerors in every conflict; instead
of being cast down by their sufferings, they will become comforters of
their brethren.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 17](act017)

</div>
