<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act002)  [Next](act004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 3:0</span></span>

([Act 3:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)) A lame man healed by
Peter and John.

([Act 3:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)) Peter's address to the
Jews.

[Acts 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 3:1</span></span>

The apostles and the first believers attended the temple worship at the
hours of prayer. Peter and John seem to have been led by a Divine
direction, to work a miracle on a man above forty years old, who had
been a cripple from his birth. Peter, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
bade him rise up and walk. Thus, if we would attempt to good purpose the
healing of men's souls, we must go forth in the name and power of Jesus
Christ, calling on helpless sinners to arise and walk in the way of
holiness, by faith in Him. How sweet the thought to our souls, that in
respect to all the crippled faculties of our fallen nature, the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth can make us whole! With what holy joy and
rapture shall we tread the holy courts, when God the Spirit causes us to
enter therein by his strength!

[Acts 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 3:12</span></span>

Observe the difference in the manner of working the miracles. Our Lord
always spoke as having Almighty power, never hesitated to receive the
greatest honour that was given to him on account of his Divine miracles.
But the apostles referred all to their Lord, and refused to receive any
honour, except as his undeserving instruments. This shows that Jesus was
one with the Father, and co-equal with Him; while the apostles knew that
they were weak, sinful men, and dependent for every thing on Jesus,
whose power effected the cure. Useful men must be very humble. Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name, give glory. Every crown must
be cast at the feet of Christ. The apostle showed the Jews the greatness
of their crime, but would not anger or drive them to despair. Assuredly,
those who reject, refuse, or deny Christ, do it through ignorance; but
this can in no case be an excuse.

[Acts 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 3:19</span></span>

The absolute necessity of repentance is to be solemnly charged upon the
consciences of all who desire that their sins may be blotted out, and
that they may share in the refreshment which nothing but a sense of
Christ's pardoning love can afford. Blessed are those who have felt
this. It was not needful for the Holy Spirit to make known the times and
seasons of these dispensations. These subjects are still left obscure.
But when sinners are convinced of their sins, they will cry to the Lord
for pardon; and to the penitent, converted, and believing, times of
refreshment will come from the presence of the Lord. In a state of trial
and probation, the glorified Redeemer will be out of sight, because we
must live by faith in him.

[Acts 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 3:22</span></span>

Here is a powerful address to warn the Jews of the dreadful consequences
of their unbelief, in the very words of Moses, their favourite prophet,
out of pretended zeal for whom they were ready to reject Christianity,
and to try to destroy it. Christ came into the world to bring a blessing
with him. And he sent his Spirit to be the great blessing. Christ came
to bless us, by turning us from our iniquities, and saving us from our
sins. We, by nature cleave to sin; the design of Divine grace is to turn
us from it, that we may not only forsake, but hate it. Let none think
that they can be happy by continuing in sin, when God declares that the
blessing is in being turned from all iniquity. Let none think that they
understand or believe the gospel, who only seek deliverance from the
punishment of sin, but do not expect happiness in being delivered from
sin itself. And let none expect to be turned from their sin, except by
believing in, and receiving Christ the Son of God, as their wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 4](act004)

</div>
