<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act017)  [Next](act019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 18:0</span></span>

([Act 18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)) Paul at Corinth, with
Aquila and Priscilla.

([Act 18:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#007)) He continues to preach
at Corinth.

([Act 18:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012)) Paul before Gallio.

([Act 18:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)) He visits Jerusalem.

([Act 18:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)) Apollos teaches at
Ephesus and in Achaia.

[Acts 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 18:1</span></span>

Though Paul was entitled to support from the churches he planted, and
from the people to whom he preached, yet he worked at his calling. An
honest trade, by which a man may get his bread, is not to be looked upon
with contempt by any. It was the custom of the Jews to bring up their
children to some trade, though they gave them learning or estates. Paul
was careful to prevent prejudices, even the most unreasonable. The love
of Christ is the best bond of the saints; and the communings of the
saints with each other, sweeten labour, contempt, and even persecution.
Most of the Jews persisted in contradicting the gospel of Christ, and
blasphemed. They would not believe themselves, and did all they could to
keep others from believing. Paul hereupon left them. He did not give
over his work; for though Israel be not gathered, Christ and his gospel
shall be glorious. The Jews could not complain, for they had the first
offer. When some oppose the gospel, we must turn to others. Grief that
many persist in unbelief should not prevent gratitude for the conversion
of some to Christ.

[Acts 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 18:7</span></span>

The Lord knows those that are his, yea, and those that shall be his; for
it is by his work upon them that they become his. Let us not despair
concerning any place, when even in wicked Corinth Christ had much
people. He will gather in his chosen flock from the places where they
are scattered Thus encouraged, the apostle continued at Corinth, and a
numerous and flourishing church grew up.

[Acts 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 18:12</span></span>

Paul was about to show that he did not teach men to worship God contrary
to law; but the judge would not allow the Jews to complain to him of
what was not within his office. It was right in Gallio that he left the
Jews to themselves in matters relating to their religion, but yet would
not let them, under pretence of that, persecute another. But it was
wrong to speak slightly of a law and religion which he might have known
to be of God, and which he ought to have acquainted himself with. In
what way God is to be worshipped, whether Jesus be the Messiah, and
whether the gospel be a Divine revelation, are not questions of words
and names, they are questions of vast importance. Gallio spoke as if he
boasted of his ignorance of the Scriptures, as if the law of God was
beneath his notice. Gallio cared for none of these things. If he cared
not for the affronts of bad men, it was commendable; but if he concerned
not himself for the abuses done to good men, his indifference was
carried too far. And those who see and hear of the sufferings of God's
people, and have no feeling with them, or care for them, who do not pity
and pray for them, are of the same spirit as Gallio, who cared for none
of these things.

[Acts 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 18:18</span></span>

While Paul found he laboured not in vain, he continued labouring. Our
times are in God's hand; we purpose, but he disposes; therefore we must
make all promises with submission to the will of God; not only if
providence permits, but if God does not otherwise direct our motions. A
very good refreshment it is to a faithful minister, to have for awhile
the society of his brethren. Disciples are compassed about with
infirmity; ministers must do what they can to strengthen them, by
directing them to Christ, who is their Strength. Let us earnestly seek,
in our several places, to promote the cause of Christ, forming plans
that appear to us most proper, but relying on the Lord to bring them to
pass if he sees good.

[Acts 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 18:24</span></span>

Apollos taught in the gospel of Christ, as far as John's ministry would
carry him, and no further. We cannot but think he had heard of Christ's
death and resurrection, but he was not informed as to the mystery of
them. Though he had not the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, as the
apostles, he made use of the gifts he had. The dispensation of the
Spirit, whatever the measure of it may be, is given to every man to
profit withal. He was a lively, affectionate preacher; fervent in
spirit. He was full of zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of
precious souls. Here was a complete man of God, thoroughly furnished for
his work. Aquila and Priscilla encouraged his ministry, by attendance
upon it. They did not despise Apollos themselves, or undervalue him to
others; but considered the disadvantages he had laboured under. And
having themselves got knowledge in the truths of the gospel by their
long intercourse with Paul, they told what they knew to him. Young
scholars may gain a great deal by converse with old Christians. Those
who do believe through grace, yet still need help. As long as they are
in this world, there are remainders of unbelief, and something lacking
in their faith to be perfected, and the work of faith to be fulfilled.
If the Jews were convinced that Jesus is Christ, even their own law
would teach them to hear him. The business of ministers is to preach
Christ. Not only to preach the truth, but to prove and defend it, with
meekness, yet with power.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 19](act019)

</div>
