<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act016)  [Next](act018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 17:0</span></span>

([Act 17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001)) Paul at Thessalonica.

([Act 17:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010)) The noble conduct of
the Bereans.

([Act 17:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016)) Paul at Athens.

([Act 17:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)) He preaches there.

([Act 17:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032)) The scornful conduct
of the Athenians.

[Acts 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 17:1</span></span>

The drift and scope of Paul's preaching and arguing, was to prove that
Jesus is the Christ. He must needs suffer for us, because he could not
otherwise purchase our redemption for us; and he must needs have risen
again, because he could not otherwise apply the redemption to us. We are
to preach concerning Jesus that he is Christ; therefore we may hope to
be saved by him, and are bound to be ruled by him. The unbelieving Jews
were angry, because the apostles preached to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved. How strange it is, that men should grudge others the
privileges they will not themselves accept! Neither rulers nor people
need be troubled at the increase of real Christians, even though
turbulent spirits should make religion the pretext for evil designs. Of
such let us beware, from such let us withdraw, that we may show a desire
to act aright in society, while we claim our right to worship God
according to our consciences.

[Acts 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 17:10</span></span>

The Jews in Berea applied seriously to the study of the word preached
unto them. They not only heard Paul preach on the sabbath, but daily
searched the Scriptures, and compared what they read with the facts
related to them. The doctrine of Christ does not fear inquiry; advocates
for his cause desire no more than that people will fully and fairly
examine whether things are so or not. Those are truly noble, and likely
to be more and more so, who make the Scriptures their rule, and consult
them accordingly. May all the hearers of the gospel become like those of
Berea, receiving the word with readiness of mind, and searching the
Scriptures daily, whether the things preached to them are so.

[Acts 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 17:16</span></span>

Athens was then famed for polite learning, philosophy, and the fine
arts; but none are more childish and superstitious, more impious, or
more credulous, than some persons, deemed eminent for learning and
ability. It was wholly given to idolatry. The zealous advocate for the
cause of Christ will be ready to plead for it in all companies, as
occasion offers. Most of these learned men took no notice of Paul; but
some, whose principles were the most directly contrary to Christianity,
made remarks upon him. The apostle ever dwelt upon two points, which are
indeed the principal doctrines of Christianity, Christ and a future
state; Christ our way, and heaven our end. They looked on this as very
different from the knowledge for many ages taught and professed at
Athens; they desire to know more of it, but only because it was new and
strange. They led him to the place where judges sat who inquired into
such matters. They asked about Paul's doctrine, not because it was good,
but because it was new. Great talkers are always busy-bodies. They spend
their time in nothing else, and a very uncomfortable account they have
to give of their time who thus spend it. Time is precious, and we are
concerned to employ it well, because eternity depends upon it, but much
is wasted in unprofitable conversation.

[Acts 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 17:22</span></span>

Here we have a sermon to heathens, who worshipped false gods, and were
without the true God in the world; and to them the scope of the
discourse was different from what the apostle preached to the Jews. In
the latter case, his business was to lead his hearers by prophecies and
miracles to the knowledge of the Redeemer, and faith in him; in the
former, it was to lead them, by the common works of providence, to know
the Creator, and worship Him. The apostle spoke of an altar he had seen,
with the inscription, "TO THE UNKNOWN GOD." This fact is stated by many
writers. After multiplying their idols to the utmost, some at Athens
thought there was another god of whom they had no knowledge. And are
there not many now called Christians, who are zealous in their
devotions, yet the great object of their worship is to them an unknown
God? Observe what glorious things Paul here says of that God whom he
served, and would have them to serve. The Lord had long borne with
idolatry, but the times of this ignorance were now ending, and by his
servants he now commanded all men every where to repent of their
idolatry. Each sect of the learned men would feel themselves powerfully
affected by the apostle's discourse, which tended to show the emptiness
or falsity of their doctrines.

[Acts 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 17:32</span></span>

The apostle was treated with more outward civility at Athens than in
some other places; but none more despised his doctrine, or treated it
with more indifference. Of all subjects, that which deserves the most
attention gains the least. But those who scorn, will have to bear the
consequences, and the word will never be useless. Some will be found,
who cleave to the Lord, and listen to his faithful servants. Considering
the judgement to come, and Christ as our Judge, should urge all to
repent of sin, and turn to Him. Whatever matter is used, all discourses
must lead to Him, and show his authority; our salvation, and
resurrection, come from and by Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 18](act018)

</div>
