<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act024)  [Next](act026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 25:0</span></span>

([Act 25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001)) Paul before Festus, he
appeals to Caesar.

([Act 25:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013)) Festus confers with
Agrippa respecting Paul.

[Acts 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 25:1</span></span>

See how restless malice is. Persecutors deem it a peculiar favour to
have their malice gratified. Preaching Christ, the end of the law, was
no offence against the law. In suffering times the prudence of the
Lord's people is tried, as well as their patience; they need wisdom. It
becomes those who are innocent, to insist upon their innocence. Paul was
willing to abide by the rules of the law, and to let that take its
course. If he deserved death, he would accept the punishment. But if
none of the things whereof they accused him were true, no man could
deliver him unto them, with justice. Paul is neither released nor
condemned. It is an instance of the slow steps which Providence takes;
by which we are often made ashamed, both of our hopes and of our fears,
and are kept waiting on God.

[Acts 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 25:13</span></span>

Agrippa had the government of Galilee. How many unjust and hasty
judgments the Roman maxim, [Act 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016),
condemn! This heathen, guided only by the light of nature, followed law
and custom exactly, yet how many Christians will not follow the rules of
truth, justice, and charity, in judging their brethren! The questions
about God's worship, the way of salvation, and the truths of the gospel,
may appear doubtful and without interest, to worldly men and mere
politicians. See how slightly this Roman speaks of Christ, and of the
great controversy between the Jews and the Christians. But the day is at
hand when Festus and the whole world will see, that all the concerns of
the Roman empire were but trifles and of no consequence, compared with
this question of Christ's resurrection. Those who have had means of
instruction, and have despised them, will be awfully convinced of their
sin and folly. Here was a noble assembly brought together to hear the
truths of the gospel, though they only meant to gratify their curiosity
by attending to the defence of a prisoner. Many, even now, attend at the
places of hearing the word of God with "great pomp," and too often with
no better motive than curiosity. And though ministers do not now stand
as prisoners to make a defence for their lives, yet numbers affect to
sit in judgment upon them, desirous to make them offenders for a word,
rather than to learn from them the truth and will of God, for the
salvation of their souls But the pomp of this appearance was outshone by
the real glory of the poor prisoner at the bar. What was the honour of
their fine appearance, compared with that of Paul's wisdom, and grace,
and holiness; his courage and constancy in suffering for Christ! It is
no small mercy to have God clear up our righteousness as the light, and
our just dealing as the noon-day; to have nothing certain laid to our
charge. And God makes even the enemies of his people to do them right.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 26](act026)

</div>
