<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act018)  [Next](act020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 19:0</span></span>

([Act 19:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)) Paul instructs the
disciples of John at Ephesus.

([Act 19:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008)) He teaches there.

([Act 19:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)) The Jewish exorcists
disgraced. Some Ephesians burn their evil books.

([Act 19:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)) The tumult at Ephesus.

([Act 19:32-41](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032)) The tumult appeased.

[Acts 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 19:1</span></span>

Paul, at Ephesus, found some religious persons, who looked to Jesus as
the Messiah. They had not been led to expect the miraculous powers of
the Holy Ghost, nor were they informed that the gospel was especially
the ministration of the Spirit. But they spake as ready to welcome the
notice of it. Paul shows them that John never design that those he
baptized should rest there, but told them that they should believe on
Him who should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. They thankfully
accepted the discovery, and were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
The Holy Ghost came upon them in a surprising, overpowering manner; they
spake with tongues, and prophesied, as the apostles and the first
Gentile coverts did. Though we do not now expect miraculous powers, yet
all who profess to be disciples of Christ, should be called on to
examine whether they have received the seal of the Holy Ghost, in his
sanctifying influences, to the sincerity of their faith. Many seem not
to have heard that there is a Holy Ghost, and many deem all that is
spoken concerning his graces and comforts, to be delusion. Of such it
may properly be inquired, "Unto what, then, were ye baptized?" for they
evidently know not the meaning of that outward sign on which they place
great dependence.

[Acts 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 19:8</span></span>

When arguments and persuasions only harden men in unbelief and
blasphemy, we must separate ourselves and others from such unholy
company. God was pleased to confirm the teaching of these holy men of
old, that if their hearers believed them not, they might believe the
works.

[Acts 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 19:13</span></span>

It was common, especially among the Jews, for persons to profess or to
try to cast out evil spirits. If we resist the devil by faith in Christ,
he will flee from us; but if we think to resist him by the using of
Christ's name, or his works, as a spell or charm, Satan will prevail
against us. Where there is true sorrow for sin, there will be free
confession of sin to God in every prayer and to man whom we have
offended, when the case requires it. Surely if the word of God prevailed
among us, many lewd, infidel, and wicked books would be burned by their
possessors. Will not these Ephesian converts rise up in judgement
against professors, who traffic in such works for the sake of gain, or
allow themselves to possess them? If we desire to be in earnest in the
great work of salvation, every pursuit and enjoyment must be given up
which hinders the effect of the gospel upon the mind, or loosens its
hold upon the heart.

[Acts 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 19:21</span></span>

Persons who came from afar to pay their devotions at the temple of
Ephesus, bought little silver shrines, or models of the temple, to carry
home with them. See how craftsmen make advantage to themselves of
people's superstition, and serve their worldly ends by it. Men are
jealous for that by which they get their wealth; and many set themselves
against the gospel of Christ, because it calls men from all unlawful
crafts, however much wealth is to be gotten by them. There are persons
who will stickle for what is most grossly absurd, unreasonable, and
false; as this, that those are gods which are made with hands, if it has
but worldly interest on its side. The whole city was full of confusion,
the common and natural effect of zeal for false religion. Zeal for the
honour of Christ, and love to the brethren, encourage zealous believers
to venture into danger. Friends will often be raised up among those who
are strangers to true religion, but have observed the honest and
consistent behaviour of Christians.

[Acts 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 19:32</span></span>

The Jews came forward in this tumult. Those who are thus careful to
distinguish themselves from the servants of Christ now, and are afraid
of being taken for them, shall have their doom accordingly in the great
day. One, having authority, at length stilled the noise. It is a very
good rule at all times, both in private and public affairs, not to be
hasty and rash in our motions, but to take time to consider; and always
to keep our passions under check. We ought to be quiet, and to do
nothing rashly; to do nothing in haste, of which we may repent at
leisure. The regular methods of the law ought always to stop popular
tumults, and in well-governed nations will do so. Most people stand in
awe of men's judgments more than of the judgement of God. How well it
were if we would thus quiet our disorderly appetites and passions, by
considering the account we must shortly give to the Judge of heaven and
earth! And see how the overruling providence of God keeps the public
peace, by an unaccountable power over the spirits of men. Thus the world
is kept in some order, and men are held back from devouring each other.
We can scarcely look around but we see men act like Demetrius and the
workmen. It is as safe to contend with wild beasts as with men enraged
by party zeal and disappointed covetousness, who think that all
arguments are answered, when they have shown that they grow rich by the
practices which are opposed. Whatever side in religious disputes, or
whatever name this spirit assumes, it is worldly, and should be
discountenanced by all who regard truth and piety. And let us not be
dismayed; the Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters; he
can still the rage of the people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 20](act020)

</div>
