<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1014)  [Next](co1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 15:0</span></span>

([Co1 15:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)) The apostle proves the
resurrection of Christ from the dead.

([Co1 15:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)) Those answered who
deny the resurrection of the body.

([Co1 15:20-34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)) The resurrection of
believers to eternal life.

(v. 35-50) Objections against it answered.

([Co1 15:51-54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)) The mystery of the
change that will be made on those living at Christ's second coming.

([Co1 15:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)) The believer's triumph
over death and the grave, An exhortation to diligence.

[1 Corinthians 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 15:1</span></span>

The word resurrection, usually points out our existence beyond the
grave. Of the apostle's doctrine not a trace can be found in all the
teaching of philosophers. The doctrine of Christ's death and
resurrection, is the foundation of Christianity. Remove this, and all
our hopes for eternity sink at once. And it is by holding this truth
firm, that Christians stand in the day of trial, and are kept faithful
to God. We believe in vain, unless we keep in the faith of the gospel.
This truth is confirmed by Old Testament prophecies; and many saw Christ
after he was risen. This apostle was highly favoured, but he always had
a low opinion of himself, and expressed it. When sinners are, by Divine
grace, turned into saints, God causes the remembrance of former sins to
make them humble, diligent, and faithful. He ascribes to Divine grace
all that was valuable in him. True believers, though not ignorant of
what the Lord has done for, in, and by them, yet when they look at their
whole conduct and their obligations, they are led to feel that none are
so worthless as they are. All true Christians believe that Jesus Christ,
and him crucified, and then risen from the dead, is the sun and
substance of Christianity. All the apostles agreed in this testimony; by
this faith they lived, and in this faith they died.

[1 Corinthians 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 15:12</span></span>

Having shown that Christ was risen, the apostle answers those who said
there would be no resurrection. There had been no justification, or
salvation, if Christ had not risen. And must not faith in Christ be
vain, and of no use, if he is still among the dead? The proof of the
resurrection of the body is the resurrection of our Lord. Even those who
died in the faith, had perished in their sins, if Christ had not risen.
All who believe in Christ, have hope in him, as a Redeemer; hope for
redemption and salvation by him; but if there is no resurrection, or
future recompence, their hope in him can only be as to this life. And
they must be in a worse condition than the rest of mankind, especially
at the time, and under the circumstances, in which the apostles wrote;
for then Christians were hated and persecuted by all men. But it is not
so; they, of all men, enjoy solid comforts amidst all their difficulties
and trials, even in the times of the sharpest persecution.

[1 Corinthians 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 15:20</span></span>

All that are by faith united to Christ, are by his resurrection assured
of their own. As through the sin of the first Adam, all men became
mortal, because all had from him the same sinful nature, so, through the
resurrection of Christ, shall all who are made to partake of the Spirit,
and the spiritual nature, revive, and live for ever. There will be an
order in the resurrection. Christ himself has been the first-fruits; at
his coming, his redeemed people will be raised before others; at the
last the wicked will rise also. Then will be the end of this present
state of things. Would we triumph in that solemn and important season,
we must now submit to his rule, accept his salvation, and live to his
glory. Then shall we rejoice in the completion of his undertaking, that
God may receive the whole glory of our salvation, that we may for ever
serve him, and enjoy his favour. What shall those do, who are baptized
for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Perhaps baptism is used here
in a figure, for afflictions, sufferings, and martyrdom, as [Mat
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022), [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023). What is, or will become of
those who have suffered many and great injuries, and have even lost
their lives, for this doctrine of the resurrection, if the dead rise not
at all? Whatever the meaning may be, doubtless the apostle's argument
was understood by the Corinthians. And it is as plain to us that
Christianity would be a foolish profession, if it proposed advantage to
themselves by their faithfulness to God; and to have our fruit to
holiness, that our end may be everlasting life. But we must not live
like beasts, as we do not die like them. It must be ignorance of God
that leads any to disbelieve the resurrection and future life. Those who
own a God and a providence, and observe how unequal things are in the
present life, how frequently the best men fare worst, cannot doubt as to
an after-state, where every thing will be set to rights. Let us not be
joined with ungodly men; but warn all around us, especially children and
young persons, to shun them as a pestilence. Let us awake to
righteousness, and not sin.

[1 Corinthians 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">co1 15:35</span></span>

1\. How are the dead raised up? that is, by what means? How can they be
raised? 2. As to the bodies which shall rise. Will it be with the like
shape, and form, and stature, and members, and qualities? The former
objection is that of those who opposed the doctrine, the latter of
curious doubters. To the first the answer is, This was to be brought
about by Divine power; that power which all may see does somewhat like
it, year after year, in the death and revival of the corn. It is foolish
to question the Almighty power of God to raise the dead, when we see it
every day quickening and reviving things that are dead. To the second
inquiry; The grain undergoes a great change; and so will the dead, when
they rise and live again. The seed dies, though a part of it springs
into new life, though how it is we cannot fully understand. The works of
creation and providence daily teach us to be humble, as well as to
admire the Creator's wisdom and goodness. There is a great variety among
other bodies, as there is among plants. There is a variety of glory
among heavenly bodies. The bodies of the dead, when they rise, will be
fitted for the heavenly bodies. The bodies of the dead, when they rise,
will be fitted for the heavenly state; and there will be a variety of
glories among them. Burying the dead, is like committing seed to the
earth, that it may spring out of it again. Nothing is more loathsome
than a dead body. But believers shall at the resurrection have bodies,
made fit to be for ever united with spirits made perfect. To God all
things are possible. He is the Author and Source of spiritual life and
holiness, unto all his people, by the supply of his Holy Spirit to the
soul; and he will also quicken and change the body by his Spirit. The
dead in Christ shall not only rise, but shall rise thus gloriously
changed. The bodies of the saints, when they rise again, will be
changed. They will be then glorious and spiritual bodies, fitted to the
heavenly world and state, where they are ever afterwards to dwell. The
human body in its present form, and with its wants and weaknesses,
cannot enter or enjoy the kingdom of God. Then let us not sow to the
flesh, of which we can only reap corruption. And the body follows the
state of the soul. He, therefore, who neglects the life of the soul,
casts away his present good; he who refuses to live to God, squanders
all he has.

[1 Corinthians 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">co1 15:51</span></span>

All the saints should not die, but all would be changed. In the gospel,
many truths, before hidden in mystery, are made known. Death never shall
appear in the regions to which our Lord will bear his risen saints.
Therefore let us seek the full assurance of faith and hope, that in the
midst of pain, and in the prospect of death, we may think calmly on the
horrors of the tomb; assured that our bodies will there sleep, and in
the mean time our souls will be present with the Redeemer. Sin gives
death all its hurtful power. The sting of death is sin; but Christ, by
dying, has taken out this sting; he has made atonement for sin, he has
obtained remission of it. The strength of sin is the law. None can
answer its demands, endure its curse, or do away his own transgressions.
Hence terror and anguish. And hence death is terrible to the unbelieving
and the impenitent. Death may seize a believer, but it cannot hold him
in its power. How many springs of joy to the saints, and of thanksgiving
to God, are opened by the death and resurrection, the sufferings and
conquests of the Redeemer! In [Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058), we have an exhortation, that
believers should be stedfast, firm in the faith of that gospel which the
apostle preached, and they received. Also, to be unmovable in their hope
and expectation of this great privilege, of being raised incorruptible
and immortal. And to abound in the work of the Lord, always doing the
Lord's service, and obeying the Lord's commands. May Christ give us
faith, and increase our faith, that we may not only be safe, but joyful
and triumphant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 16](co1016)

</div>
