<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1011)  [Next](co1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 12:0</span></span>

([Co1 12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)) The variety of use of
spiritual gifts are shown.

([Co1 12:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)) In the human body
every member has its place and use.

([Co1 12:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)) This is applied to the
church of Christ.

([Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)) And there is something
more excellent than spiritual gifts.

[1 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 12:1</span></span>

Spiritual gifts were extraordinary powers bestowed in the first ages, to
convince unbelievers, and to spread the gospel. Gifts and graces greatly
differ. Both were freely given of God. But where grace is given, it is
for the salvation of those who have it. Gifts are for the advantage and
salvation of others; and there may be great gifts where there is no
grace. The extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit were chiefly exercised
in the public assemblies, where the Corinthians seem to have made
displays of them, wanting in the spirit of piety, and of Christian love.
While heathens, they had not been influenced by the Spirit of Christ. No
man can call Christ Lord, with believing dependence upon him, unless
that faith is wrought by the Holy Ghost. No man could believe with his
heart, or prove by a miracle, that Jesus was Christ, unless by the Holy
Ghost. There are various gifts, and various offices to perform, but all
proceed from one God, one Lord, one Spirit; that is, from the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, the origin of all spiritual blessings. No man has
them merely for himself. The more he profits others, the more will they
turn to his own account. The gifts mentioned appear to mean exact
understanding, and uttering the doctrines of the Christian religion; the
knowledge of mysteries, and skill to give advice and counsel. Also the
gift of healing the sick, the working of miracles, and to explain
Scripture by a peculiar gift of the Spirit, and ability to speak and
interpret languages. If we have any knowledge of the truth, or any power
to make it known, we must give all the glory of God. The greater the
gifts are, the more the possessor is exposed to temptations, and the
larger is the measure of grace needed to keep him humble and spiritual;
and he will meet with more painful experiences and humbling
dispensations. We have little cause to glory in any gifts bestowed on
us, or to despise those who have them not.

[1 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 12:12</span></span>

Christ and his church form one body, as Head and members. Christians
become members of this body by baptism. The outward rite is of Divine
institution; it is a sign of the new birth, and is called therefore the
washing of regeneration, [Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005). But
it is by the Spirit, only by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, that we are
made members of Christ's body. And by communion with Christ at the
Lord's supper, we are strengthened, not by drinking the wine, but by
drinking into one Spirit. Each member has its form, place, and use. The
meanest makes a part of the body. There must be a distinction of members
in the body. So Christ's members have different powers and different
places. We should do the duties of our own place, and not murmur, or
quarrel with others. All the members of the body are useful and
necessary to each other. Nor is there a member of the body of Christ,
but may and ought to be useful to fellow-members. As in the natural body
of man, the members should be closely united by the strongest bonds of
love; the good of the whole should be the object of all. All Christians
are dependent one upon another; each is to expect and receive help from
the rest. Let us then have more of the spirit of union in our religion.

[1 Corinthians 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 12:27</span></span>

Contempt, hatred, envy, and strife, are very unnatural in Christians. It
is like the members of the same body being without concern for one
another, or quarrelling with each other. The proud, contentious spirit
that prevailed, as to spiritual gifts, was thus condemned. The offices
and gifts, or favours, dispensed by the Holy Spirit, are noticed. Chief
ministers; persons enabled to interpret Scripture; those who laboured in
word and doctrine; those who had power to heal diseases; such as helped
the sick and weak; such as disposed of the money given in charity by the
church, and managed the affairs of the church; and such as could speak
divers languages. What holds the last and lowest rank in this list, is
the power to speak languages; how vain, if a man does so merely to amuse
or to exalt himself! See the distribution of these gifts, not to every
one alike, [Co1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029), [Co1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030). This were to make the church
all one, as if the body were all ear, or all eye. The Spirit distributes
to every one as he will. We must be content though we are lower and less
than others. We must not despise others, if we have greater gifts. How
blessed the Christian church, if all the members did their duty! Instead
of coveting the highest stations, or the most splendid gifts, let us
leave the appointment of his instruments to God, and those in whom he
works by his providence. Remember, those will not be approved hereafter
who seek the chief places, but those who are most faithful to the trust
placed in them, and most diligent in their Master's work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 13](co1013)

</div>
