<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1015)  [Next](co2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 16:0</span></span>

([Co1 16:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)) A collection for the
poor at Jerusalem.

([Co1 16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)) Timothy and Apollos
commended.

([Co1 16:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)) Exhortation to
watchfulness in faith and love.

([Co1 16:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)) Christian salutations.

[1 Corinthians 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 16:1</span></span>

The good examples of other Christians and churches should rouse us. It
is good to lay up in store for good uses. Those who are rich in this
world, should be rich in good works, [Ti1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017), [Ti1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018). The diligent hand will not make
rich, without the Divine blessing, [Pro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004), [Pro
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022). And what more proper to stir us
up to charity to the people and children of God, than to look at all we
have as his gift? Works of mercy are real fruits of true love to God,
and are therefore proper services on his own day. Ministers are doing
their proper business, when putting forward, or helping works of
charity. The heart of a Christian minister must be towards the people
among whom he has laboured long, and with success. All our purposes must
be made with submission to the Divine providence, [Jam
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015). Adversaries and opposition do
not break the spirits of faithful and successful ministers, but warm
their zeal, and inspire them with fresh courage. A faithful minister is
more discouraged by the hardness of his hearers' hearts, and the
backslidings of professors, than by the enemies' attempts.

[1 Corinthians 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 16:10</span></span>

Timothy came to do the work of the Lord. Therefore to vex his spirit,
would be to grieve the Holy Spirit; to despise him, would be to despise
Him that sent him. Those who work the work of the Lord, should be
treated with tenderness and respect. Faithful ministers will not be
jealous of each other. It becomes the ministers of the gospel to show
concern for each other's reputation and usefulness.

[1 Corinthians 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 16:13</span></span>

A Christian is always in danger, therefore should ever be on the watch.
He should be fixed in the faith of the gospel, and never desert or give
it up. By this faith alone he will be able to keep his ground in an hour
of temptation. Christians should be careful that charity not only reigns
in their hearts, but shines in their lives. There is a great difference
between Christian firmness and feverish warmth and transport. The
apostle gave particular directions as to some who served the cause of
Christ among them. Those who serve the saints, those who desire the
honour of the churches, and to remove reproaches from them, are to be
thought much of, and loved. They should willingly acknowledge the worth
of such, and all who laboured with or helped the apostle.

[1 Corinthians 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 16:19</span></span>

Christianity by no means destroys civility. Religion should promote a
courteous and obliging temper towards all. Those give a false idea of
religion, and reproach it, who would take encouragement from it to be
sour and morose. And Christian salutations are not mere empty
compliments; but are real expressions of good-will to others, and
commend them to the Divine grace and blessing. Every Christian family
should be as a Christian church. Wherever two or three are gathered
together in the name of Christ, and he is among them, there is a church.
Here is a solemn warning. Many who have Christ's name much in their
mouths, have no true love to him in their hearts. None love him in
truth, who do not love his laws, and keep his commandments. Many are
Christians in name, who do not love Christ Jesus the Lord in sincerity.
Such are separated from the people of God, and the favour of God. Those
who love not the Lord Jesus Christ, must perish without remedy. Let us
not rest in any religious profession where there is not the love of
Christ, earnest desires for his salvation, gratitude for his mercies,
and obedience to his commandments. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
has in it all that is good, for time and for eternity. To wish that our
friends may have this grace with them, is wishing them the utmost good.
And this we should wish all our friends and brethren in Christ. We can
wish them nothing greater, and we should wish them nothing less. True
Christianity makes us wish those whom we love, the blessings of both
worlds; this is meant in wishing the grace of Christ to be with them.
The apostle had dealt plainly with the Corinthians, and told them of
their faults with just severity; but he parts in love, and with a solemn
profession of his love to them for Christ's sake. May our love be with
all who are in Christ Jesus. Let us try whether all things appear
worthless to us, when compared with Christ and his righteousness. Do we
allow ourselves in any known sin, or in the neglect of any known duty?
By such inquiries, faithfully made, we may judge of the state of our
souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Introduction](co2000)

</div>
