<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2000)  [Next](co2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

([Co2 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)) The apostle blesses God
for comfort in, and deliverance out of troubles.

([Co2 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)) He professes his own
and his fellow-labourers' integrity.

([Co2 1:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015)) Gives reasons for his
not coming to them.

[2 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 1:1</span></span>

We are encouraged to come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. The Lord is able
to give peace to the troubled conscience, and to calm the raging
passions of the soul. These blessings are given by him, as the Father of
his redeemed family. It is our Saviour who says, Let not your heart be
troubled. All comforts come from God, and our sweetest comforts are in
him. He speaks peace to souls by granting the free remission of sins;
and he comforts them by the enlivening influences of the Holy Spirit,
and by the rich mercies of his grace. He is able to bind up the
broken-hearted, to heal the most painful wounds, and also to give hope
and joy under the heaviest sorrows. The favours God bestows on us, are
not only to make us cheerful, but also that we may be useful to others.
He sends comforts enough to support such as simply trust in and serve
him. If we should be brought so low as to despair even of life, yet we
may then trust God, who can bring back even from death. Their hope and
trust were not in vain; nor shall any be ashamed who trust in the Lord.
Past experiences encourage faith and hope, and lay us under obligation
to trust in God for time to come. And it is our duty, not only to help
one another with prayer, but in praise and thanksgiving, and thereby to
make suitable returns for benefits received. Thus both trials and
mercies will end in good to ourselves and others.

[2 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 1:12</span></span>

Though, as a sinner, the apostle could only rejoice and glory in Christ
Jesus, yet, as a believer, he might rejoice and glory in being really
what he professed. Conscience witnesses concerning the steady course and
tenor of the life. Thereby we may judge ourselves, and not by this or by
that single act. Our conversation will be well ordered, when we live and
act under such a gracious principle in the heart. Having this, we may
leave our characters in the Lord's hands, but using proper means to
clear them, when the credit of the gospel, or our usefulness, calls for
it.

[2 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 1:15</span></span>

The apostle clears himself from the charge of levity and inconstancy, in
not coming to Corinth. Good men should be careful to keep the reputation
of sincerity and constancy; they should not resolve, but on careful
thought; and they will not change unless for weighty reasons. Nothing
can render God's promises more certain: his giving them through Christ,
assures us they are his promises; as the wonders God wrought in the
life, resurrection, and ascension of his Son, confirm faith. The Holy
Spirit makes Christians firm in the faith of the gospel: the quickening
of the Spirit is an earnest of everlasting life; and the comforts of the
Spirit are an earnest of everlasting joy. The apostle desired to spare
the blame he feared would be unavoidable, if he had gone to Corinth
before he learned what effect his former letter produced. Our strength
and ability are owing to faith; and our comfort and joy must flow from
faith. The holy tempers and gracious fruits which attend faith, secure
from delusion in so important a matter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 2](co2002)

</div>
