<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2011)  [Next](co2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 12:0</span></span>

([Co2 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)) The apostle's
revelations.

([Co2 12:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)) Which were improved to
his spiritual advantage.

([Co2 12:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)) The signs of an
apostle were in him, His purpose of making them a visit; but he
expresses his fear lest he should have to be severe with some.

[2 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 12:1</span></span>

There can be no doubt the apostle speaks of himself. Whether heavenly
things were brought down to him, while his body was in a trance, as in
the case of ancient prophets; or whether his soul was dislodged from the
body for a time, and taken up into heaven, or whether he was taken up,
body and soul together, he knew not. We are not capable, nor is it fit
we should yet know, the particulars of that glorious place and state. He
did not attempt to publish to the world what he had heard there, but he
set forth the doctrine of Christ. On that foundation the church is
built, and on that we must build our faith and hope. And while this
teaches us to enlarge our expectations of the glory that shall be
revealed, it should render us contented with the usual methods of
learning the truth and will of God.

[2 Corinthians 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 12:7</span></span>

The apostle gives an account of the method God took to keep him humble,
and to prevent his being lifted up above measure, on account of the
visions and revelations he had. We are not told what this thorn in the
flesh was, whether some great trouble, or some great temptation. But God
often brings this good out of evil, that the reproaches of our enemies
help to hide pride from us. If God loves us, he will keep us from being
exalted above measure; and spiritual burdens are ordered to cure
spiritual pride. This thorn in the flesh is said to be a messenger of
Satan which he sent for evil; but God designed it, and overruled it for
good. Prayer is a salve for every sore, a remedy for every malady; and
when we are afflicted with thorns in the flesh, we should give ourselves
to prayer. If an answer be not given to the first prayer, nor to the
second, we are to continue praying. Troubles are sent to teach us to
pray; and are continued, to teach us to continue instant in prayer.
Though God accepts the prayer of faith, yet he does not always give what
is asked for: as he sometimes grants in wrath, so he sometimes denies in
love. When God does not take away our troubles and temptations, yet, if
he gives grace enough for us, we have no reason to complain. Grace
signifies the good-will of God towards us, and that is enough to
enlighten and enliven us, sufficient to strengthen and comfort in all
afflictions and distresses. His strength is made perfect in our
weakness. Thus his grace is manifested and magnified. When we are weak
in ourselves, then we are strong in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ;
when we feel that we are weak in ourselves, then we go to Christ,
receive strength from him, and enjoy most the supplies of Divine
strength and grace.

[2 Corinthians 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 12:11</span></span>

We owe it to good men, to stand up in the defence of their reputation;
and we are under special obligations to those from whom we have received
benefit, especially spiritual benefit, to own them as instruments in
God's hand of good to us. Here is an account of the apostle's behaviour
and kind intentions; in which see the character of a faithful minister
of the gospel. This was his great aim and design, to do good. Here are
noticed several sins commonly found among professors of religion. Falls
and misdeeds are humbling to a minister; and God sometimes takes this
way to humble those who might be tempted to be lifted up. These vast
verses show to what excesses the false teachers had drawn aside their
deluded followers. How grievous it is that such evils should be found
among professors of the gospel! Yet thus it is, and has been too often,
and it was so even in the days of the apostles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 13](co2013)

</div>
