<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2005)  [Next](co2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 6:0</span></span>

([Co2 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)) The apostle, with
others, proved themselves faithful ministers of Christ, by their
unblamable life and behaviour.

([Co2 6:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)) By affection for them,
And by earnest concern, that they might have no fellowship with
unbelievers and idolaters.

[2 Corinthians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 6:1</span></span>

The gospel is a word of grace sounding in our ears. The gospel day is a
day of salvation, the means of grace the means of salvation, the offers
of the gospel the offers of salvation, and the present time the proper
time to accept these offers. The morrow is none of ours: we know not
what will be on the morrow, nor where we shall be. We now enjoy a day of
grace; then let all be careful not to neglect it. Ministers of the
gospel should look upon themselves as God's servants, and act in every
thing suitably to that character. The apostle did so, by much patience
in afflictions, by acting from good principles, and by due temper and
behaviour. Believers, in this world, need the grace of God, to arm them
against temptations, so as to bear the good report of men without pride;
and so as to bear their reproaches with patience. They have nothing in
themselves, but possess all things in Christ. Of such differences is a
Christian's life made up, and through such a variety of conditions and
reports, is our way to heaven; and we should be careful in all things to
approve ourselves to God. The gospel, when faithfully preached, and
fully received, betters the condition even of the poorest. They save
what before they riotously spent, and diligently employ their time to
useful purposes. They save and gain by religion, and thus are made rich,
both for the world to come and for this, when compared with their
sinful, profligate state, before they received the gospel.

[2 Corinthians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 6:11</span></span>

It is wrong for believers to join with the wicked and profane. The word
unbeliever applies to all destitute of true faith. True pastors will
caution their beloved children in the gospel, not to be unequally yoked.
The fatal effects of neglecting Scripture precepts as to marriages
clearly appear. Instead of a help meet, the union brings a snare. Those
whose cross it is to be unequally united, without their wilful fault,
may expect consolation under it; but when believers enter into such
unions, against the express warnings of God's word, they must expect
must distress. The caution also extends to common conversation. We
should not join in friendship and acquaintance with wicked men and
unbelievers. Though we cannot wholly avoid seeing and hearing, and being
with such, yet we should never choose them for friends. We must not
defile ourselves by converse with those who defile themselves with sin.
Come out from the workers of iniquity, and separate from their vain and
sinful pleasures and pursuits; from all conformity to the corruptions of
this present evil world. If it be an envied privilege to be the son or
daughter of an earthly prince, who can express the dignity and happiness
of being sons and daughters of the Almighty?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 7](co2007)

</div>
