<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col002)  [Next](col004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 3:0</span></span>

([Col 3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)) The Colossians exhorted
to be heavenly-minded.

([Col 3:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)) To mortify all corrupt
affections.

([Col 3:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)) To live in mutual love,
forbearance, and forgiveness.

([Col 3:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)) And to practise the
duties of wives and husbands, children, parents, and servants.

[Colossians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 3:1</span></span>

As Christians are freed from the ceremonial law, they must walk the more
closely with God in gospel obedience. As heaven and earth are contrary
one to the other, both cannot be followed together; and affection to the
one will weaken and abate affection to the other. Those that are born
again are dead to sin, because its dominion is broken, its power
gradually subdued by the operation of grace, and it shall at length be
extinguished by the perfection of glory. To be dead, then, means this,
that those who have the Holy Spirit, mortifying within them the lusts of
the flesh, are able to despise earthly things, and to desire those that
are heavenly. Christ is, at present, one whom we have not seen; but our
comfort is, that our life is safe with him. The streams of this living
water flow into the soul by the influences of the Holy Spirit, through
faith. Christ lives in the believer by his Spirit, and the believer
lives to him in all he does. At the second coming of Christ, there will
be a general assembling of all the redeemed; and those whose life is now
hid with Christ, shall then appear with him in his glory. Do we look for
such happiness, and should we not set our affections upon that world,
and live above this?

[Colossians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 3:5</span></span>

It is our duty to mortify our members which incline to the things of the
world. Mortify them, kill them, suppress them, as weeds or vermin which
spread and destroy all about them. Continual opposition must be made to
all corrupt workings, and no provision made for carnal indulgences.
Occasions of sin must be avoided: the lusts of the flesh, and the love
of the world; and covetousness, which is idolatry; love of present good,
and of outward enjoyments. It is necessary to mortify sins, because if
we do not kill them, they will kill us. The gospel changes the higher as
well as the lower powers of the soul, and supports the rule of right
reason and conscience, over appetite and passion. There is now no
difference from country, or conditions and circumstances of life. It is
the duty of every one to be holy, because Christ is a Christian's All,
his only Lord and Saviour, and all his hope and happiness.

[Colossians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 3:12</span></span>

We must not only do no hurt to any, but do what good we can to all.
Those who are the elect of God, holy and beloved, ought to be lowly and
compassionate towards all. While in this world, where there is so much
corruption in our hearts, quarrels will sometimes arise. But it is our
duty to forgive one another, imitating the forgiveness through which we
are saved. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts; it is of his
working in all who are his. Thanksgiving to God, helps to make us
agreeable to all men. The gospel is the word of Christ. Many have the
word, but it dwells in them poorly; it has no power over them. The soul
prospers, when we are full of the Scriptures and of the grace of Christ.
But when we sing psalms, we must be affected with what we sing. Whatever
we are employed about, let us do every thing in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and in believing dependence on him. Those who do all in Christ's
name, will never want matter of thanksgiving to God, even the Father.

[Colossians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 3:18</span></span>

The epistles most taken up in displaying the glory of the Divine grace,
and magnifying the Lord Jesus, are the most particular in pressing the
duties of the Christian life. We must never separate the privileges and
duties of the gospel. Submission is the duty of wives. But it is
submission, not to a severe lord or stern tyrant, but to her own
husband, who is engaged to affectionate duty. And husbands must love
their wives with tender and faithful affection. Dutiful children are the
most likely to prosper. And parents must be tender, as well as children
obedient. Servants are to do their duty, and obey their masters'
commands, in all things consistent with duty to God their heavenly
Master. They must be both just and diligent; without selfish designs, or
hypocrisy and disguise. Those who fear God, will be just and faithful
when from under their master's eye, because they know they are under the
eye of God. And do all with diligence, not idly and slothfully;
cheerfully, not discontented at the providence of God which put them in
that relation. And for servants' encouragement, let them know, that in
serving their masters according to the command of Christ, they serve
Christ, and he will give them a glorious reward at last. But, on the
other hand, he who doeth wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he
hath done. God will punish the unjust, as well as reward the faithful
servant; and the same if masters wrong their servants. For the righteous
Judge of the earth will deal justly between master and servant. Both
will stand upon a level at his tribunal. How happy would true religion
make the world, if it every where prevailed, influenced every state of
things, and every relation of life! But the profession of those persons
who are regardless of duties, and give just cause for complaint to those
they are connected with, deceives themselves, as well as brings reproach
on the gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 4](col004)

</div>
