<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan005)  [Next](dan007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 6:0</span></span>

([Dan 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)) The malice of Daniel's
enemies.

([Dan 6:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)) His constancy in prayer.

([Dan 6:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)) He is cast into the
lion's den.

([Dan 6:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)) His miraculous
preservation.

([Dan 6:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)) The decree of Darius.

[Daniel 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 6:1</span></span>

We notice to the glory of God, that though Daniel was now very old, yet
he was able for business, and had continued faithful to his religion. It
is for the glory of God, when those who profess religion, conduct
themselves so that their most watchful enemies may find no occasion for
blaming them, save only in the matters of their God, in which they walk
according to their consciences.

[Daniel 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 6:6</span></span>

To forbid prayer for thirty days, is, for so long, to rob God of all the
tribute he has from man, and to rob man of all the comfort he has in
God. Does not every man's heart direct him, when in want or distress, to
call upon God? We could not live a day without God; and can men live
thirty days without prayer? Yet it is to be feared that those who,
without any decree forbidding them, present no hearty, serious petitions
to God for more than thirty days together, are far more numerous than
those who serve him continually, with humble, thankful hearts.
Persecuting laws are always made on false pretences; but it does not
become Christians to make bitter complaints, or to indulge in revilings.
It is good to have hours for prayer. Daniel prayed openly and avowedly;
and though a man of vast business, he did not think that would excuse
him from daily exercises of devotion. How inexcusable are those who have
but little to do in the world, yet will not do thus much for their
souls! In trying times we must take heed, lest, under pretence of
discretion, we are guilty of cowardice in the cause of God. All who
throw away their souls, as those certainly do that live without prayer,
even if it be to save their lives, at the end will be found to be fools.
Nor did Daniel only pray, and not give thanks, cutting off some part of
the service to make the time of danger shorter; but he performed the
whole. In a word, the duty of prayer is founded upon the sufficiency of
God as an almighty Creator and Redeemer, and upon our wants as sinful
creatures. To Christ we must turn our eyes. Thither let the Christian
look, thither let him pray, in this land of his captivity.

[Daniel 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 6:11</span></span>

It is no new thing for what is done faithfully, in conscience toward
God, to be misrepresented as done obstinately, and in contempt of the
civil powers. Through want of due thought, we often do that which
afterwards, like Darius, we see cause a thousand times to wish undone
again. Daniel, that venerable man, is brought as the vilest of
malefactors, and is thrown into the den of lions, to be devoured, only
for worshipping his God. No doubt the placing the stone was ordered by
the providence of God, that the miracle of Daniel's deliverance might
appear more plain; and the king sealed it with his own signet, probably
lest Daniel's enemies should kill him. Let us commit our lives and souls
unto God, in well-doing. We cannot place full confidence even in men
whom we faithfully serve; but believers may, in all cases, be sure of
the Divine favour and consolation.

[Daniel 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 6:18</span></span>

The best way to have a good night, is to keep a good conscience. We are
sure of what the king doubted, that the servants of the living God have
a Master well able to protect them. See the power of God over the
fiercest creatures, and believe his power to restrain the roaring lion
that goeth about continually seeking to devour. Daniel was kept
perfectly safe, because he believed in his God. Those who boldly and
cheerfully trust in God to protect them in the way of duty, shall always
find him a present help. Thus the righteous is delivered out of trouble,
and the wicked cometh in his stead. The short triumph of the wicked will
end in their ruin.

[Daniel 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 6:25</span></span>

If we live in the fear of God, and walk according to that rule, peace
shall be upon us. The kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever, are
the Lord's; but many are employed in making known his wonderful works to
others, who themselves remain strangers to his saving grace. May we be
doers, as well as believers of his word, least at the last we should be
found to have deceived ourselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 7](dan007)

</div>
