<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu011)  [Next](deu013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 12:0</span></span>

([Deu 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)) Monuments of idolatry to
be destroyed.

(v. 5-32) The place of God's service to be kept.

[Deuteronomy 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 12:1</span></span>

Moses comes to the statutes he had to give in charge to Israel; and
begins with such as relate to the worship of God. The Israelites are
charged not to bring the rites and usages of idolaters into the worship
of God; not under colour of making it better. We cannot serve God and
mammon; nor worship the true God and idols; nor depend upon Christ Jesus
and upon superstitious or self-righteous confidences.

[Deuteronomy 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 12:5</span></span>

The command to bring ALL the sacrifices to the door of the tabernacle,
was now explained with reference to the promised land. As to moral
service, then, as now, men might pray and worship every where, as they
did in their synagogues. The place which God would choose, is said to be
the place where he would put his name. It was to be his habitation,
where, as King of Israel, he would be found by all who reverently sought
him. Now, under the gospel, we have no temple or altar that sanctifies
the gift but Christ only: and as to the places of worship, the prophets
foretold that in every place the spiritual incense should be offered,
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). Our Saviour declared, that
those are accepted as true worshippers, who worship God in sincerity and
truth, without regard either to this mountain or Jerusalem, [Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021). And a devout Israelite might
honour God, keep up communion with him, and obtain mercy from him,
though he had no opportunity of bringing a sacrifice to his altar. Work
for God should be done with holy joy and cheerfulness. Even children and
servants must rejoice before God; the services of religion are to be a
pleasure, and not a task or drudgery. It is the duty of people to be
kind to their ministers, who teach them well, and set them good
examples. As long as we live, we need their assistance, till we come to
that world where ordinances will not be needed. Whether we eat or drink,
or whatever we do, we are commanded to do all to the glory of God. And
we must do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to
the Father through him. They must not even inquire into the modes and
forms of idolatrous worship. What good would it do them to know those
depths of Satan? And our inward satisfaction will be more and more, as
we abound in love and good works, which spring from faith and the
in-dwelling Spirit of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 13](deu013)

</div>
