<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu003)  [Next](deu005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 4:0</span></span>

(v. 1-23) Earnest exhortations to obedience, and dissuasions from
idolatry.

(v. 24-40) Warnings against disobedience, and promises of mercy.

([Deu 4:41-49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041)) Cities of refuge
appointed.

[Deuteronomy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 4:1</span></span>

The power and love of God to Israel are here made the ground and reason
of a number of cautions and serious warnings; and although there is much
reference to their national covenant, yet all may be applied to those
who live under the gospel. What are laws made for but to be observed and
obeyed? Our obedience as individuals cannot merit salvation; but it is
the only evidence that we are partakers of the gift of God, which is
eternal life through Jesus Christ, Considering how many temptations we
are compassed with, and what corrupt desires we have in our bosoms, we
have great need to keep our hearts with all diligence. Those cannot walk
aright, who walk carelessly. Moses charges particularly to take heed of
the sin of idolatry. He shows how weak the temptation would be to those
who thought aright; for these pretended gods, the sun, moon, and stars,
were only blessings which the Lord their God had imparted to all
nations. It is absurd to worship them; shall we serve those that were
made to serve us? Take heed lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your
God. We must take heed lest at any time we forget our religion. Care,
caution, and watchfulness, are helps against a bad memory.

[Deuteronomy 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 4:24</span></span>

Moses urged the greatness, glory, and goodness of God. Did we consider
what a God he is with whom we have to do, we should surely make
conscience of our duty to him, and not dare to sin against him. Shall we
forsake a merciful God, who will never forsake us, if we are faithful
unto him? Whither can we go? Let us be held to our duty by the bonds of
love, and prevailed with by the mercies of God to cleave to him. Moses
urged God's authority over them, and their obligations to him. In
keeping God's commandments they would act wisely for themselves. The
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom. Those who enjoy the benefit of Divine
light and laws, ought to support their character for wisdom and honour,
that God may be glorified thereby. Those who call upon God, shall
certainly find him within call, ready to give an answer of peace to
every prayer of faith. All these statutes and judgments of the Divine
law are just and righteous, above the statutes and judgments of any of
the nations. What they saw at mount Sinai, gave an earnest of the day of
judgment, in which the Lord Jesus shall be revealed in flaming fire.
They must also remember what they heard at mount Sinai. God manifests
himself in the works of the creation, without speech or language, yet
their voice is heard, [Psa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001), [Psa
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003); but to Israel he made himself
known by speech and language, condescending to their weakness. The rise
of this nation was quite different from the origin of all other nations.
See the reasons of free grace; we are not beloved for our own sakes, but
for Christ's sake. Moses urged the certain benefit and advantage of
obedience. This argument he had begun with, [Deu
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001), That ye may live, and go in and
possess the land; and this he concludes with, [Deu
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#040), That it may go well with thee,
and with thy children after thee. He reminds them that their prosperity
would depend upon their piety. Apostasy from God would undoubtedly be
the ruin of their nation. He foresees their revolt from God to idols.
Those, and those only, shall find God to their comfort, who seek him
with all their heart. Afflictions engage and quicken us to seek God;
and, by the grace of God working with them, many are thus brought back
to their right mind. When these things are come upon thee, turn to the
Lord thy God, for thou seest what comes of turning from him. Let all the
arguments be laid together, and then say, if religion has not reason on
its side. None cast off the government of their God, but those who first
abandon the understanding of a man.

[Deuteronomy 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 4:41</span></span>

Here is the introduction to another discourse, or sermon, Moses preached
to Israel, which we have in the following chapters. He sets the law
before them, as the rule they were to work by, the way they were to walk
in. He sets it before them, as the glass in which they were to see their
natural face, that, looking into this perfect law of liberty, they might
continue therein. These are the laws, given when Israel was newly come
out of Egypt; and they were now repeated. Moses gave these laws in
charge, while they encamped over against Beth-peor, an idol place of the
Moabites. Their present triumphs were a powerful argument for obedience.
And we should understand our own situation as sinners, and the nature of
that gracious covenant to which we are invited. Therein greater things
are shown to us than ever Israel saw from mount Sinai; greater mercies
are given to us than they experienced in the wilderness, or in Canaan.
One speaks to us, who is of infinitely greater dignity than Moses; who
bare our sins upon the cross; and pleads with us by His dying love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 5](deu005)

</div>
