<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc003)  [Next](ecc005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 4:0</span></span>

([Ecc 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)) Miseries from oppression.

([Ecc 4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)) Troubles from envy.

([Ecc 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#007), [Ecc
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#008)) The folly of covetousness.

([Ecc 4:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009)) The advantages of mutual
assistance.

([Ecc 4:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013)) The changes of royalty.

[Ecclesiastes 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 4:1</span></span>

It grieved Solomon to see might prevail against right. Wherever we turn,
we see melancholy proofs of the wickedness and misery of mankind, who
try to create trouble to themselves and to each other. Being thus hardly
used, men are tempted to hate and despise life. But a good man, though
badly off while in this world, cannot have cause to wish he had never
been born, since he is glorifying the Lord, even in the fires, and will
be happy at last, for ever happy. Ungodly men have most cause to wish
the continuance of life with all its vexations, as a far more miserable
condition awaits them if they die in their sins. If human and worldly
things were our chief good, not to exist would be preferable to life,
considering the various oppressions here below.

[Ecclesiastes 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 4:4</span></span>

Solomon notices the sources of trouble peculiar to well-doers, and
includes all who labour with diligence, and whose efforts are crowned
with success. They often become great and prosperous, but this excites
envy and opposition. Others, seeing the vexations of an active course,
foolishly expect more satisfaction in sloth and idleness. But idleness
is a sin that is its own punishment. Let us by honest industry lay hold
on the handful, that we may not want necessaries, but not grasp at both
hands full, which would only create vexation of spirit. Moderate pains
and gains do best.

[Ecclesiastes 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 4:7</span></span>

Frequently, the more men have, the more they would have; and on this
they are so intent, that they get no enjoyment from what they have.
Selfishness is the cause of this evil. A selfish man cares for nobody;
there is none to take care of but himself, yet he will scarcely allow
necessary rest to himself, and the people he employs. He never thinks he
has enough. He has enough for his calling, for his family, but he has
not enough for his eyes. Many are so set upon the world, that in pursuit
of it they bereave themselves, not only of the favour of God and eternal
life, but of the pleasures of this life. The distant relations or
strangers who inherit such a man's wealth, never thank him. Covetousness
gathers strength by time and habit; men tottering on the brink of the
grave, grow more grasping and griping. Alas, and how often do we see men
professing to be followers of Him, who, "though he was rich, for our
sakes became poor," anxiously scraping money together and holding it
fast, excusing themselves by common-place talking about the necessity of
care, and the danger of extravagance!

[Ecclesiastes 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 4:9</span></span>

Surely he has more satisfaction in life, who labours hard to maintain
those he loves, than the miser has in his toil. In all things union
tends to success and safety, but above all, the union of Christians.
They assist each other by encouragement, or friendly reproof. They warm
each other's hearts while they converse together of the love of Christ,
or join in singing his praises. Then let us improve our opportunities of
Christian fellowship. In these things all is not vanity, though there
will be some alloy as long as we are under the sun. Where two are
closely joined in holy love and fellowship, Christ will by his Spirit
come to them; then there is a threefold cord.

[Ecclesiastes 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 4:13</span></span>

People are never long easy and satisfied; they are fond of changes. This
is no new thing. Princes see themselves slighted by those they have
studied to oblige; this is vanity and vexation of spirit. But the
willing servants of the Lord Jesus, our King, rejoice in him alone, and
they will love Him more and more to all eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 5](ecc005)

</div>
