<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc010)  [Next](ecc012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 11:0</span></span>

([Ecc 11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001)) Exhortation to
liberality.

([Ecc 11:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#007)) An admonition to
prepare for death, and to young persons to be religious.

[Ecclesiastes 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 11:1</span></span>

Solomon presses the rich to do good to others. Give freely, though it
may seem thrown away and lost. Give to many. Excuse not thyself with the
good thou hast done, from the good thou hast further to do. It is not
lost, but well laid out. We have reason to expect evil, for we are born
to trouble; it is wisdom to do good in the day of prosperity. Riches
cannot profit us, if we do not benefit others. Every man must labour to
be a blessing to that place where the providence of God casts him.
Wherever we are, we may find good work to do, if we have but hearts to
do it. If we magnify every little difficulty, start objections, and
fancy hardships, we shall never go on, much less go through with our
work. Winds and clouds of tribulation are, in God's hands, designed to
try us. God's work shall agree with his word, whether we see it or not.
And we may well trust God to provide for us, without our anxious,
disquieting cares. Be not weary in well-doing, for in due season, in
God's time, you shall reap, [Gal 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009).

[Ecclesiastes 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 11:7</span></span>

Life is sweet to bad men, because they have their portion in this life;
it is sweet to good men, because it is the time of preparation for a
better; it is sweet to all. Here is a caution to think of death, even
when life is most sweet. Solomon makes an effecting address to young
persons. They would desire opportunity to pursue every pleasure. Then
follow your desires, but be assured that God will call you into
judgment. How many give loose to every appetite, and rush into every
vicious pleasure! But God registers every one of their sinful thoughts
and desires, their idle words and wicked words. If they would avoid
remorse and terror, if they would have hope and comfort on a dying bed,
if they would escape misery here and hereafter, let them remember the
vanity of youthful pleasures. That Solomon means to condemn the
pleasures of sin is evident. His object is to draw the young to purer
and more lasting joys. This is not the language of one grudging youthful
pleasures, because he can no longer partake of them; but of one who has,
by a miracle of mercy, been brought back in safety. He would persuade
the young from trying a course whence so few return. If the young would
live a life of true happiness, if they would secure happiness hereafter,
let them remember their Creator in the days of their youth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 12](ecc012)

</div>
