<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc011)  [Next](sol000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 12:0</span></span>

([Ecc 12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001)) A description of the
infirmities of age.

([Ecc 12:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#008)) All is vanity: also a
warning of the judgment to come.

[Ecclesiastes 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 12:1</span></span>

We should remember our sins against our Creator, repent, and seek
forgiveness. We should remember our duties, and set about them, looking
to him for grace and strength. This should be done early, while the body
is strong, and the spirits active. When a man has the pain of reviewing
a misspent life, his not having given up sin and worldly vanities till
he is forced to say, I have no pleasure in them, renders his sincerity
very questionable. Then follows a figurative description of old age and
its infirmities, which has some difficulties; but the meaning is plain,
to show how uncomfortable, generally, the days of old age are. As the
four verses, [Ecc 12:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#002), are a
figurative description of the infirmities that usually accompany old
age, [Ecc 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006) notices the
circumstances which take place in the hour of death. If sin had not
entered into the world, these infirmities would not have been known.
Surely then the aged should reflect on the evil of sin.

[Ecclesiastes 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 12:8</span></span>

Solomon repeats his text, VANITY OF VANITIES, ALL IS VANITY. These are
the words of one that could speak by dear-bought experience of the
vanity of the world, which can do nothing to ease men of the burden of
sin. As he considered the worth of souls, he gave good heed to what he
spake and wrote; words of truth will always be acceptable words. The
truths of God are as goads to such as are dull and draw back, and nails
to such as are wandering and draw aside; means to establish the heart,
that we may never sit loose to our duty, nor be taken from it. The
Shepherd of Israel is the Giver of inspired wisdom. Teachers and guides
all receive their communications from him. The title is applied in
Scripture to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. The prophets sought
diligently, what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ in them
did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and
the glory that should follow. To write many books was not suited to the
shortness of human life, and would be weariness to the writer, and to
the reader; and then was much more so to both than it is now. All things
would be vanity and vexation, except they led to this conclusion, That
to fear God, and keep his commandments, is the whole of man. The fear of
God includes in it all the affections of the soul towards him, which are
produced by the Holy Spirit. There may be terror where there is no love,
nay, where there is hatred. But this is different from the gracious fear
of God, as the feelings of an affectionate child. The fear of God, is
often put for the whole of true religion in the heart, and includes its
practical results in the life. Let us attend to the one thing needful,
and now come to him as a merciful Saviour, who will soon come as an
almighty Judge, when he will bring to light the things of darkness, and
manifest the counsels of all hearts. Why does God record in his word,
that ALL IS VANITY, but to keep us from deceiving ourselves to our ruin?
He makes our duty to be our interest. May it be graven in all our
hearts. Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is all that
concerns man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](sol000)

</div>
