<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph002)  [Next](eph004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 3:0</span></span>

([Eph 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001)) The apostle sets forth
his office, and his qualifications for it, and his call to it.

([Eph 3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)) Also the noble purposes
answered by it.

([Eph 3:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#013)) He prays for the
Ephesians.

([Eph 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020), [Eph
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#021)) And adds a thanksgiving.

[Ephesians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 3:1</span></span>

For having preached the doctrine of truth, the apostle was a prisoner,
but a prisoner of Jesus Christ; the object of special protection and
care, while thus suffering for him. All the gracious offers of the
gospel, and the joyful tidings it contains, come from the rich grace of
God; it is the great means by which the Spirit works grace in the souls
of men. The mystery, is that secret, hidden purpose of salvation through
Christ. This was not so fully and clearly shown in the ages before
Christ, as unto the prophets of the New Testament. This was the great
truth made known to the apostle, that God would call the Gentiles to
salvation by faith in Christ. An effectual working of Divine power
attends the gifts of Divine grace. As God appointed Paul to the office,
so he qualified him for it.

[Ephesians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 3:8</span></span>

Those whom God advances to honourable employments, he makes low in their
own eyes; and where God gives grace to be humble, there he gives all
other needful grace. How highly he speaks of Jesus Christ; the
unsearchable riches of Christ! Though many are not enriched with these
riches; yet how great a favour to have them preached among us, and to
have an offer of them! And if we are not enriched with them it is our
own fault. The first creation, when God made all things out of nothing,
and the new creation, whereby sinners are made new creatures by
converting grace, are of God by Jesus Christ. His riches are as
unsearchable and as sure as ever, yet while angels adore the wisdom of
God in the redemption of his church, the ignorance of self-wise and
carnal men deems the whole to be foolishness.

[Ephesians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 3:13</span></span>

The apostle seems to be more anxious lest the believers should be
discouraged and faint upon his tribulations, than for what he himself
had to bear. He asks for spiritual blessings, which are the best
blessings. Strength from the Spirit of God in the inner man; strength in
the soul; the strength of faith, to serve God, and to do our duty. If
the law of Christ is written in our hearts, and the love of Christ is
shed abroad there, then Christ dwells there. Where his Spirit dwells,
there he dwells. We should desire that good affections may be fixed in
us. And how desirable to have a fixed sense of the love of God in Christ
to our souls! How powerfully the apostle speaks of the love of Christ!
The breadth shows its extent to all nations and ranks; the length, that
it continues from everlasting to everlasting; the depth, its saving
those who are sunk into the depths of sin and misery; the height, its
raising them up to heavenly happiness and glory. Those who receive grace
for grace from Christ's fulness, may be said to be filled with the
fulness of God. Should not this satisfy man? Must he needs fill himself
with a thousand trifles, fancying thereby to complete his happiness?

[Ephesians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 3:20</span></span>

It is proper always to end prayers with praises. Let us expect more, and
ask for more, encouraged by what Christ has already done for our souls,
being assured that the conversion of sinners, and the comfort of
believers, will be to his glory, for ever and ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 4](eph004)

</div>
