<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est003)  [Next](est005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 4:0</span></span>

([Est 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)) The Jews lament their
danger.

([Est 4:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)) Esther undertakes to
plead for the Jews.

[Esther 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 4:1</span></span>

Mordecai avowed his relation to the Jews. Public calamities, that
oppress the church of God, should affect our hearts more than any
private affliction, and it is peculiarly distressing to occasion
sufferings to others. God will keep those that are exposed to evil by
the tenderness of their consciences.

[Esther 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 4:5</span></span>

We are prone to shrink from services that are attended with peril or
loss. But when the cause of Christ and his people demand it, we must
take up our cross, and follow him. When Christians are disposed to
consult their own ease or safety, rather than the public good, they
should be blamed. The law was express, all knew it. It is not thus in
the court of the King of kings: to the footstool of his throne of grace
we may always come boldly, and may be sure of an answer of peace to the
prayer of faith. We are welcome, even into the holiest, through the
blood of Jesus. Providence so ordered it, that, just then, the king's
affections had cooled toward Esther; her faith and courage thereby were
the more tried; and God's goodness in the favour she now found with the
king, thereby shone the brighter. Haman no doubt did what he could to
set the king against her. Mordecai suggests, that it was a cause which,
one way or other, would certainly be carried, and which therefore she
might safely venture in. This was the language of strong faith, which
staggered not at the promise when the danger was most threatening, but
against hope believed in hope. He that by sinful devices will save his
life, and will not trust God with it in the way of duty, shall lose it
in the way of sin. Divine Providence had regard to this matter, in
bringing Esther to be queen. Therefore thou art bound in gratitude to do
this service for God and his church, else thou dost not answer the end
of thy being raised up. There is wise counsel and design in all the
providences of God, which will prove that they are all intended for the
good of the church. We should, every one, consider for what end God has
put us in the place where we are, and study to answer that end: and take
care that we do not let it slip. Having solemnly commended our souls and
our cause to God, we may venture upon his service. All dangers are
trifling compared with the danger of losing our souls. But the trembling
sinner is often as much afraid of casting himself, without reserve, upon
the Lord's free mercy, as Esther was of coming before the king. Let him
venture, as she did, with earnest prayer and supplication, and he shall
fare as well and better than she did. The cause of God must prevail: we
are safe in being united to it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 5](est005)

</div>
