<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 32:0</span></span>

([Exo 32:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)) The people cause Aaron
to make a golden calf.

([Exo 32:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)) God's displeasure, The
intercession of Moses.

([Exo 32:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015)) Moses breaks the
tables of the law, He destroys the golden calf.

([Exo 32:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021)) Aaron's excuse, The
idolaters slain.

([Exo 32:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)) Moses prays for the
people.

[Exodus 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 32:1</span></span>

While Moses was in the mount, receiving the law from God, the people
made a tumultuous address to Aaron. This giddy multitude were weary of
waiting for the return of Moses. Weariness in waiting betrays to many
temptations. The Lord must be waited for till he comes, and waited for
though he tarry. Let their readiness to part with their ear-rings to
make an idol, shame our niggardliness in the service of the true God.
They did not draw back on account of the cost of their idolatry; and
shall we grudge the expenses of religion? Aaron produced the shape of an
ox or calf, giving it some finish with a graving tool. They offered
sacrifice to this idol. Having set up an image before them, and so
changed the truth of God into a lie, their sacrifices were abomination.
Had they not, only a few days before, in this very place, heard the
voice of the Lord God speaking to them out of the midst of the fire,
Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image? Had they not themselves
solemnly entered into covenant with God, that they would do all he had
said to them, and would be obedient? [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007). Yet before they stirred from the
place where this covenant had been solemnly made, they brake an express
command, in defiance of an express threatening. It plainly shows, that
the law was no more able to make holy, than it was to justify; by it is
the knowledge of sin, but not the cure of sin. Aaron was set apart by
the Divine appointment to the office of the priesthood; but he, who had
once shamed himself so far as to build an altar to a golden calf, must
own himself unworthy of the honour of attending at the altar of God, and
indebted to free grace alone for it. Thus pride and boasting were
silenced.

[Exodus 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 32:7</span></span>

God says to Moses, that the Israelites had corrupted themselves. Sin is
the corruption of the sinner, and it is a self-corruption; every man is
tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust. They had turned aside
out of the way. Sin is a departing from the way of duty into a by-path.
They soon forgot God's works. He sees what they cannot discover, nor is
any wickedness of the world hid from him. We could not bear to see the
thousandth part of that evil which God sees every day. God expresses the
greatness of his just displeasure, after the manner of men who would
have prayer of Moses could save them from ruin; thus he was a type of
Christ, by whose mediation alone, God would reconcile the world to
himself. Moses pleads God's glory. The glorifying God's name, as it
ought to be our first petition, and it is so in the Lord's prayer, so it
ought to be our great plea. And God's promises are to be our pleas in
prayer; for what he has promised he is able to perform. See the power of
prayer. In answer to the prayers of Moses, God showed his purpose of
sparing the people, as he had before seemed determined on their
destruction; which change of the outward discovery of his purpose, is
called repenting of the evil.

[Exodus 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 32:15</span></span>

What a change it is, to come down from the mount of communion with God,
to converse with a wicked world. In God we see nothing but what is pure
and pleasing; in the world nothing but what is sinful and provoking.
That it might appear an idol is nothing in the world, Moses ground the
calf to dust. Mixing this powder with their drink, signified that the
backslider in heart should be filled with his own ways.

[Exodus 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 32:21</span></span>

Never did any wise man make a more frivolous and foolish excuse than
that of Aaron. We must never be drawn into sin by any thing man can say
or do to us; for men can but tempt us to sin, they cannot force us. The
approach of Moses turned the dancing into trembling. They were exposed
to shame by their sin. The course Moses took to roll away this reproach,
was, not by concealing the sin, or putting any false colour upon it, but
by punishing it. The Levites were to slay the ringleaders in this
wickedness; yet none were executed but those who openly stood forth.
Those are marked for ruin who persist in sin: those who in the morning
were shouting and dancing, before night were dying. Such sudden changes
do the judgments of the Lord sometimes make with sinners that are secure
and jovial in their sin.

[Exodus 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 32:30</span></span>

Moses calls it a great sin. The work of ministers is to show people the
greatness of their sins. The great evil of sin appears in the price of
pardon. Moses pleads with God for mercy; he came not to make excuses,
but to make atonement. We are not to suppose that Moses means that he
would be willing to perish for ever, for the people's sake. We are to
love our neighbour as ourselves, and not more than ourselves. But having
that mind which was in Christ, he was willing to lay down his life in
the most painful manner, if he might thereby preserve the people. Moses
could not wholly turn away the wrath of God; which shows that the law of
Moses was not able to reconcile men to God, and to perfect our peace
with him. In Christ alone, God so pardons sin as to remember it no more.
From this history we see, that no unhumbled, carnal heart, can long
endure the holy precepts, the humbling truths, and the spiritual worship
of God. But a god, a priest, a worship, a doctrine, and a sacrifice,
suited to the carnal mind, will ever meet with abundance of worshippers.
The very gospel itself may be so perverted as to suit a worldly taste.
Well is it for us, that the Prophet like unto Moses, but who is beyond
compare more powerful and merciful, has made atonement for our souls,
and now intercedes in our behalf. Let us rejoice in his grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033)

</div>
