<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo003)  [Next](exo005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 4:0</span></span>

([Exo 4:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)) God gives Moses power to
work miracles.

([Exo 4:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)) Moses is loth to be
sent, Aaron is to assist him.

([Exo 4:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#018)) Moses leaves Midian,
God's message to Pharaoh.

([Exo 4:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024)) God's displeasure
against Moses, Aaron meets him, The people believe them.

[Exodus 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 4:1</span></span>

Moses objects, that the people would not take his word, unless he showed
them some sign. God gives him power to work miracles. But those who are
now employed to deliver God's messages to men, need not the power to
work miracles: their character and their doctrines are to be tried by
that word of God to which they appeal. These miracles especially
referred to the miracles of the Lord Jesus Christ. It belonged to Him
only, to cast the power of the devil out of the soul, and to heal the
soul of the leprosy of sin; and so it was for Him first to cast the
devil out of the body, and to heal the leprosy of the body.

[Exodus 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 4:10</span></span>

Moses continued backward to the work God designed him for; there was
much of cowardice, slothfulness, and unbelief in him. We must not judge
of men by the readiness of their discourse. A great deal of wisdom and
true worth may be with a slow tongue. God sometimes makes choice of
those as his messengers, who have the least of the advantages of art or
nature, that his grace in them may appear the more glorious. Christ's
disciples were no orators, till the Holy Spirit made them such. God
condescends to answer the excuse of Moses. Even self-diffidence, when it
hinders us from duty, or clogs us in duty, is very displeasing to the
Lord. But while we blame Moses for shrinking from this dangerous
service, let us ask our own hearts if we are not neglecting duties more
easy, and less perilous. The tongue of Aaron, with the head and heart of
Moses, would make one completely fit for this errand. God promises, I
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth. Even Aaron, who could speak
well, yet could not speak to purpose, unless God gave constant teaching
and help; for without the constant aid of Divine grace, the best gifts
will fail.

[Exodus 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 4:18</span></span>

After God had appeared in the bush, he often spake to Moses. Pharaoh had
hardened his own heart against the groans and cries of the oppressed
Israelites; and now God, in the way of righteous judgment, hardens his
heart against the teaching of the miracles, and the terror of the
plagues. But whether Pharaoh will hear, or whether he will forbear,
Moses must tell him, Thus saith the Lord. He must demand a discharge for
Israel, Let my son go; not only my servant, whom thou hast no right to
detain, but my son. It is my son that serves me, and therefore must be
spared, must be pleaded for. In case of refusal I will slay thy son,
even thy first-born. As men deal with God's people, let them expect so
to be dealt with.

[Exodus 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 4:24</span></span>

God met Moses in anger. The Lord threatened him with death or sent
sickness upon him, as the punishment of his having neglected to
circumcise his son. When God discovers to us what is amiss in our lives,
we must give all diligence to amend it speedily. This is the voice of
every rod; it calls us to return to Him that smites us. God sent Aaron
to meet Moses. The more they saw of God's bringing them together, the
more pleasant their interview was. The elders of Israel met them in
faith, and were ready to obey them. It often happens, that less
difficulty is found than was expected, in such undertakings as are
according to the will of God, and for his glory. Let us but arise and
try at our proper work, the Lord will be with us and prosper us. If
Israel welcomed the tidings of their deliverance, and worshipped the
Lord, how should we welcome the glad tidings of redemption, embrace it
in faith, and adore the Redeemer!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 5](exo005)

</div>
