<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 40:0</span></span>

([Exo 40:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001)) The tabernacle is to be
set up, Aaron and his sons to be sanctified.

(v. 16-33) Moses performs all as directed.

([Exo 40:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034)) The glory of the Lord
fills the tabernacle.

[Exodus 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 40:1</span></span>

When a new year begins, we should seek to serve God better than the year
before. In half a year the tabernacle was completed. When the hearts of
numbers are earnest in a good cause, much may be done in a short time;
and when the commandments of God are continually attended to, as the
rule of working, all will be done well. The high-priesthood was in the
family of Aaron till Christ came, and in Him, the substance of all these
shadows, it continues for ever.

[Exodus 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 40:16</span></span>

When the tabernacle and the furniture of it were prepared, they did not
put off rearing it till they came to Canaan; but, in obedience to the
will of God, they set it up in the midst of their camp. Those who are
unsettled in the world, must not think that this will excuse want of
religion; as if it were enough to begin to serve God when they begin to
be settled in the world. No; a tabernacle for God is very needful, even
in a wilderness, especially as we may be in another world before we come
to fix in this. And we may justly fear lest we should deceive ourselves
with a form of godliness. The thought that so few entered Canaan, should
warn young persons especially, not to put off the care of their souls.

[Exodus 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 40:34</span></span>

The cloud covered the tabernacle even in the clearest day; it was not a
cloud which the sun scatters. This cloud was a token of God's presence
to be seen day and night, by all Israel, that they might never again
question, Is the Lord among us, or is he not? It guided the camp of
Israel through the wilderness. While the cloud rested on the tabernacle,
they rested; when it removed, they followed it. The glory of the Lord
filled the tabernacle. In light and fire the Shechinah made itself
visible: God is Light; our God is a consuming Fire. Yet so dazzling was
the light, and so dreadful the fire, that Moses was not able to enter
into the tent of the congregation, till the splendour was abated. But
what Moses could not do, our Lord Jesus has done, whom God caused to
draw near; and who has invited us to come boldly, even to the
mercy-seat. Being taught by the Holy Spirit to follow the example of
Christ, as well as to depend upon him, to attend his ordinances, and
obey his precepts, we shall be kept from losing our way, and be led in
the midst of the paths of judgment, till we come to heaven, the
habitation of his holiness. BLESSED BE GOD FOR JESUS CHRIST!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Introduction](lev000)

</div>
