<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo022)  [Next](exo024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 23:0</span></span>

([Exo 23:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)) Laws against falsehood
and injustice.

([Exo 23:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010)) The year of rest, The
sabbath, The three festivals.

([Exo 23:20-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)) God promises to
conduct the Israelites to Canaan.

[Exodus 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 23:1</span></span>

In the law of Moses are very plain marks of sound moral feeling, and of
true political wisdom. Every thing in it is suited to the desired and
avowed object, the worship of one only God, and the separation of Israel
from the pagan world. Neither parties, friends, witnesses, nor common
opinions, must move us to lessen great faults, to aggravate small ones,
excuse offenders, accuse the innocent, or misrepresent any thing.

[Exodus 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 23:10</span></span>

Every seventh year the land was to rest. They must not plough or sow it;
what the earth produced of itself, should be eaten, and not laid up.
This law seems to have been intended to teach dependence on Providence,
and God's faithfulness in sending the larger increase while they kept
his appointments. It was also typical of the heavenly rest, when all
earthly labours, cares, and interests shall cease for ever. All respect
to the gods of the heathen is strictly forbidden. Since idolatry was a
sin to which the Israelites leaned, they must blot out the remembrance
of the gods of the heathen. Solemn religious attendance on God, in the
place which he should choose, is strictly required. They must come
together before the Lord. What a good Master do we serve, who has made
it our duty to rejoice before him! Let us devote with pleasure to the
service of God that portion of our time which he requires, and count his
sabbaths and ordinances to be a feast unto our souls. They were not to
come empty-handed; so now, we must not come to worship God
empty-hearted; our souls must be filled with holy desires toward him,
and dedications of ourselves to him; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased.

[Exodus 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 23:20</span></span>

It is here promised that they should be guided and kept in their way
through the wilderness to the land of promise, Behold, I send an angel
before thee, mine angel. The precept joined with this promise is, that
they be obedient to this angel whom God would send before them. Christ
is the Angel of Jehovah; this is plainly taught by St. Paul, [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009). They should have a comfortable
settlement in the land of Canaan. How reasonable are the conditions of
this promise; that they should serve the only true God; not the gods of
the nations, which are no gods at all. How rich are the particulars of
this promise! The comfort of their food, the continuance of their
health, the increase of their wealth, the prolonging their lives to old
age. Thus hath godliness the promise of the life that now is. It is
promised that they should subdue their enemies. Hosts of hornets made
way for the hosts of Israel; such mean creatures can God use for
chastising his people's enemies. In real kindness to the church, its
enemies are subdued by little and little; thus we are kept on our guard,
and in continual dependence on God. Corruptions are driven out of the
hearts of God's people, not all at once, but by little and little. The
precept with this promise is, that they should not make friendship with
idolaters. Those that would keep from bad courses, must keep from bad
company. It is dangerous to live in a bad neighbourhood; others' sins
will be our snares. Our greatest danger is from those who would make us
sin against God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 24](exo024)

</div>
