<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 16:0</span></span>

([Exo 16:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)) The Israelites come to
the wilderness of Sin. They murmur for food, God promises bread from
heaven.

([Exo 16:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)) God sends quails and
manna.

([Exo 16:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022)) Particulars respecting
the manna.

([Exo 16:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#032)) An omer of manna to be
preserved.

[Exodus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 16:1</span></span>

The provisions of Israel, brought from Egypt, were spent by the middle
of the second month, and they murmured. It is no new thing for the
greatest kindness to be basely represented as the greatest injuries.
They so far undervalue their deliverance, that they wished they had died
in Egypt; and by the hand of the Lord, that is, by the plagues which cut
off the Egyptians. We cannot suppose they had plenty in Egypt, nor could
they fear dying for want in the wilderness, while they had flocks and
herds: none talk more absurdly than murmurers. When we begin to fret, we
ought to consider, that God hears all our murmurings. God promises a
speedy and constant supply. He tried whether they would trust him, and
rest satisfied with the bread of the day in its day. Thus he tried if
they would serve him, and it appeared how ungrateful they were. When God
plagued the Egyptians, it was to make them know he was their Lord; when
he provided for the Israelites, it was to make them know he was their
God.

[Exodus 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 16:13</span></span>

At evening the quails came up, and the people caught with ease as many
as they needed. The manna came down in dew. They called it "Manna,
Manhu," which means, "What is this?" "It is a portion; it is that which
our God has allotted us, and we will take it, and be thankful." It was
pleasant food; it was wholesome food. The manna was rained from heaven;
it appeared, when the dew was gone, as a small round thing, as small as
the hoar frost, like coriander seed, in colour like pearls. The manna
fell only six days in the week, and in double quantity on the sixth day;
it bred worms and became offensive if kept more than one day, excepting
on the sabbath. The people had never seen it before. It could be ground
in a mill, or beaten in a mortar, and was then made into cakes and
baked. It continued the forty years the Israelites were in the
wilderness, wherever they went, and ceased when they arrived in Canaan.
All this shows how different it was from any thing found before, or
found now. They were to gather the manna every morning. We are hereby
taught, 1. To be prudent and diligent in providing food for ourselves
and our households; with quietness working, and eating our own bread,
not the bread of idleness or deceit. God's bounty leaves room for man's
duty; it did so even when manna was rained; they must not eat till they
have gathered. 2. To be content with enough. Those that have most, have
for themselves but food and raiment; those that have least, generally
have these; so that he who gathers much has nothing over, and he who
gathers little has no lack. There is not such a disproportion between
one and another in the enjoyment of the things of this life, as in the
mere possession of them. 3. To depend upon Providence: let them sleep
quietly, though they have no bread in their tents, nor in all their
camp, trusting that God, with the following day, would bring them in
their daily bread. It was surer and safer in God's storehouse than their
own, and would come thence sweeter and fresher. See here the folly of
hoarding. The manna laid up by some, who thought themselves wiser, and
better managers, than their neighbours, and who would provide lest it
should fail next day, bred worms, and became good for nothing. That will
prove to be most wasted, which is covetously and distrustfully spared.
Such riches are corrupted, [Jam 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002),
[Jam 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003). The same wisdom, power, and
goodness that brought food daily from above for the Israelites in the
wilderness, brings food yearly out of the earth in the constant course
of nature, and gives us all things richly to enjoy.

[Exodus 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 16:22</span></span>

Here is mention of a seventh-day sabbath. It was known, not only before
the giving of the law upon mount Sinai, but before the bringing of
Israel out of Egypt, even from the beginning, [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003). The setting apart one day in
seven for holy work, and, in order to that, for holy rest, was ever
since God created man upon the earth, and is the most ancient of the
Divine laws. Appointing them to rest on the seventh day, he took care
that they should be no losers by it; and none ever will be losers by
serving God. On that day they were to fetch in enough for two days, and
to make it ready. This directs us to contrive family affairs, so that
they may hinder us as little as possible in the work of the sabbath.
Works of necessity are to be done on that day; but it is desirable to
have as little as may be to do, that we may apply ourselves the more
closely to prepare for the life that is to come. When they kept manna
against a command, it stank; when they kept it by a command, it was
sweet and good; every thing is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
On the seventh day God did not send the manna, therefore they must not
expect it, nor go out to gather. This showed that it was produced by
miracle.

[Exodus 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 16:32</span></span>

God having provided manna to be his people's food in the wilderness, the
remembrance of it was to be preserved. Eaten bread must not be
forgotten. God's miracles and mercies are to be had in remembrance. The
word of God is the manna by which our souls are nourished, [Mat
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004). The comforts of the Spirit are
hidden manna, [Rev 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017). These come
from heaven, as the manna did, and are the support and comfort of the
Divine life in the soul, while we are in the wilderness of this world.
Christ in the word is to be applied to the soul, and the means of grace
are to be used. We must every one of us gather for ourselves, and gather
in the morning of our days, the morning of our opportunities; which if
we let slip, it may be too late to gather. The manna must not be hoarded
up, but eaten; those who have received Christ, must by faith live upon
him, and not receive his grace in vain. There was manna enough for all,
enough for each, and none had too much; so in Christ there is enough,
but not more than we need. But those who ate manna, hungered again, died
at last, and with many of them God was not well pleased; whereas they
that feed on Christ by faith, shall never hunger, and shall die no more,
and with them God will be for ever well pleased. Let us seek earnestly
for the grace of the Holy Spirit, to turn all our knowledge of the
doctrine of Christ crucified, into the spiritual nourishment of our
souls by faith and love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017)

</div>
