<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo012)  [Next](exo014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 13:0</span></span>

([Exo 13:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)) The first-born
sanctified to God The remembrance of the passover commanded.

([Exo 13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011)) The firstlings of
beasts set apart.

([Exo 13:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)) Joseph's bones carried
with the Israelites, They come to Etham.

([Exo 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021), [Exo
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022)) God guideth the Israelites by a
pillar of cloud fire.

[Exodus 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 13:1</span></span>

In remembrance of the destruction of the first-born of Egypt, both of
man and of beast, and the deliverance of the Israelites out of bondage,
the first-born males of the Israelites were set apart to the Lord. By
this was set before them, that their lives were preserved through the
ransom of the atonement, which in due time was to be made for sin. They
were also to consider their lives, thus ransomed from death, as now to
be consecrated to the service of God. The parents were not to look upon
themselves as having any right in their first-born, till they solemnly
presented them to God, and allowed his title to them. That which is, by
special mercy, spared to us, should be applied to God's honour; at
least, some grateful acknowledgment, in works of piety and charity,
should be made. The remembrance of their coming out of Egypt must be
kept up every year. The day of Christ's resurrection is to be
remembered, for in it we were raised up with Christ out of death's house
of bondage. The Scripture tells us not expressly what day of the year
Christ rose, but it states particularly what day of the week it was; as
the more valuable deliverance, it should be remembered weekly. The
Israelites must keep the feast of unleavened bread. Under the gospel, we
must not only remember Christ, but observe his holy supper. Do this in
remembrance of him. Also care must be taken to teach children the
knowledge of God. Here is an old law for catechising. It is of great use
to acquaint children betimes with the histories of the Bible. And those
who have God's law in their heart should have it in their mouth, and
often speak of it, to affect themselves, and to teach others.

[Exodus 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 13:11</span></span>

The firstlings of beast not used in sacrifice, were to be changed for
others so used, or they were to be destroyed. Our souls are forfeited to
God's justice, and unless ransomed by the sacrifice of Christ, will
certainly perish. These institutions would continually remind them of
their duty, to love and serve the Lord. In like manner, baptism and the
Lord's supper, if explained and attended to, would remind us, and give
us occasion to remind one another of our profession and duty.

[Exodus 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 13:17</span></span>

There were two ways from Egypt to Canaan. One was only a few days'
journey; the other was much further about, through the wilderness, and
that was the way in which God chose to lead his people Israel. The
Egyptians were to be drowned in the Red sea; the Israelites were to be
humbled and proved in the wilderness. God's way is the right way, though
it seems about. If we think he leads not his people the nearest way, yet
we may be sure he leads them the best way, and so it will appear when we
come to our journey's end. The Philistines were powerful enemies; it was
needful that the Israelites should be prepared for the wars of Canaan,
by passing through the difficulties of the wilderness. Thus God
proportions his people's trials to their strength, [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013). They went up in good order.
They went up in five in a rank, some; in five bands, so others, which it
seems rather to their faith and hope, that God would bring them to
Canaan, in expectation of which they carried these bones with them while
in the desert.

[Exodus 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 13:21</span></span>

The Lord went before them in a pillar, or appearance of the Divine
Majesty. Christ was with the church in the wilderness, [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009). Those whom God brings into a
wilderness, he will not leave nor lose there, but will take care to lead
them through it. It was great satisfaction to Moses and the pious
Israelites, to be sure that they were under Divine guidance. Those who
make the glory of God their end, and the word of God their rule, the
Spirit of God the guide of their affections, and the providence of God
the guide of their affairs, may be sure that the Lord goes before them,
though they cannot see it with their eyes: we must now live by faith.
When Israel marched, this pillar went before, and pointed out the place
of encampment, as Divine Wisdom saw fit. It sheltered by day from the
heat, and gave light by night. The Bible is a light to our feet, a
lantern to our paths, with which the Saviour's love has provided us. It
testifies of Christ. It is to us like the pillar to the Israelites.
Listen to that voice which cries, I am the Light of the world; he that
followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of
life, [Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012). Jesus Christ alone,
as shown in the Bible, and as the Holy Spirit, in answer to prayer,
recommends him to the soul, is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 14](exo014)

</div>
