<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze010)  [Next](eze012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 11:0</span></span>

([Eze 11:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)) Divine judgments
against the wicked at Jerusalem.

([Eze 11:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)) Divine favour towards
those in captivity.

([Eze 11:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)) The Divine presence
forsakes the city.

[Ezekiel 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 11:1</span></span>

Where Satan cannot persuade men to look upon the judgment to come as
uncertain, he gains his point by persuading them to look upon it as at a
distance. These wretched rulers dare to say, We are as safe in this city
as flesh in a boiling pot; the walls of the city shall be to us as walls
of brass, we shall receive no more damage from the besiegers than the
caldron does from the fire. When sinners flatter themselves to their own
ruin, it is time to tell them they shall have no peace if they go on.
None shall remain in possession of the city but those who are buried in
it. Those are least safe who are most secure. God is often pleased to
single out some sinners for warning to others. Whether Pelatiah died at
that time in Jerusalem, or when the fulfilment of the prophecy drew
near, is uncertain. Like Ezekiel, we ought to be much affected with the
sudden death of others, and we should still plead with the Lord to have
mercy on those who remain.

[Ezekiel 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 11:14</span></span>

The pious captives in Babylon were insulted by the Jews who continued in
Jerusalem; but God made gracious promises to them. It is promised, that
God will give them one heart; a heart firmly fixed for God, and not
wavering. All who are made holy have a new spirit, a new temper and
dispositions; they act from new principles, walk by new rules, and aim
at new ends. A new name, or a new face, will not serve without a new
spirit. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. The carnal heart,
like a stone, cannot be made to feel. Men live among the dead and dying,
and are neither concerned nor humbled. He will make their hearts tender
and fit to receive impressions: this is God's work, it is his gift by
promise; and a wonderful and happy change is wrought by it, from death
to life. Their practices shall be agreeable to those principles. These
two must and will go together. When the sinner feels his need of these
blessings, let him present the promises as prayers in the name of
Christ, they will be performed.

[Ezekiel 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 11:22</span></span>

Here is the departure of God's presence from the city and temple. It was
from the Mount of Olives that the vision went up, typifying the
ascension of Christ to heaven from that very mountain. Though the Lord
will not forsake his people, yet he may be driven away from any part of
his visible church by their sins, and woe will be upon them when He
withdraws his presence, glory, and protection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 12](eze012)

</div>
