<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal004)  [Next](gal006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 5:0</span></span>

([Gal 5:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)) An earnest exhortation
to stand fast in the liberty of the gospel.

([Gal 5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)) To take heed of
indulging a sinful temper.

([Gal 5:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)) And to walk in the
Spirit, and not to fulfil the lusts of the flesh: the works of both are
described.

[Galatians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 5:1</span></span>

Christ will not be the Saviour of any who will not own and rely upon him
as their only Saviour. Let us take heed to the warnings and persuasions
of the apostle to stedfastness in the doctrine and liberty of the
gospel. All true Christians, being taught by the Holy Spirit, wait for
eternal life, the reward of righteousness, and the object of their hope,
as the gift of God by faith in Christ; and not for the sake of their own
works. The Jewish convert might observe the ceremonies or assert his
liberty, the Gentile might disregard them or might attend to them,
provided he did not depend upon them. No outward privileges or
profession will avail to acceptance with God, without sincere faith in
our Lord Jesus. True faith is a working grace; it works by love to God,
and to our brethren. May we be of the number of those who, through the
Spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. The danger of old
was not in things of no consequence in themselves, as many forms and
observances now are. But without faith working by love, all else is
worthless, and compared with it other things are of small value.

[Galatians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 5:7</span></span>

The life of a Christian is a race, wherein he must run, and hold on, if
he would obtain the prize. It is not enough that we profess
Christianity, but we must run well, by living up to that profession.
Many who set out fairly in religion, are hindered in their progress, or
turn out of the way. It concerns those who begin to turn out of the way,
or to tire in it, seriously to inquire what hinders them. The opinion or
persuasion, [Gal 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008), was, no doubt,
that of mixing the works of the law with faith in Christ in
justification. The apostle leaves them to judge whence it must arise,
but sufficiently shows that it could be owing to none but Satan. It is
dangerous for Christian churches to encourage those who follow, but
especially who spread, destructive errors. And in reproving sin and
error, we should always distinguish between the leaders and the led. The
Jews were offended, because Christ was preached as the only salvation
for sinners. If Paul and others would have admitted that the observance
of the law of Moses was to be joined with faith in Christ, as necessary
to salvation, then believers might have avoided many of the sufferings
they underwent. The first beginnings of such leaven should be opposed.
And assuredly those who persist in disturbing the church of Christ must
bear their judgment.

[Galatians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 5:13</span></span>

The gospel is a doctrine according to godliness, [Ti1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003), and is so far from giving the
least countenance to sin, that it lays us under the strongest obligation
to avoid and subdue it. The apostle urges that all the law is fulfilled
in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. If
Christians, who should help one another, and rejoice one another,
quarrel, what can be expected but that the God of love should deny his
grace, that the Spirit of love should depart, and the evil spirit, who
seeks their destruction, should prevail? Happy would it be, if
Christians, instead of biting and devouring one another on account of
different opinions, would set themselves against sin in themselves, and
in the places where they live.

[Galatians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 5:16</span></span>

If it be our care to act under the guidance and power of the blessed
Spirit, though we may not be freed from the stirrings and oppositions of
the corrupt nature which remains in us, it shall not have dominion over
us. Believers are engaged in a conflict, in which they earnestly desire
that grace may obtain full and speedy victory. And those who desire thus
to give themselves up to be led by the Holy Spirit, are not under the
law as a covenant of works, nor exposed to its awful curse. Their hatred
of sin, and desires after holiness, show that they have a part in the
salvation of the gospel. The works of the flesh are many and manifest.
And these sins will shut men out of heaven. Yet what numbers, calling
themselves Christians, live in these, and say they hope for heaven! The
fruits of the Spirit, or of the renewed nature, which we are to do, are
named. And as the apostle had chiefly named works of the flesh, not only
hurtful to men themselves, but tending to make them so to one another,
so here he chiefly notices the fruits of the Spirit, which tend to make
Christians agreeable one to another, as well as to make them happy. The
fruits of the Spirit plainly show, that such are led by the Spirit. By
describing the works of the flesh and fruits of the Spirit, we are told
what to avoid and oppose, and what we are to cherish and cultivate; and
this is the sincere care and endeavour of all real Christians. Sin does
not now reign in their mortal bodies, so that they obey it, [Rom
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012), for they seek to destroy it.
Christ never will own those who yield themselves up to be the servants
of sin. And it is not enough that we cease to do evil, but we must learn
to do well. Our conversation will always be answerable to the principle
which guides and governs us, [Rom 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005).
We must set ourselves in earnest to mortify the deeds of the body, and
to walk in newness of life. Not being desirous of vain-glory, or unduly
wishing for the esteem and applause of men, not provoking or envying one
another, but seeking to bring forth more abundantly those good fruits,
which are, through Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 6](gal006)

</div>
