<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal002)  [Next](gal004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 3:0</span></span>

([Gal 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)) The Galatians reproved
for departing from the great doctrine of justification alone, through
faith in Christ.

([Gal 3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)) This doctrine established
from the example of Abraham.

([Gal 3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)) From the tenor of the
law and the severity of its curse.

([Gal 3:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)) From the covenant of
promises, which the law could not disannul.

([Gal 3:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)) The law was a school
master to lead them to Christ.

([Gal 3:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)) Under the gospel state
true believers are all one in Christ.

[Galatians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 3:1</span></span>

Several things made the folly of the Galatian Christians worse. They had
the doctrine of the cross preached, and the Lord's supper administered
among them, in both which Christ crucified, and the nature of his
sufferings, had been fully and clearly set forth. Had they been made
partakers of the Holy Spirit, by the ministration of the law, or on
account of any works done by them in obedience thereto? Was it not by
their hearing and embracing the doctrine of faith in Christ alone for
justification? Which of these had God owned with tokens of his favour
and acceptance? It was not by the first, but the last. And those must be
very unwise, who suffer themselves to be turned away from the ministry
and doctrine which have been blessed to their spiritual advantage. Alas,
that men should turn from the all-important doctrine of Christ
crucified, to listen to useless distinctions, mere moral preaching, or
wild fancies! The god of this world, by various men and means, has
blinded men's eyes, lest they should learn to trust in a crucified
Saviour. We may boldly demand where the fruits of the Holy Spirit are
most evidently brought forth? whether among those who preach
justification by the works of the law, or those who preach the doctrine
of faith? Assuredly among the latter.

[Galatians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 3:6</span></span>

The apostle proves the doctrine he had blamed the Galatians for
rejecting; namely, that of justification by faith without the works of
the law. This he does from the example of Abraham, whose faith fastened
upon the word and promise of God, and upon his believing he was owned
and accepted of God as a righteous man. The Scripture is said to
foresee, because the Holy Spirit that indited the Scripture did foresee.
Through faith in the promise of God he was blessed; and it is only in
the same way that others obtain this privilege. Let us then study the
object, nature, and effects of Abraham's faith; for who can in any other
way escape the curse of the holy law? The curse is against all sinners,
therefore against all men; for all have sinned, and are become guilty
before God: and if, as transgressors of the law, we are under its curse,
it must be vain to look for justification by it. Those only are just or
righteous who are freed from death and wrath, and restored into a state
of life in the favour of God; and it is only through faith that persons
become righteous. Thus we see that justification by faith is no new
doctrine, but was taught in the church of God, long before the times of
the gospel. It is, in truth, the only way wherein any sinners ever were,
or can be justified. Though deliverance is not to be expected from the
law, there is a way open to escape the curse, and regain the favour of
God, namely, through faith in Christ. Christ redeemed us from the curse
of the law; being made sin, or a sin-offering, for us, he was made a
curse for us; not separated from God, but laid for a time under the
Divine punishment. The heavy sufferings of the Son of God, more loudly
warn sinners to flee from the wrath to come, than all the curses of the
law; for how can God spare any man who remains under sin, seeing that he
spared not his own Son, when our sins were charged upon him? Yet at the
same time, Christ, as from the cross, freely invites sinners to take
refuge in him.

[Galatians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 3:15</span></span>

The covenant God made with Abraham, was not done away by the giving the
law to Moses. The covenant was made with Abraham and his Seed. It is
still in force; Christ abideth for ever in his person, and his spiritual
seed, who are his by faith. By this we learn the difference between the
promises of the law and those of the gospel. The promises of the law are
made to the person of every man; the promises of the gospel are first
made to Christ, then by him to those who are by faith ingrafted into
Christ. Rightly to divide the word of truth, a great difference must be
put between the promise and the law, as to the inward affections, and
the whole practice of life. When the promise is mingled with the law, it
is made nothing but the law. Let Christ be always before our eyes, as a
sure argument for the defence of faith, against dependence on human
righteousness.

[Galatians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 3:19</span></span>

If that promise was enough for salvation, wherefore then serveth the
law? The Israelites, though chosen to be God's peculiar people, were
sinners as well as others. The law was not intended to discover a way of
justification, different from that made known by the promise, but to
lead men to see their need of the promise, by showing the sinfulness of
sin, and to point to Christ, through whom alone they could be pardoned
and justified. The promise was given by God himself; the law was given
by the ministry of angels, and the hand of a mediator, even Moses. Hence
the law could not be designed to set aside the promise. A mediator, as
the very term signifies, is a friend that comes between two parties, and
is not to act merely with and for one of them. The great design of the
law was, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to
those that believe; that, being convinced of their guilt, and the
insufficiency of the law to effect a righteousness for them, they might
be persuaded to believe on Christ, and so obtain the benefit of the
promise. And it is not possible that the holy, just, and good law of
God, the standard of duty to all, should be contrary to the gospel of
Christ. It tends every way to promote it.

[Galatians 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 3:23</span></span>

The law did not teach a living, saving knowledge; but, by its rites and
ceremonies, especially by its sacrifices, it pointed to Christ, that
they might be justified by faith. And thus it was, as the word properly
signifies, a servant, to lead to Christ, as children are led to school
by servants who have the care of them, that they might be more fully
taught by Him the true way of justification and salvation, which is only
by faith in Christ. And the vastly greater advantage of the gospel state
is shown, under which we enjoy a clearer discovery of Divine grace and
mercy than the Jews of old. Most men continue shut up as in a dark
dungeon, in love with their sins, being blinded and lulled asleep by
Satan, through wordly pleasures, interests, and pursuits. But the
awakened sinner discovers his dreadful condition. Then he feels that the
mercy and grace of God form his only hope. And the terrors of the law
are often used by the convincing Spirit, to show the sinner his need of
Christ, to bring him to rely on his sufferings and merits, that he may
be justified by faith. Then the law, by the teaching of the Holy Spirit,
becomes his loved rule of duty, and his standard for daily
self-examination. In this use of it he learns to depend more simply on
the Saviour.

[Galatians 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 3:26</span></span>

Real Christians enjoy great privileges under the gospel; and are no
longer accounted servants, but sons; not now kept at such a distance,
and under such restraints as the Jews were. Having accepted Christ Jesus
as their Lord and Saviour, and relying on him alone for justification
and salvation, they become the sons of God. But no outward forms or
profession can secure these blessings; for if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. In baptism we put on Christ;
therein we profess to be his disciples. Being baptized into Christ, we
are baptized into his death, that as he died and rose again, so we
should die unto sin, and walk in newness and holiness of life. The
putting on of Christ according to the gospel, consists not in outward
imitation, but in a new birth, an entire change. He who makes believers
to be heirs, will provide for them. Therefore our care must be to do the
duties that belong to us, and all other cares we must cast upon God. And
our special care must be for heaven; the things of this life are but
trifles. The city of God in heaven, is the portion or child's part. Seek
to be sure of that above all things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 4](gal004)

</div>
