<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 40:0</span></span>

(v. 1-19) The chief butler and baker of Pharaoh in prison, Their dreams
interpreted by Joseph.

([Gen 40:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020)) The ingratitude of the
chief butler.

[Genesis 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 40:1</span></span>

It was not so much the prison that made the butler and baker sad, as
their dreams. God has more ways than one to sadden the spirits. Joseph
had compassion towards them. Let us be concerned for the sadness of our
brethren's countenances. It is often a relief to those that are in
trouble to be noticed. Also learn to look into the causes of our own
sorrow. Is there a good reason? Is there not comfort sufficient to
balance it, whatever it is? Why art thou cast down, O my soul? Joseph
was careful to ascribe the glory to God. The chief butler's dream
foretold his advancement. The chief baker's dream his death. It was not
Joseph's fault that he brought the baker no better tidings. And thus
ministers are but interpreters; they cannot make the thing otherwise
than it is: if they deal faithfully, and their message prove unpleasing,
it is not their fault. Joseph does not reflect upon his brethren that
sold him; nor does he reflect on the wrong done him by his mistress and
his master, but mildly states his own innocence. When we are called on
to clear ourselves, we should carefully avoid, as much as may be,
speaking ill of others. Let us be content to prove ourselves innocent,
and not upbraid others with their guilt.

[Genesis 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 40:20</span></span>

Joseph's interpretation of the dreams came to pass on the very day
fixed. On Pharaoh's birth-day, all his servants attended him, and then
the cases of these two came to be looked into. We may all profitably
take notice of our birth-days, with thankfulness for the mercies of our
birth, sorrow for the sinfulness of our lives, and expectation of the
day of our death, as better than the day of our birth. But it seems
strange that worldly people, who are so fond of living here, should
rejoice at the end of one year after another of their short span of
life. A Christian has cause to rejoice that he was born, also that he
comes nearer to the end of his sin and sorrow, and nearer to his
everlasting happiness. The chief butler remembered not Joseph, but
forgot him. Joseph had deserved well at his hands, yet he forgot him. We
must not think it strange, if in this world we have hatred shown us for
our love, and slights for our kindness. See how apt those who are
themselves at ease are to forget others in distress. Joseph learned by
his disappointment to trust in God only. We cannot expect too little
from man, nor too much from God. Let us not forget the sufferings,
promises, and love of our Redeemer. We blame the chief butler's
ingratitude to Joseph, yet we ourselves act much more ungratefully to
the Lord Jesus. Joseph had but foretold the chief butler's enlargement,
but Christ wrought out ours; he mediated with the King of Kings for us;
yet we forget him, though often reminded of him, and though we have
promised never to forget him. Thus ill do we requite Him, like foolish
people and unwise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041)

</div>
