<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen004)  [Next](gen006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 5:0</span></span>

([Gen 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)) Adam and Seth.

([Gen 5:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#006)) The patriarchs from Seth
to Enoch.

([Gen 5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#021)) Enoch.

([Gen 5:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#025)) Methuselah to Noah.

[Genesis 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 5:1</span></span>

Adam was made in the image of God; but when fallen he begat a son in his
own image, sinful and defiled, frail, wretched, and mortal, like
himself. Not only a man like himself, consisting of body and soul, but a
sinner like himself. This was the reverse of that Divine likeness in
which Adam was made; having lost it, he could not convey it to his seed.
Adam lived, in all, 930 years; and then died, according to the sentence
passed upon him, "To dust thou shalt return." Though he did not die in
the day he ate forbidden fruit, yet in that very day he became mortal.
Then he began to die; his whole life after was but a reprieve, a
forfeited, condemned life; it was a wasting, dying life. Man's life is
but dying by degrees.

[Genesis 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 5:6</span></span>

Concerning each of these, except Enoch, it is said, "and he died." It is
well to observe the deaths of others. They all lived very long; not one
of them died till he had seen almost eight hundred years, and some of
them lived much longer; a great while for an immortal soul to be
prisoned in a house of clay. The present life surely was not to them
such a burden as it commonly is now, else they would have been weary of
it. Nor was the future life so clearly revealed then, as it now under
the gospel, else they would have been urgent to remove to it. All the
patriarchs that lived before the flood, except Noah, were born before
Adam died. From him they might receive a full account of the creation,
the fall, the promise, and the Divine precepts about religious worship
and a religious life. Thus God kept up in his church the knowledge of
his will.

[Genesis 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 5:21</span></span>

Enoch was the seventh from Adam. Godliness is walking with God: which
shows reconciliation to God, for two cannot walk together except they be
agreed, [Amo 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003). It includes all the
parts of a godly, righteous, and sober life. To walk with God, is to set
God always before us, to act as always under his eye. It is constantly
to care, in all things to please God, and in nothing to offend him. It
is to be followers of him as dear children. The Holy Spirit, instead of
saying, Enoch lived, says, Enoch walked with God. This was his constant
care and work; while others lived to themselves and the world, he lived
to God. It was the joy of his life. Enoch was removed to a better world.
As he did not live like the rest of mankind, so he did not leave the
world by death as they did. He was not found, because God had translated
him, [Heb 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005). He had lived but 365
years, which, as men's ages were then, was but the midst of a man's
days. God often takes those soonest whom he loves best; the time they
lose on earth, is gained in heaven, to their unspeakable advantage. See
how Enoch's removal is expressed: he was not, for God took him. He was
not any longer in this world; he was changed, as the saints shall be,
who are alive at Christ's second coming. Those who begin to walk with
God when young, may expect to walk with him long, comfortably, and
usefully. The true Christian's steady walk in holiness, through many a
year, till God takes him, will best recommend that religion which many
oppose and many abuse. And walking with God well agrees with the cares,
comforts, and duties of life.

[Genesis 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 5:25</span></span>

Methuselah signifies, 'he dies, there is a dart,' 'a sending forth,'
namely, of the deluge, which came the year that Methuselah died. He
lived 969 years, the longest that any man ever lived on earth; but the
longest liver must die at last. Noah signifies rest; his parents gave
him that name, with a prospect of his being a great blessing to his
generation. Observe his father's complaint of the calamitous state of
human life, by the entrance of sin, and the curse of sin. Our whole life
is spent in labour, and our time filled up with continual toil. God
having cursed the ground, it is as much as some can do, with the utmost
care and pains, to get a hard livelihood out of it. Lamech hoped for
relief by the birth of this son, "This same shall comfort us." It
signifies not only that desire and expectation which parents generally
have about their children, that they will be comforts to them and
helpers, though they often prove otherwise; but it signifies also a
prospect of something more. Is Christ ours? Is heaven ours? We need
better comforters under our toil and sorrow, than the dearest relations
and the most promising offspring; may we seek and find comforts in
Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 6](gen006)

</div>
