<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen018)  [Next](gen020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 19:0</span></span>

(v. 1-29) The destruction of Sodom, and the deliverance of Lot.

([Gen 19:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#030)) The sin and disgrace
of Lot.

[Genesis 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 19:1</span></span>

Lot was good, but there was not one more of the same character in the
city. All the people of Sodom were very wicked and vile. Care was
therefore taken for saving Lot and his family. Lot lingered; he trifled.
Thus many who are under convictions about their spiritual state, and the
necessity of a change, defer that needful work. The salvation of the
most righteous men is of God's mercy, not by their own merit. We are
saved by grace. God's power also must be acknowledged in bringing souls
out of a sinful state If God had not been merciful to us, our lingering
had been our ruin. Lot must flee for his life. He must not hanker after
Sodom. Such commands as these are given to those who, through grace, are
delivered out of a sinful state and condition. Return not to sin and
Satan. Rest not in self and the world. Reach toward Christ and heaven,
for that is escaping to the mountain, short of which we must not stop.
Concerning this destruction, observe that it is a revelation of the
wrath of God against sin and sinners of all ages. Let us learn from
hence the evil of sin, and its hurtful nature; it leads to ruin.

[Genesis 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 19:30</span></span>

See the peril of security. Lot, who kept chaste in Sodom, and was a
mourner for the wickedness of the place, and a witness against it, when
in the mountain, alone, and, as he thought, out of the way of
temptation, is shamefully overtaken. Let him that thinks he stands high,
and stands firm, take heed lest he fall. See the peril of drunkenness;
it is not only a great sin itself, but lets in many sins, which bring a
lasting wound and dishonour. Many a man does that, when he is drunk,
which, when he is sober, he could not think of without horror. See also
the peril of temptation, even from relations and friends, whom we love
and esteem, and expect kindness from. We must dread a snare, wherever we
are, and be always upon our guard. No excuse can be made for the
daughters, nor for Lot. Scarcely any account can be given of the affair
but this, The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked: who can know it? From the silence of the Scripture concerning
Lot henceforward, learn that drunkenness, as it makes men forgetful, so
it makes them to be forgotten.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 20](gen020)

</div>
