<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen005)  [Next](gen007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 6:0</span></span>

([Gen 6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)) The wickedness of the
world which provoked God's wrath.

([Gen 6:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#008)) Noah finds grace.

([Gen 6:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012)) Noah warned of the
flood, The directions respecting the ark.

([Gen 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#022)) Noah's faith and
obedience.

[Genesis 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 6:1</span></span>

The most remarkable thing concerning the old world, is the destroying of
it by the deluge, or flood. We are told of the abounding iniquity of
that wicked world: God's just wrath, and his holy resolution to punish
it. In all ages there has been a peculiar curse of God upon marriages
between professors of true religion and its avowed enemies. The evil
example of the ungodly party corrupts or greatly hurts the other. Family
religion is put an end to, and the children are trained up according to
the worldly maxims of that parent who is without the fear of God. If we
profess to be the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty, we must not
marry without his consent. He will never give his blessing, if we prefer
beauty, wit, wealth, or worldly honours, to faith and holiness. The
Spirit of God strove with men, by sending Enoch, Noah, and perhaps
others, to preach to them; by waiting to be gracious, notwithstanding
their rebellions; and by exciting alarm and convictions in their
consciences. But the Lord declared that his Spirit should not thus
strive with men always; he would leave them to be hardened in sin, and
ripened for destruction. This he determined on, because man was flesh:
not only frail and feeble, but carnal and depraved; having misused the
noble powers of his soul to gratify his corrupt inclinations. God sees
all the wickedness that is among the children of men; it cannot be hid
from him now; and if it be not repented of, it shall be made known by
him shortly. The wickedness of a people is great indeed, when noted
sinners are men renowned among them. Very much sin was committed in all
places, by all sorts of people. Any one might see that the wickedness of
man was great: but God saw that every imagination, or purpose, of the
thoughts of man's heart, was only evil continually. This was the bitter
root, the corrupt spring. The heart was deceitful and desperately
wicked; the principles were corrupt; the habits and dispositions evil.
Their designs and devices were wicked. They did evil deliberately,
contriving how to do mischief. There was no good among them. God saw
man's wickedness as one injured and wronged by it. He saw it as a tender
father sees the folly and stubbornness of a rebellious and disobedient
child, which grieves him, and makes him wish he had been childless. The
words here used are remarkable; they are used after the manner of men,
and do not mean that God can change, or be unhappy. Does God thus hate
our sin? And shall not we be grieved to the heart for it? Oh that we may
look on Him whom we have grieved, and mourn! God repented that he had
made man; but we never find him repent that he redeemed man. God
resolves to destroy man: the original word is very striking, 'I will
wipe off man from the earth,' as dirt or filth is wiped off from a place
which should be clean, and is thrown to the dunghill, the proper place
for it. God speaks of man as his own creature, when he resolves upon his
punishment. Those forfeit their lives who do not answer the end of their
living. God speaks of resolution concerning men, after his Spirit had
been long striving with them in vain. None are punished by the justice
of God, but those who hate to be reformed by the grace of God.

[Genesis 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 6:8</span></span>

Noah did not find favour in the eyes of men; they hated and persecuted
him, because both by his life and preaching he condemned the world: but
he found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and this made him more truly
honourable than the men of renown. Let this be our chief desire, let us
labour that we may be accepted of him. When the rest of the world was
wicked, Noah kept his integrity. God's good-will towards Noah produced
this good work in him. He was a just man, that is, justified before God,
by faith in the promised Seed. As such he was made holy, and had right
principles; and was righteous in his conversation. He was not only
honest, but devout; it was his constant care to do the will of God. God
looks down upon those with an eye of favour, who sincerely look up to
him with an eye of faith. It is easy to be religious when religion is in
fashion; but it shows strong faith and resolution, to swim against the
stream, and to appear for God when no one else appears for him; Noah did
so. All kinds of sin were found among men. They corrupted God's worship.
Sin fills the earth with violence, and this fully justified God's
resolution to destroy the world. The contagion spread. When wickedness
is become general, ruin is not far off; while there is a remnant of
praying people in a nation, to empty the measure as it fills, judgments
may be long kept off; but when all hands are at work to pull down the
fences, by sin, and none stand in the gap to make up the breach, what
can be expected but a flood of wrath?

[Genesis 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 6:12</span></span>

God told Noah his purpose to destroy the wicked world by water. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014). It is with all believers,
enabling them to understand and apply the declarations and warnings of
the written word. God chose to do it by a flood of waters, which should
drown the world. As he chooses the rod with which he corrects his
children, so he chooses the sword with which he cuts off his enemies.
God established his covenant with Noah. This is the first place in the
Bible where the word 'covenant' is found; it seems to mean, 1. The
covenant of providence; that the course of nature shall be continued to
the end of time. 2. The covenant of grace; that God would be a God to
Noah, and that out of his seed God would take to himself a people. God
directed Noah to make an ark. This ark was like the hulk of a ship,
fitted to float upon the waters. It was very large, half the size of St.
Paul's cathedral, and would hold more than eighteen of the largest ships
now used. God could have secured Noah without putting him to any care,
or pains, or trouble; but employed him in making that which was to be
the means to preserve him, for the trial of his faith and obedience.
Both the providence of God, and the grace of God, own and crown the
obedient and diligent. God gave Noah particular orders how to make the
ark, which could not therefore but be well fitted for the purpose. God
promised Noah that he and his family should be kept alive in the ark.
What we do in obedience to God, we and our families are likely to have
the benefit of. The piety of parents gets their children good in this
life, and furthers them in the way to eternal life, if they improve it.

[Genesis 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 6:22</span></span>

Noah's faith triumphed over all corrupt reasonings. To rear so large a
building, such a one as he never saw, and to provide food for the living
creatures, would require from him a great deal of care, and labour, and
expense. His neighbours would laugh at him. But all such objections,
Noah, by faith, got over; his obedience was ready and resolute. Having
begun to build, he did not leave off till he had finished: so did he,
and so must we do. He feared the deluge, and therefore prepared the ark.
And in the warning given to Noah, there is a more solemn warning given
to us, to flee from the wrath to come, which will sweep the world of
unbelievers into the pit of destruction. Christ, the true Noah, which
same shall comfort us, hath by his sufferings already prepared the ark,
and kindly invites us by faith to enter in. While the day of his
patience continues, let us hear and obey his voice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 7](gen007)

</div>
