<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen025)  [Next](gen027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 26:0</span></span>

([Gen 26:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)) Isaac, because of
famine, goes to Gerar.

([Gen 26:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#006)) He denies his wife and
is reproved by Abimelech.

([Gen 26:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012)) Isaac grows rich, The
Philistines' envy.

([Gen 26:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#018)) Isaac digs wells God
blesses him.

([Gen 26:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#026)) Abimelech makes a
covenant with Isaac.

([Gen 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034), [Gen
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#035)) Esau's wives.

[Genesis 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 26:1</span></span>

Isaac had been trained up in a believing dependence upon the Divine
grant of the land of Canaan to him and his heirs; and now that there is
a famine in the land, Isaac still cleaves to the covenant. The real
worth of God's promises cannot be lessened to a believer by any cross
providences that may befall him. If God engage to be with us, and we are
where he would have us to be, nothing but our own unbelief and distrust
can prevent our comfort. The obedience of Abraham to the Divine command,
was evidence of that faith, whereby, as a sinner, he was justified
before God, and the effect of that love whereby true faith works. God
testifies that he approved this obedience, to encourage others,
especially Isaac.

[Genesis 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 26:6</span></span>

There is nothing in Isaac's denial of his wife to be imitated, nor even
excused. The temptation of Isaac is the same as that which overcame his
father, and that in two instances. This rendered his conduct the greater
sin. The falls of those who are gone before us are so many rocks on
which others have split; and the recording of them is like placing buoys
to save future mariners. This Abimelech was not the same that lived in
Abraham's days, but both acted rightly. The sins of professors shame
them before those that are not themselves religious.

[Genesis 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 26:12</span></span>

God blessed Isaac. Be it observed, for the encouragement of poor tenants
who occupy other people's lands, and are honest and industrious, that
God blessed him with a great increase. The Philistines envied Isaac. It
is an instance of the vanity of the world; for the more men have of it,
the more they are envied, and exposed to censure and injury. Also of the
corruption of nature; for that is an ill principle indeed, which makes
men grieve at the good of others. They made Isaac go out of their
country. That wisdom which is from above, will teach us to give up our
right, and to draw back from contentions. If we are wrongfully driven
from one place, the Lord will make room for us in another.

[Genesis 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 26:18</span></span>

Isaac met with much opposition in digging wells. Two were called
Contention and Hatred. See the nature of worldly things; they make
quarrels, and are occasions of strife; and what is often the lot of the
most quiet and peaceable; those who avoid striving, yet cannot avoid
being striven with. And what a mercy it is to have plenty of water; to
have it without striving for it! The more common this mercy is, the more
reason to be thankful for it. At length Isaac digged a well, for which
they strove not. Those that study to be quiet, seldom fail of being so.
When men are false and unkind, still God is faithful and gracious; and
his time to show himself so is, when we are most disappointed by men.
The same night that Isaac came weary and uneasy to Beer-sheba, God
brought comforts to his soul. Those may remove with comfort who are sure
of God's presence.

[Genesis 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 26:26</span></span>

When a man's ways please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at
peace with him, [Pro 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007). Kings'
hearts are in his hands, and when he pleases, he can turn them to favour
his people. It is not wrong to stand upon our guard in dealing with
those who have acted unfairly. But Isaac did not insist on the
unkindnesses they had done him; he freely entered into friendship with
them. Religion teaches us to be neighbourly, and, as much as in us lies,
to live peaceable with all men. Providence smiled upon what Isaac did;
God blessed his labours.

[Genesis 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 26:34</span></span>

Esau was foolish in marrying two wives together, and still more in
marrying Canaanites, strangers to the blessing of Abraham, and subject
to the curse of Noah. It grieved his parents that he married without
their advice and consent. It grieved them that he married among those
who had no religion. Children have little reason to expect God's
blessing who do that which is a grief of mind to good parents.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 27](gen027)

</div>
