<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen022)  [Next](gen024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 23:0</span></span>

([Gen 23:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001)) The death of Sarah,
Abraham applies for a burying-place.

([Gen 23:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#014)) Sarah's burying-place.

[Genesis 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 23:1</span></span>

The longest life must shortly come to a close. Blessed be God that there
is a world where sin, death, vanity, and vexation cannot enter. Blessed
be his name, that even death cannot part believers from union with
Christ. Those whom we most love, yea, even our own bodies, which we so
care for, must soon become loathsome lumps of clays, and be buried out
of sight. How loose then should we be to all earthly attachments and
adornments! Let us seek rather that our souls be adorned with heavenly
graces. Abraham rendered honour and respect to the princes of Heth,
although of the ungodly Canaanites. The religion of the Bible enjoins to
pay due respect to all in authority, without flattering their persons,
or countenancing their crimes if they are unworthy characters. And the
noble generosity of these Canaanites shames and condemns the closeness,
selfishness, and ill-humour of many that call themselves Israelites. It
was not in pride that Abraham refused the gift, because he scorned to be
beholden to Ephron; but in justice and in prudence. Abraham was able to
pay for the field, and therefore would not take advantage of Ephron's
generosity. Honesty, as well as honour, forbids us to take advantage of
our neighbour's liberality, and to impose, upon those who give freely.

[Genesis 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 23:14</span></span>

Prudence, as well as justice, directs us to be fair and open in our
dealings; cheating bargains will not bear the light. Abraham, without
fraud or delay, pays the money. He pays it at once in full, without
keeping any part back; and by weight, current money with the merchant,
without deceit. See how anciently money was used for the help of trade,
and how honestly it should be paid when it is due. Though all the land
of Canaan was Abraham by promise, yet the time of his possessing it not
being come, what he had occasion for he bought and paid for. Dominion is
not founded in grace. The saints' title to an eternal inheritance does
not entitle them to the possessions of this world, nor justify them in
doing wrong. Ephron honestly and fairly makes a good title to the land.
As that which is bought, must be honestly paid for, so that which is
sold, must be honestly delivered and secured. Let us manage our concerns
with punctuality and exactness, in order to avoid contention. Abraham
buried Sarah in cave. or vault, which was in the purchased field. It
would tend to endear the land to his posterity. And it is worth noting,
that a burying-place was the only piece of the land which Abraham
possessed in Canaan. Those who have least of this earth, find a grave in
it. This sepulchre was at the end of the field; whatever our possessions
are, there is a burial-place at the end of them. It was a token of his
belief and expectation of the resurrection. Abraham is contented to be
still a pilgrim while he lives, but secures a place where, when he dies,
his flesh may rest in hope. After all, the chief concern is, with whom
we shall rise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 24](gen024)

</div>
