<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen013)  [Next](gen015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 14:0</span></span>

([Gen 14:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)) The battle of the
kings, Lot is taken prisoner.

([Gen 14:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)) Abram rescues Lot.

([Gen 14:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)) Melchizedek blesses
Abram.

([Gen 14:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)) Abram restores the
spoil.

[Genesis 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 14:1</span></span>

The wars of nations make great figure in history, but we should not have
had the record of this war if Abram and Lot had not been concerned. Out
of covetousness, Lot had settled in fruitful, but wicked Sodom. Its
inhabitants were the most ripe for vengeance of all the descendants of
Canaan. The invaders were from Chaldea and Persia, then only small
kingdoms. They took Lot among the rest, and his goods. Though he was
righteous, and Abram's brother's son, yet he was with the rest in this
trouble. Neither our own piety, nor our relation to the favourites of
Heaven, will be our security when God's judgments are abroad. Many an
honest man fares the worse for his wicked neighbours: it is our wisdom
to separate, or at least to distinguish ourselves from them, [Co2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017). So near a relation of Abram
should have been a companion and a disciple of Abram. If he chose to
dwell in Sodom, he must thank himself if he share in Sodom's losses.
When we go out of the way of our duty, we put ourselves from under God's
protection, and cannot expect that the choice made by our lusts, should
end to our comfort. They took Lot's goods; it is just with God to
deprive us of enjoyments, by which we suffer ourselves to be deprived of
the enjoyment of him.

[Genesis 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 14:13</span></span>

Abram takes this opportunity to give a real proof of his being truly
friendly to Lot. We ought to be ready to succour those in distress,
especially relations and friends. And though others may have been
wanting in their duty to us, yet we must not neglect our duty to them.
Abram rescued the captives. As we have opportunity, we must do good to
all.

[Genesis 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 14:17</span></span>

Melchizedek is spoken of as a king of Salem, supposed to be the place
afterwards called Jerusalem, and it is generally thought that he was
only a man. The words of the apostle, [Heb
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003), state only, that the sacred
history has said nothing of his ancestors. The silence of the Scriptures
on this, is to raise our thoughts to Him, whose generation cannot be
declared. Bread and wine were suitable refreshment for the weary
followers of Abram; and it is remarkable that Christ appointed the same
as the memorials of his body and blood, which are meat and drink indeed
to the soul. Melchizedek blessed Abram from God. He blessed God from
Abram. We ought to give thanks for other's mercies as for our own. Jesus
Christ, our great High Priest, is the Mediator both of our prayers and
praises, and not only offers up ours, but his own for us. Abram gave him
the tenth of the spoils, [Heb 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004).
When we have received some great mercy from God, it is very fit we
should express our thankfulness by some special act of pious charity.
Jesus Christ, our great Melchizedek, is to have homage done him, and to
be humbly acknowledged as our King and Priest; not only the tithe of
all, but all we have, must be given up to him.

[Genesis 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 14:21</span></span>

Observe the king of Sodom's grateful offer to Abram, Give me the souls,
and take thou the substance. Gratitude teaches us to recompense to the
utmost of our power, those that have undergone fatigues, run hazards,
and been at expense for our service and benefit. Abram generously
refused this offer. He accompanies his refusal with a good reason, Lest
thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich: which would reflect upon the
promise and covenant of God, as if He would not have enriched Abraham
without the spoils of Sodom. The people of God must, for their credit's
sake, take heed of doing any thing that looks mean or mercenary, or that
savors of covetousness and self-seeking. Abraham can trust the Possessor
of Heaven and earth to provide for him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 15](gen015)

</div>
