<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 7:0</span></span>

([Gen 7:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)) Noah, and his family and
the living creatures, enter the ark, and the flood begins.

([Gen 7:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013)) Noah shut in the ark.

([Gen 7:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017)) The increase of the
flood for forty days.

([Gen 7:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021)) All flesh is destroyed
by the flood.

[Genesis 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 7:1</span></span>

The call to Noah is very kind, like that of a tender father to his
children to come in-doors when he sees night or a storm coming. Noah did
not go into the ark till God bade him, though he knew it was to be his
place of refuge. It is very comfortable to see God going before us in
every step we take. Noah had taken a great deal of pains to build the
ark, and now he was himself kept alive in it. What we do in obedience to
the command of God, and in faith, we ourselves shall certainly have the
comfort of, first or last. This call to Noah reminds us of the call the
gospel gives to poor sinners. Christ is an ark, in whom alone we can be
safe, when death and judgment approach. The word says, "Come;" ministers
say, "Come;" the Spirit says, "Come, come into the Ark." Noah was
accounted righteous, not for his own righteousness, but as an heir of
the righteousness which is by faith, [Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007). He believed the revelation of a
saviour, and sought and expected salvation through Him alone. Thus was
he justified by faith, and received that Spirit whose fruit is in all
goodness; but if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. After the hundred and twenty years, God granted seven days' longer
space for repentance. But these seven days were trifled away, like all
the rest. It shall be but seven days. They had only one week more, one
sabbath more to improve, and to consider the things that belonged to
their peace. But it is common for those who have been careless of their
souls during the years of their health, when they have looked upon death
at a distance, to be as careless during the days, the few days of their
sickness, when they see death approaching; their hearts being hardened
by the deceitfulness of sin. As Noah prepared the ark by faith in the
warning given that the flood would come, so he went into it, by faith in
this warning that it would come quickly. And on the day Noah was
securely fixed in the ark, the fountains of the great deep were broken
up. The earth had within it those waters, which, at God's command,
sprang up and flooded it; and thus our bodies have in themselves those
humours, which, when God pleases, become the seeds and springs of mortal
diseases. The windows of heaven were opened, and the waters which were
above the firmament, that is, in the air, were poured out upon the
earth. The rain comes down in drops; but such rains fell then, as were
never known before or since. It rained without stop or abatement, forty
days and forty nights, upon the whole earth at once. As there was a
peculiar exercise of the almighty power of God in causing the flood, it
is vain and presumptuous to attempt explaining the method of it, by
human wisdom.

[Genesis 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 7:13</span></span>

The ravenous creatures were made mild and manageable; yet, when this
occasion was over, they were of the same kind as before; for the ark did
not alter their natures. Hypocrites in the church, who outwardly conform
to the laws of that ark, are yet unchanged; and it will appear, one time
or other, what kind they are after. God continued his care of Noah. God
shut the door, to secure him and keep him safe in the ark; also to keep
all others for ever out. In what manner this was done, God has not been
pleased to make known. There is much of our gospel duty and privilege to
be seen in Noah's safety in the ark. The apostle makes it a type of
Christian baptism, [Pe1 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020), [Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021). Observe then, it is our great
duty, in obedience to the gospel call, by a lively faith in Christ, to
come into that way of salvation which God has provided for poor sinners.
Those that come into the ark, should bring as many as they can with
them, by good instructions, by persuasions, and by good examples. There
is room enough in Christ for all comers. God put Adam into paradise, but
did not shut him in, so he threw himself out; but when God put Noah into
the ark, and so when he brings a soul to Christ, the salvation is sure:
it is not in our own keeping, but in the Mediator's hand. But the door
of mercy will shortly be shut against those that now make light of it.
Knock now, and it shall be opened, [Luk
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025).

[Genesis 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 7:17</span></span>

The flood was increasing forty days. The waters rose so high, that the
tops of the highest mountains were overflowed more than twenty feet.
There is no place on earth so high as to set men out of the reach of
God's judgments. God's hand will find out all his enemies, [Psa
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008). When the flood thus increased,
Noah's ark was lifted up, and the waters which broke down every thing
else, bore up the ark. That which to unbelievers betokens death unto
death, to the faithful betokens life unto life.

[Genesis 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 7:21</span></span>

All the men, women, and children, that were in the world, excepting
those in the ark, died. We may easily imagine what terror seized them.
Our Saviour tells us, that till the very day that the flood came, they
were eating and drinking, [Luk 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026),
[Luk 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027); they were deaf and blind
to all Divine warnings. In this posture death surprised them. They were
convinced of their folly when it was too late. We may suppose they tried
all ways and means possible to save themselves, but all in vain. And
those that are not found in Christ, the Ark, are certainly undone,
undone for ever. Let us pause, and consider this tremendous judgment!
Who can stand before the Lord when he is angry? The sin of sinners will
be their ruin, first or last, if not repented of. The righteous God
knows how to bring ruin upon the world of the ungodly, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005). How tremendous will be the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men! Happy they who are part of
Christ's family, and safe with him as such; they may look forward
without dismay, and rejoice that they shall triumph, when fire shall
burn up the earth, and all that therein is. We are apt to suppose some
favourable distinctions in our own case or character; but if we neglect,
refuse, or abuse the salvation of Christ, we shall, notwithstanding such
fancied advantages, be destroyed in the common ruin of an unbelieving
world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
