<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen031)  [Next](gen033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 32:0</span></span>

([Gen 32:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001)) Jacob's vision at
Mahanaim, His fear of Esau.

([Gen 32:9-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#009)) Jacob's earnest prayer
for deliverance, He prepares a present for Esau.

([Gen 32:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)) He wrestles with the
Angel.

[Genesis 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 32:1</span></span>

The angels of God appeared to Jacob, to encourage him with the assurance
of the Divine protection. When God designs his people for great trials,
he prepares them by great comforts. While Jacob, to whom the promise
belonged, had been in hard service, Esau was become a prince. Jacob sent
a message, showing that he did not insist upon the birth-right. Yielding
pacifies great offences, [Ecc 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004). We
must not refuse to speak respectfully, even to those unjustly angry with
us. Jacob received an account of Esau's warlike preparations against
him, and was greatly afraid. A lively sense of danger, and quickening
fear arising from it, may be found united with humble confidence in
God's power and promise.

[Genesis 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 32:9</span></span>

Times of fear should be times of prayer: whatever causes fear, should
drive us to our knees, to our God. Jacob had lately seen his guards of
angels, but in this distress he applied to God, not to them; he knew
they were his fellow-servants, [Rev
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009). There cannot be a better pattern
for true prayer than this. Here is a thankful acknowledgement of former
undeserved favours; a humble confession of unworthiness; a plain
statement of his fears and distress; a full reference of the whole
affair to the Lord, and resting all his hopes on him. The best we can
say to God in prayer, is what he has said to us. Thus he made the name
of the Lord his strong tower, and could not but be safe. Jacob's fear
did not make him sink into despair, nor did his prayer make him presume
upon God's mercy, without the use of means. God answers prayers by
teaching us to order our affairs aright. To pacify Esau, Jacob sent him
a present. We must not despair of reconciling ourselves to those most
angry against us.

[Genesis 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 32:24</span></span>

A great while before day, Jacob being alone, more fully spread his fears
before God in prayer. While thus employed, One in the likeness of a man
wrestled with him. When the spirit helpeth our infirmities, and our
earnest and vast desires can scarcely find words to utter them, and we
still mean more than we can express, then prayer is indeed wrestling
with God. However tried or discouraged, we shall prevail; and prevailing
with Him in prayer, we shall prevail against all enemies that strive
with us. Nothing requires more vigour and unceasing exertion than
wrestling. It is an emblem of the true spirit of faith and prayer. Jacob
kept his ground; though the struggle continued long, this did not shake
his faith, nor silence his prayer. He will have a blessing, and had
rather have all his bone put out of joint than go away without one.
Those who would have the blessing of Christ, must resolve to take no
denial. The fervent prayer is the effectual prayer. The Angel puts a
lasting mark of honour upon him, by changing his name. Jacob signifies a
supplanter. From henceforth he shall be celebrated, not for craft and
artful management, but for true valour. Thou shalt be called Israel, a
prince with God, a name greater than those of the great men of the
earth. He is a prince indeed that is a prince with God; those are truly
honourable that are mighty in prayer. Having power with God, he shall
have power with men too; he shall prevail, and gain Esau's favour. Jacob
gives a new name to the place. He calls it Peniel, the face of God,
because there he had seen the appearance of God, and obtained the favour
of God. It becomes those whom God honours, to admire his grace towards
them. The Angel who wrestled with Jacob was the second Person in the
sacred Trinity, who was afterwards God manifest in the flesh, and who,
dwelling in human nature, is called Immanuel, [Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004), [Hos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#005). Jacob halted on his thigh. It
might serve to keep him from being lifted up with the abundance of the
revelations. The sun rose on Jacob: it is sun-rise with that soul, which
has had communion with God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 33](gen033)

</div>
