<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 9:0</span></span>

([Heb 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)) The Jewish tabernacle and
its utensils.

([Heb 9:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006)) Their use and meaning.

([Heb 9:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)) These fulfilled in
Christ.

([Heb 9:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)) The necessity, superior
dignity, and power of his priesthood and sacrifice.

[Hebrews 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 9:1</span></span>

The apostle shows to the Hebrews the typical reference of their
ceremonies to Christ. The tabernacle was a movable temple, shadowing
forth the unsettled state of the church upon earth, and the human nature
of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt
bodily. The typical meaning of these things has been shown in former
remarks, and the ordinances and articles of the Mosaic covenant point
out Christ as our Light, and as the Bread of life to our souls; and
remind us of his Divine Person, his holy priesthood, perfect
righteousness, and all-prevailing intercession. Thus was the Lord Jesus
Christ, all and in all, from the beginning. And as interpreted by the
gospel, these things are a glorious representation of the wisdom of God,
and confirm faith in Him who was prefigured by them.

[Hebrews 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 9:6</span></span>

The apostle goes on to speak of the Old Testament services. Christ,
having undertaken to be our High Priest, could not enter into heaven
till he had shed his blood for us; and none of us can enter, either into
God's gracious presence here, or his glorious presence hereafter, but by
the blood of Jesus. Sins are errors, great errors, both in judgment and
practice; and who can understand all his errors? They leave guilt upon
the conscience, not to be washed away but by the blood of Christ. We
must plead this blood on earth, while he is pleading it for us in
heaven. A few believers, under the Divine teaching, saw something of the
way of access to God, of communion with him, and of admission into
heaven through the promised Redeemer, but the Israelites in general
looked no further than the outward forms. These could not take away the
defilement or dominion of sin. They could neither discharge the debts,
nor resolve the doubts, of him who did the service. Gospel times are,
and should be, times of reformation, of clearer light as to all things
needful to be known, and of greater love, causing us to bear ill-will to
none, but good-will to all. We have greater freedom, both of spirit and
speech, in the gospel, and greater obligations to a more holy living.

[Hebrews 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 9:11</span></span>

All good things past, present, and to come, were and are founded upon
the priestly office of Christ, and come to us from thence. Our High
Priest entered into heaven once for all, and has obtained eternal
redemption. The Holy Ghost further signified and showed that the Old
Testament sacrifices only freed the outward man from ceremonial
uncleanness, and fitted him for some outward privileges. What gave such
power to the blood of Christ? It was Christ's offering himself without
any sinful stain in his nature or life. This cleanses the most guilty
conscience from dead, or deadly, works to serve the living God; from
sinful works, such as pollute the soul, as dead bodies did the persons
of the Jews who touched them; while the grace that seals pardon,
new-creates the polluted soul. Nothing more destroys the faith of the
gospel, than by any means to weaken the direct power of the blood of
Christ. The depth of the mystery of the sacrifice of Christ, we cannot
dive into, the height we cannot comprehend. We cannot search out the
greatness of it, or the wisdom, the love, the grace that is in it. But
in considering the sacrifice of Christ, faith finds life, food, and
refreshment.

[Hebrews 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 9:15</span></span>

The solemn transactions between God and man, are sometimes called a
covenant, here a testament, which is a willing deed of a person,
bestowing legacies on such persons as are described, and it only takes
effect upon his death. Thus Christ died, not only to obtain the
blessings of salvation for us, but to give power to the disposal of
them. All, by sin, were become guilty before God, had forfeited every
thing that is good; but God, willing to show the greatness of his mercy,
proclaimed a covenant of grace. Nothing could be clean to a sinner, not
even his religious duties; except as his guilt was done away by the
death of a sacrifice, of value sufficient for that end, and unless he
continually depended upon it. May we ascribe all real good works to the
same all-procuring cause, and offer our spiritual sacrifices as
sprinkled with Christ's blood, and so purified from their defilement.

[Hebrews 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 9:23</span></span>

It is evident that the sacrifices of Christ are infinitely better than
those of the law, which could neither procure pardon for sin, nor impart
power against it. Sin would still have been upon us, and have had
dominion over us; but Jesus Christ, by one sacrifice, has destroyed the
works of the devil, that believers may be made righteous, holy, and
happy. As no wisdom, learning, virtue, wealth, or power, can keep one of
the human race from death, so nothing can deliver a sinner from being
condemned at the day of judgment, except the atoning sacrifice of
Christ; nor will one be saved from eternal punishment who despises or
neglects this great salvation. The believer knows that his Redeemer
liveth, and that he shall see him. Here is the faith and patience of the
church, of all sincere believers. Hence is their continual prayer as the
fruit and expression of their faith, Even so come, Lord Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010)

</div>
