<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb001)  [Next](heb003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 2:0</span></span>

([Heb 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)) The duty of stedfastly
adhering to Christ and his gospel.

([Heb 2:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)) His sufferings are no
objection against his pre-eminence.

([Heb 2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)) The reason of his
sufferings, and the fitness of them.

([Heb 2:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)) Christ's taking the
nature of man, and not his taking the nature of angels, was necessary to
his priestly office.

[Hebrews 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 2:1</span></span>

Christ being proved to be superior to the angels, this doctrine is
applied. Our minds and memories are like a leaky vessel, they do not,
without much care, retain what is poured into them. This proceeds from
the corruption of our nature, temptations, worldly cares, and pleasures.
Sinning against the gospel is neglect of this great salvation; it is a
contempt of the saving grace of God in Christ, making light of it, not
caring for it, not regarding either the worth of gospel grace, or the
want of it, and our undone state without it. The Lord's judgments under
the gospel dispensation are chiefly spiritual, but are on that account
the more to be dreaded. Here is an appeal to the consciences of sinners.
Even partial neglects will not escape rebukes; they often bring darkness
on the souls they do not finally ruin. The setting forth the gospel was
continued and confirmed by those who heard Christ, by the evangelists
and apostles, who were witnesses of what Jesus Christ began both to do
and to teach; and by the gifts of the Holy Ghost, qualified for the work
to which they were called. And all this according to God's own will. It
was the will of God that we should have sure ground for our faith, and a
strong foundation for our hope in receiving the gospel. Let us mind this
one thing needful, and attend to the Holy Scriptures, written by those
who heard the words of our gracious Lord, and were inspired by his
Spirit; then we shall be blessed with the good part that cannot be taken
away.

[Hebrews 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 2:5</span></span>

Neither the state in which the church is at present, nor its more
completely restored state, when the prince of this world shall be cast
out, and the kingdoms of the earth become the kingdom of Christ, is left
to the government of the angels: Christ will take to him his great
power, and will reign. And what is the moving cause of all the kindness
God shows to men in giving Christ for them and to them? it is the grace
of God. As a reward of Christ's humiliation in suffering death, he has
unlimited dominion over all things; thus this ancient scripture was
fulfilled in him. Thus God has done wonderful things for us in creation
and providence, but for these we have made the basest returns.

[Hebrews 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 2:10</span></span>

Whatever the proud, carnal, and unbelieving may imagine or object, the
spiritual mind will see peculiar glory in the cross of Christ, and be
satisfied that it became Him, who in all things displays his own
perfections in bringing many sons to glory, to make the Author of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. His way to the crown was by the
cross, and so must that of his people be. Christ sanctifies; he has
purchased and sent the sanctifying Spirit: the Spirit sanctifies as the
Spirit of Christ. True believers are sanctified, endowed with holy
principles and powers, set apart to high and holy uses and purposes.
Christ and believers are all of one heavenly Father, who is God. They
are brought into relation with Christ. But the words, his not being
ashamed to call them brethren, express the high superiority of Christ to
the human nature. This is shown from three texts of Scripture. See [Psa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022); [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002); [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018).

[Hebrews 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 2:14</span></span>

The angels fell, and remained without hope or help. Christ never
designed to be the Saviour of the fallen angels, therefore he did not
take their nature; and the nature of angels could not be an atoning
sacrifice for the sin of man. Here is a price paid, enough for all, and
suitable to all, for it was in our nature. Here the wonderful love of
God appeared, that, when Christ knew what he must suffer in our nature,
and how he must die in it, yet he readily took it upon him. And this
atonement made way for his people's deliverance from Satan's bondage,
and for the pardon of their sins through faith. Let those who dread
death, and strive to get the better of their terrors, no longer attempt
to outbrave or to stifle them, no longer grow careless or wicked through
despair. Let them not expect help from the world, or human devices; but
let them seek pardon, peace, grace, and a lively hope of heaven, by
faith in Him who died and rose again, that thus they may rise above the
fear of death. The remembrance of his own sorrows and temptations, makes
Christ mindful of the trials of his people, and ready to help them. He
is ready and willing to succour those who are tempted, and seek him. He
became man, and was tempted, that he might be every way qualified to
succour his people, seeing that he had passed through the same
temptations himself, but continued perfectly free from sin. Then let not
the afflicted and tempted despond, or give place to Satan, as if
temptations made it wrong for them to come to the Lord in prayer. Not
soul ever perished under temptation, that cried unto the Lord from real
alarm at its danger, with faith and expectation of relief. This is our
duty upon our first being surprised by temptations, and would stop their
progress, which is our wisdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 3](heb003)

</div>
