<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa028)  [Next](isa030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 29:0</span></span>

([Isa 29:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)) Judgements on Jerusalem
and on its enemies.

([Isa 29:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009)) The senselessness and
hypocrisy of the Jews.

([Isa 29:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017)) The conversion of the
Gentiles, and future blessings for the Jews.

[Isaiah 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 29:1</span></span>

Ariel may signify the altar of burnt-offerings. Let Jerusalem know that
outward religious services will not make men free from judgements.
Hypocrites never can please God, nor make their peace with him. God had
often and long, by a host of angels, encamped round about Jerusalem for
protection and deliverance; but now he fought against it. Proud looks
and proud language shall be brought down by humbling providences. The
destruction of Jerusalem's enemies is foretold. The army of Sennacherib
went as a dream; and thus the multitudes, that through successive ages
fight against God's altar and worship, shall fall. Speedily will sinners
awake from their soothing dreams in the pains of hell.

[Isaiah 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 29:9</span></span>

The security of sinners in sinful ways, is cause for lamentation and
wonder. The learned men, through prejudice, said that the Divine
prophecies were obscure; and the poor urged their want of learning. The
Bible is a sealed book to every man, learned or unlearned, till he
begins to study it with a simple heart and a teachable spirit, that he
may thence learn the truth and the will of God. To worship God, is to
approach him. And if the heart be full of his love and fear, out of the
abundance of it the mouth will speak; but there are many whose religion
is lip-labour only. When they pretend to be speaking to God, they are
thinking of a thousand foolish things. They worship the God of Israel
according to their own devices. Numbers are only formal in worship. And
their religion is only to comply with custom, and to serve their own
interest. But the wanderings of mind, and defects in devotion, which are
the believer's burden, are very different from the withdrawing of the
heart from God, so severely blamed. And those who make religion no more
than a pretence, to serve a turn, deceive themselves. And as those that
quarrel with God, so those that think to conceal themselves from him, in
effect charge him with folly. But all their perverse conduct shall be
entirely done away.

[Isaiah 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 29:17</span></span>

The wonderful change here foretold, may refer to the affairs of Judah,
though it looks further. When a great harvest of souls was gathered to
Christ from among the Gentiles, then the wilderness was turned into a
fruitful field; and the Jewish church, that had long been a fruitful
field, became as a deserted forest. Those who, when in trouble, can
truly rejoice in God, shall soon have cause greatly to rejoice in him.
The grace of meekness contributes to the increase of our holy joy. The
enemies who were powerful shall become mean and weak. To complete the
repose of God's people, the scorners at home shall be cut off by
judgements. All are apt to speak unadvisedly, and to mistake what they
hear, but it is very unfair to make a man an offender for a word. They
did all they could to bring those into trouble who told them of their
faults. But He that redeemed Abraham out of his snares and troubles,
will redeem those who are, by faith, his true seed, out of theirs. It
will be the greatest comfort to godly parents to see their children
renewed creatures, the work of God's grace. May those who now err in
spirit, and murmur against the truth, come to understanding, and learn
true doctrine. The Spirit of truth shall set right their mistakes, and
lead them into all truth. This should encourage us to pray for those
that have erred, and are deceived. All who murmured at the truths of
God, as hard sayings, shall learn and be aware what God designed in all.
See the change religion produces in the hearts of men, and the peace and
pleasure of a humble and devout spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 30](isa030)

</div>
