<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa063)  [Next](isa065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 64](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 64:0</span></span>

([Isa 64:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)) The church prays that
God's power may be manifested.

([Isa 64:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)) A confession of sin,
and afflictions bewailed.

[Isaiah 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 64:1</span></span>

They desire that God would manifest himself to them and for them, so
that all may see it. This is applicable to the second coming of Christ,
when the Lord himself shall descend from heaven. They plead what God had
used to do, and had declared his gracious purpose to do, for his people.
They need not fear being disappointed of it, for it is sure; or
disappointed in it, for it is sufficient. The happiness of his people is
bound up in what God has designed for them, and is preparing for them,
and preparing them for; what he has done or will do. Can we believe
this, and then think any thing too great to expect from his truth,
power, and love? It is spiritual and cannot be comprehended by human
understanding. It is ever ready. See what communion there is between a
gracious God and a gracious soul. We must make conscience of doing our
duty in every thing the Lord our God requires. Thou meetest him; this
speaks his freeness and forwardness in doing them good. Though God has
been angry with us for our sins, and justly, yet his anger has soon
ended; but in his favour is life, which goes on and continues, and on
that we depend for our salvation.

[Isaiah 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 64:6</span></span>

The people of God, in affliction, confess and bewail their sins, owning
themselves unworthy of his mercy. Sin is that abominable thing which the
Lord hates. Our deeds, whatever they may seem to be, if we think to
merit by them at God's hand, are as rags, and will not cover us; filthy
rags, and will but defile us. Even our few good works in which there is
real excellence, as fruits of the Spirit, are so defective and defiled
as done by us, that they need to be washed in the fountain open for sin
and uncleanness. It bodes ill when prayer is kept back. To pray, is by
faith to take hold of the promises the Lord has made of his good-will to
us, and to plead them; to take hold of him, earnestly begging him not to
leave us; or soliciting his return. They brought their troubles upon
themselves by their own folly. Sinners are blasted, and then carried
away, by the wind of their own iniquity; it withers and then ruins them.
When they made themselves as an unclean thing, no wonder that God
loathed them. Foolish and careless as we are, poor and despised, yet
still Thou art our Father. It is the wrath of a Father we are under, who
will be reconciled; and the relief our case requires is expected only
from him. They refer themselves to God. They do not say, "Lord, rebuke
us not," for that may be necessary; but, "Not in thy displeasure." They
state their lamentable condition. See what ruin sin brings upon a
people; and an outward profession of holiness will be no defence against
it. God's people presume not to tell him what he shall say, but their
prayer is, Speak for the comfort and relief of thy people. How few call
upon the Lord with their whole hearts, or stir themselves to lay hold
upon him! God may delay for a time to answer our prayers, but he will,
in the end, answer those who call on his name and hope in his mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 65](isa065)

</div>
