<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa056)  [Next](isa058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 57](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 57:0</span></span>

([Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001), [Isa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002)) The blessed death of the
righteous.

([Isa 57:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003)) The abominable
idolatries of the Jewish nation.

([Isa 57:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013)) Promises to the humble
and contrite.

[Isaiah 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 57:1</span></span>

The righteous are delivered from the sting of death, not from the stroke
of it. The careless world disregards this. Few lament it as a public
loss, and very few notice it as a public warning. They are taken away in
compassion, that they may not see the evil, nor share in it, nor be
tempted by it. The righteous man, when he dies, enters into peace and
rest.

[Isaiah 57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 57:3</span></span>

The Lord here calls apostates and hypocrites to appear before him. When
reproved for their sins, and threatened with judgments, they ridiculed
the word of God. The Jews were guilty of idolatry before the captivity;
but not after that affliction. Their zeal in the worship of false gods,
may shame our indifference in the worship of the true God. The service
of sin is disgraceful slavery; those who thus debase themselves to hell,
will justly have their portion there. Men incline to a religion that
inflames their unholy passions. They are led to do any evil, however
great or vile, if they think it will atone for crimes, or purchase
indulgence for some favourite lust. This explains idolatry, whether
pagan, Jewish, or antichristian. But those who set up anything instead
of God, for their hope and confidence, never will come to a right end.
Those who forsake the only right way, wander in a thousand by-paths. The
pleasures of sin soon tire, but never satisfy. Those who care not for
the word of God and his providences, show they have no fear of God. Sin
profits not; it ruins and destroys.

[Isaiah 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 57:13</span></span>

The idols and their worshippers shall come to nothing; but those who
trust in God's grace, shall be brought to the joys of heaven. With the
Lord there is neither beginning of days, nor end of life, nor change of
time. His name is holy, and all must know him as a holy God. He will
have tender regard to those who bring their mind to their condition, and
dread his wrath. He will make his abode with those whose hearts he has
thus humbled, in order to revive and comfort them. When troubles last
long, even good men are tempted to entertain hard thoughts of God.
Therefore He will not contend for ever, for he will not forsake the work
of his own hands, nor defeat the purchase of his Son's blood.
Covetousness is a sin that particularly lays men under the Divine
displeasure. See the sinfulness of sin. See also that troubles cannot
reform men unless God's grace work in them. Peace shall be published,
perfect peace. It is the fruit of preaching lips, and praying lips.
Christ came and preached peace to Gentiles, as well as to the Jews; to
after-ages, who were afar off in time, as well as to those of that age.
But the wicked would not be healed by God's grace, therefore would not
be healed by his comforts. Their ungoverned lusts and passions made them
like the troubled sea. Also the terrors of conscience disturbed their
enjoyments. God hath said it, and all the world cannot unsay it, That
there is no peace to those who allow themselves in any sin. If we are
recovered from such an awful state, it is only by the grace of God. And
the influences of the Holy Spirit, and that new heart, from whence comes
grateful praise, the fruit of our lips, are his gift. Salvation, with
all its fruits, hopes, and comforts, is his work, and to him belongs all
the glory. There is no peace for the wicked man; but let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him
return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, and
he will abundantly pardon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 58](isa058)

</div>
