<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa000)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

([Isa 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)) The corruptions
prevailing among the Jews.

([Isa 1:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)) Severe censures.

([Isa 1:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)) Exhortations to
repentance.

([Isa 1:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)) The state of Judah is
lamented; with gracious promises of the gospel times.

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

Isaiah signifies, "The salvation of the Lord;" a very suitable name for
this prophet, who prophesies so much of Jesus the Saviour, and his
salvation. God's professing people did not know or consider that they
owed their lives and comforts to God's fatherly care and kindness. How
many are very careless in the affairs of their souls! Not considering
what we do know in religion, does us as much harm, as ignorance of what
we should know. The wickedness was universal. Here is a comparison taken
from a sick and diseased body. The distemper threatens to be mortal.
From the sole of the foot even to the head; from the meanest peasant to
the greatest peer, there is no soundness, no good principle, no
religion, for that is the health of the soul. Nothing but guilt and
corruption; the sad effects of Adam's fall. This passage declares the
total depravity of human nature. While sin remains unrepented, nothing
is done toward healing these wounds, and preventing fatal effects.
Jerusalem was exposed and unprotected, like the huts or sheds built up
to guard ripening fruits. These are still to be seen in the East, where
fruits form a large part of the summer food of the people. But the Lord
had a small remnant of pious servants at Jerusalem. It is of the Lord's
mercies that we are not consumed. The evil nature is in every one of us;
only Jesus and his sanctifying Spirit can restore us to spiritual
health.

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

Judea was desolate, and their cities burned. This awakened them to bring
sacrifices and offerings, as if they would bribe God to remove the
punishment, and give them leave to go on in their sin. Many who will
readily part with their sacrifices, will not be persuaded to part with
their sins. They relied on the mere form as a service deserving a
reward. The most costly devotions of wicked people, without thorough
reformation of heart and life, cannot be acceptable to God. He not only
did not accept them, but he abhorred them. All this shows that sin is
very hateful to God. If we allow ourselves in secret sin, or forbidden
indulgences; if we reject the salvation of Christ, our very prayers will
become abomination.

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

Not only feel sorrow for the sin committed, but break off the practice.
We must be doing, not stand idle. We must be doing the good the Lord our
God requires. It is plain that the sacrifices of the law could not
atone, even for outward national crimes. But, blessed be God, there is a
Fountain opened, in which sinners of every age and rank may be cleansed.
Though our sins have been as scarlet and crimson, a deep dye, a double
dye, first in the wool of original corruption, and afterwards in the
many threads of actual transgression; though we have often dipped into
sin, by many backslidings; yet pardoning mercy will take out the stain,
[Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007). They should have all the
happiness and comfort they could desire. Life and death, good and evil,
are set before us. O Lord, incline all of us to live to thy glory.

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

Neither holy cities nor royal ones are faithful to their trust, if
religion does not dwell in them. Dross may shine like silver, and the
wine that is mixed with water may still have the colour of wine. Those
have a great deal to answer for, who do not help the oppressed, but
oppress them. Men may do much by outward restraints; but only God works
effectually by the influences of his Spirit, as a Spirit of Judgment.
Sin is the worst captivity, the worst slavery. The redemption of the
spiritual Zion, by the righteousness and death of Christ, and by his
powerful grace, most fully accord with what is here meant. Utter ruin is
threatened. The Jews should become as a tree when blasted by heat; as a
garden without water, which in those hot countries would soon be burned
up. Thus shall they be that trust in idols, or in an arm of flesh. Even
the strong man shall be as tow; not only soon broken, and pulled to
pieces, but easily catching fire. When the sinner has made himself as
tow and stubble, and God makes himself as a consuming fire, what can
prevent the utter ruin of the sinner?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
