<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa008)  [Next](isa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 9:0</span></span>

([Isa 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)) The Son that should be
born, and his kingdom.

([Isa 9:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008)) The judgments to come
upon Israel, and on the enemies of the kingdom of Christ.

[Isaiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 9:1</span></span>

The Syrians and Assyrians first ravaged the countries here mentioned,
and that region was first favoured by the preaching of Christ. Those
that want the gospel, walk in darkness, and in the utmost danger. But
when the gospel comes to any place, to any soul, light comes. Let us
earnestly pray that it may shine into our hearts, and make us wise unto
salvation. The gospel brings joy with it. Those who would have joy, must
expect to go through hard work, as the husbandman, before he has the joy
of harvest; and hard conflict, as the soldier, before he divides the
spoil. The Jews were delivered from the yoke of many oppressors; this
was a shadow of the believer's deliverance from the yoke of Satan. The
cleansing the souls of believers from the power and pollution of sin,
would be by the influence of the Holy Spirit, as purifying fire. These
great things for the church, shall be done by the Messiah, Emmanuel. The
Child is born; it was certain; and the church, before Christ came in the
flesh, benefitted by his undertaking. It is a prophecy of him and of his
kingdom, which those that waited for the Consolation of Israel read with
pleasure. This Child was born for the benefit of us men, of us sinners,
of all believers, from the beginning to the end of the world. Justly is
he called Wonderful, for he is both God and man. His love is the wonder
of angels and glorified saints. He is the Counsellor, for he knew the
counsels of God from eternity; and he gives counsel to men, in which he
consults our welfare. He is the Wonderful Counsellor; none teaches like
him. He is God, the mighty One. Such is the work of the Mediator, that
no less power than that of the mighty God could bring it to pass. He is
God, one with the Father. As the Prince of Peace, he reconciles us to
God; he is the Giver of peace in the heart and conscience; and when his
kingdom is fully established, men shall learn war no more. The
government shall be upon him; he shall bear the burden of it. Glorious
things are spoken of Christ's government. There is no end to the
increase of its peace, for the happiness of its subjects shall last for
ever. The exact agreement of this prophecy with the doctrine of the New
Testament, shows that Jewish prophets and Christian teachers had the
same view of the person and salvation of the Messiah. To what earthly
king or kingdom can these words apply? Give then, O Lord, to thy people
to know thee by every endearing name, and in every glorious character.
Give increase of grace in every heart of thy redeemed upon earth.

[Isaiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 9:8</span></span>

Those are ripening apace for ruin, whose hearts are unhumbled under
humbling providences. For that which God designs, in smiting us, is, to
turn us to himself; and if this point be not gained by lesser judgments,
greater may be expected. The leaders of the people misled them. We have
reason to be afraid of those that speak well of us, when we do ill.
Wickedness was universal, all were infected with it. They shall be in
trouble, and see no way out; and when men's ways displease the Lord, he
makes even their friends to be at war with them. God would take away
those they thought to have help from. Their rulers were the head. Their
false prophets were the tail and the rush, the most despicable. In these
civil contests, men preyed on near relations who were as their own
flesh. The people turn not to Him who smites them, therefore he
continues to smite: for when God judges, he will overcome; and the
proudest, stoutest sinner shall either bend or break.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 10](isa010)

</div>
