<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa003)  [Next](isa005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 4:0</span></span>

([Isa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)) The havoc occasioned by
war.

([Isa 4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002)) The times of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 4:1</span></span>

This first verse belongs to the third chapter. When the troubles should
come upon the land, as the unmarried state was deemed reproachful among
the Jews, these women would act contrary to common usage, and seek
husbands for themselves.

[Isaiah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 4:2</span></span>

Not only the setting forth Christ's kingdom in the times of the
apostles, but its enlargement by gathering the dispersed Jews into the
church, is foretold. Christ is called the Branch of the Lord, being
planted by his power, and flourishing to his praise. The gospel is the
fruit of the Branch of the Lord; all the graces and comforts of the
gospel spring from Christ. It is called the fruit of the earth, because
it sprang up in this world, and was suited for the present state. It
will be good evidence that we are distinguished from those merely called
Israel, if we are brought to see all beauty in Christ, and holiness. As
a type of this blessed day, Jerusalem should again flourish as a branch,
and be blessed with the fruits of the earth. God will keep for himself a
holy seed. When most of those that have a place and a name in Zion, and
in Jerusalem, shall be cut off by their unbelief, some shall be left.
Those only that are holy shall be left, when the Son of man shall gather
out of his kingdom every thing which offends. By the judgment of God's
providence, sinners were destroyed and consumed; but by the Spirit of
grace they are reformed and converted. The Spirit herein acts as a
Spirit of judgment, enlightening the mind, convincing the conscience;
also as a Spirit of burning, quickening and strengthening the
affections, and making men zealously affected in a good work. An ardent
love to Christ and souls, and zeal against sin, will carry men on with
resolution in endeavours to turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Every
affliction serves believers as a furnace, to purify them from dross; and
the convincing, enlightening, and powerful influences of the Holy
Spirit, gradually root out their lusts, and render them holy as He is
holy. God will protect his church, and all that belong to it. Gospel
truths and ordinances are the glory of the church. Grace in the soul is
the glory of it; and those that have it are kept by the power of God.
But only those who are weary will seek rest; only those who are
convinced that a storm is approaching, will look for shelter. Affected
with a deep sense of the Divine displeasure, to which we are exposed by
sin, let us at once have recourse to Jesus Christ, and thankfully accept
the refuge he affords.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 5](isa005)

</div>
