<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 66:0</span></span>

([Isa 66:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)) God looks at the heart,
and vengeance is threatened for guilt.

([Isa 66:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)) The increase of the
church, when Jew and Gentile shall be gathered to the Redeemer.

([Isa 66:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)) Every enemy of the
church shall be destroyed, and the final ruin of ungodly men shall be
seen.

[Isaiah 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 66:1</span></span>

The Jews gloried much in their temple. But what satisfaction can the
Eternal Mind take in a house made with men's hands? God has a heaven and
an earth of his own making, and temples of man's making; but he
overlooks them, that he may look with favour to him who is poor in
spirit and serious, self-abasing and self-denying; whose heart truly
sorrows for sin: such a heart is a living temple for God. The sacrifice
of the wicked is not only unacceptable, but a great offence to God. And
he that now offers a sacrifice after the law, does in effect set aside
Christ's sacrifice. He that burns incense, puts contempt upon the
incense of Christ's intercession, and is as if he blessed an idol. Men
shall be deceived by the vain confidences with which they deceive
themselves. Unbelieving hearts, and unpurified consciences, need no more
to make them miserable, than to have their own fears brought upon them.
Whatever men put in the place of the priesthood, atonement, and
intercession of Christ, will be found hateful to God.

[Isaiah 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 66:5</span></span>

The prophet turns to those that trembled at God's word, to comfort and
encourage them. The Lord will appear, to the joy of the humble believer,
and to the confusion of hypocrites and persecutors. When the Spirit was
poured out, and the gospel went forth from Zion, multitudes were
converted in a little time. The word of God, especially his promises,
and ordinances, are the consolations of the church. The true happiness
of all Christians is increased by every convert brought to Christ. The
gospel brings with it, wherever it is received in its power, such a
river of peace, as will carry us to the ocean of boundless and endless
bliss. Divine comforts reach the inward man; the joy of the Lord will be
the strength of the believer. Both God's mercy and justice shall be
manifested, and for ever magnified.

[Isaiah 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 66:15</span></span>

A prophetic declaration is given of the Lord's vengeance on all enemies
of his church, especially that of all antichristian opposers of the
gospel in the latter days. [Isa 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019),
[Isa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020), set forth the abundance of
means for conversion of sinners. These expressions are figurative, and
express the plentiful and gracious helps for bringing God's elect home
to Christ. All shall be welcome; and nothing shall be wanting for their
assistance and encouragement. A gospel ministry shall be set up in the
church; they would have solemn worship before the Lord. In the last
verse the nature of the punishment of sinners in the world to come is
represented. Then shall the righteous and wicked be separated. Our
Saviour applies this to the everlasting misery and torment of impenitent
sinners in the future state. To the honour of that free grace which thus
distinguishes them, let the redeemed of the Lord, with humility, and not
without holy trembling, sing triumphant songs. With this affecting
representation of the opposite states of the righteous and wicked,
characters which include the whole human race, Isaiah concludes his
prophecies. May God grant, for Christ's sake, that our portion may be
with those who fear and love his name, who cleave to his truths, and
persevere in every good work, looking to receive from the Lord Jesus
Christ the gracious invitation, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Introduction](jer000)

</div>
