<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa001)  [Next](isa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 2:0</span></span>

([Isa 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)) The conversion of the
Gentiles, Description of the sinfulness of Israel.

([Isa 2:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)) The awful punishment of
unbelievers.

[Isaiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 2:1</span></span>

The calling of the Gentiles, the spread of the gospel, and that far more
extensive preaching of it yet to come, are foretold. Let Christians
strengthen one another, and support one another. It is God who teaches
his people, by his word and Spirit. Christ promotes peace, as well as
holiness. If all men were real Christians, there could be no war; but
nothing answering to these expressions has yet taken place on the earth.
Whatever others do, let us walk in the light of this peace. Let us
remember that when true religion flourishes, men delight in going up to
the house of the Lord, and in urging others to accompany them. Those are
in danger who please themselves with strangers to God; for we soon learn
to follow the ways of persons whose company we keep. It is not having
silver and gold, horses and chariots, that displeases God, but depending
upon them, as if we could not be safe, and easy, and happy without them,
and could not but be so with them. Sin is a disgrace to the poorest and
the lowest. And though lands called Christian are not full of idols, in
the literal sense, are they not full of idolized riches? and are not men
so busy about their gains and indulgences, that the Lord, his truths,
and precepts, are forgotten or despised?

[Isaiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 2:10</span></span>

The taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans seems first meant here, when
idolatry among the Jews was done away; but our thoughts are led forward
to the destruction of all the enemies of Christ. It is folly for those
who are pursued by the wrath of God, to think to hide or shelter
themselves from it. The shaking of the earth will be terrible to those
who set their affections on things of the earth. Men's haughtiness will
be brought down, either by the grace of God convincing them of the evil
of pride, or by the providence of God depriving them of all the things
they were proud of. The day of the Lord shall be upon those things in
which they put their confidence. Those who will not be reasoned out of
their sins, sooner or later shall be frightened out of them. Covetous
men make money their god; but the time will come when they will feel it
as much their burden. This whole passage may be applied to the case of
an awakened sinner, ready to leave all that his soul may be saved. The
Jews were prone to rely on their heathen neighbours; but they are here
called upon to cease from depending on mortal man. We are all prone to
the same sin. Then let not man be your fear, let not him be your hope;
but let your hope be in the Lord your God. Let us make this our great
concern.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 3](isa003)

</div>
