<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa029)  [Next](isa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 30:0</span></span>

([Isa 30:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)) The Jews reproved for
seeking aid from Egypt.

([Isa 30:8-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008)) Judgements in
consequence of their contempt of God's word.

([Isa 30:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019)) God's mercies to his
church.

([Isa 30:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)) The ruin of the
Assyrian army, and of all God's enemies.

[Isaiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 30:1</span></span>

It was often the fault and folly of the Jews, that when troubled by
their neighbours on one side, they sought for succour from others,
instead of looking up to God. Nor can we avoid the dreadful consequences
of adding sin to sin, but by making the righteousness of Christ our
refuge, and seeking for the sanctification of the Holy Spirit. Men have
always been prone to lean to their own understandings, but this will end
in their shame and misery. They would not trust in God. They took much
pains to gain the Egyptians. The riches so spent turned to a bad
account. See what dangers men run into who forsake God to follow their
carnal confidences. The Creator is the Rock of ages, the creature a
broken reed; we cannot expect too little from man, or too much from God.
Our strength is to sit still, in humble dependence upon God and his
goodness, and quiet submission to his will.

[Isaiah 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 30:8</span></span>

The Jews were the only professing people God then had in the world, yet
many among them were rebellious. They had the light, but they loved
darkness rather. The prophets checked them in their sinful pursuits, so
that they could not proceed without fear; this they took amiss. But
faithful ministers will not be driven from seeking to awaken sinners.
God is the Holy One of Israel, and so they shall find him. They did not
like to hear of his holy commandments and his hatred of sin; they
desired that they might no more be reminded of these things. But as they
despised the word of God, their sins undermined their safety. Their
state would be dashed in pieces like a potter's vessel. Let us return
from our evil ways, and settle in the way of duty; that is the way to be
saved. Would we be strengthened, it must be in quietness and in
confidence, keeping peace in our own minds, and relying upon God. They
think themselves wiser than God; but the project by which they thought
to save themselves was their ruin. Only here and there one shall escape,
as a warning to others. If men will not repent, turn to God, and seek
happiness in his favour and service, their desires will but hasten their
ruin. Those who make God alone their confidence, will have comfort. God
ever waits to be gracious to all that come to him by faith in Christ,
and happy are those who wait for him.

[Isaiah 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 30:19</span></span>

God's people will soon arrive at the Zion above, and then they will weep
no more for ever. Even now they would have more comfort, as well as
holiness, if they were more constant in prayer. A famine of bread is not
so great a judgment as a famine of the word of God. There are right-hand
and left-hand errors; the tempter is busy courting us into by-paths. It
is happy if, by the counsels of a faithful minister or friend, or the
checks of conscience, and the strivings of God the Spirit, we are set
right when doubting, and prevented from going wrong. They shall be cured
of their idolatry. To all true penitents sin becomes very hateful. This
is shown daily in the conversion of souls, by the power of Divine grace,
to the fear and love of God. Abundant means of grace, with the
influences of the Holy Spirit, would be extended to places destitute of
them. The effect of this should be comfort and joy to the people of God.
Light, that is, knowledge, shall increase. This is the light which the
gospel brought into the world, and which proclaims healing to the
broken-hearted.

[Isaiah 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 30:27</span></span>

God curbs and restrains from doing mischief. With a word he guides his
people into the right way, but with a bridle he turns his enemies upon
their own ruin. Here, in threatening the ruin of Sennacherib's army, the
prophet points at the final and everlasting destruction of all
impenitent sinners. Tophet was a valley near Jerusalem, where fires were
continually burning to destroy things that were hurtful and offensive,
and there the idolatrous Jews caused their children to pass through the
fire to Moloch. This denotes the certainty of the destruction, as an
awful emblem of the place of torment in the other world. No oppressor
shall escape the Divine wrath. Let sinners then flee to Christ, seeking
to be reconciled to Him, that they may be safe and happy, when
destruction from the Almighty shall sweep away all the workers of
iniquity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 31](isa031)

</div>
