<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa051)  [Next](isa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 52:0</span></span>

([Isa 52:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)) The welcome news of
Christ's kingdom.

([Isa 52:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)) The humiliation of the
Messiah.

[Isaiah 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 52:1</span></span>

The gospel proclaims liberty to those bound with fears. Let those weary
and heavy laden under the burden of sin, find relief in Christ, shake
themselves from the dust of their doubts and fears, and loose themselves
from those bands. The price paid by the Redeemer for our salvation, was
not silver or gold, or corruptible things, but his own precious blood.
Considering the freeness of this salvation, and how hurtful to temporal
comfort sins are, we shall more value the redemption which is in Christ.
Do we seek victory over every sin, recollecting that the glory of God
requires holiness in every follower of Christ? The good news is, that
the Lord Jesus reigns. Christ himself brought these tidings first. His
ministers proclaim these good tidings: keeping themselves clean from the
pollutions of the world, they are beautiful to those to whom they are
sent. Zion's watchmen could scarcely discern any thing of God's favour
through the dark cloud of their afflictions; but now the cloud is
scattered, they shall plainly see the performance. Zion's waste places
shall then rejoice; all the world will have the benefit. This is applied
to our salvation by Christ. Babylon is no place for Israelites. And it
is a call to all in the bondage of sin and Satan, to use the liberty
Christ has proclaimed. They were to go with diligent haste, not to lose
time nor linger; but they were not to go with distrustful haste. Those
in the way of duty, are under God's special protection; and he that
believes this, will not hasten for fear.

[Isaiah 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 52:13</span></span>

Here begins that wonderful, minute, and faithful description of the
office, character, and glory of the Messiah, which has struck conviction
to many of the most hardened unbelievers. Christ is Wisdom itself; in
the work of our redemption there appeared the wisdom of God in a
mystery. Those that saw him, said, Surely never man looked so miserable:
never was sorrow like unto his sorrow. But God highly exalted him. That
shall be discovered by the gospel of Christ, which could never be told
in any other way. And Christ having once shed his blood for sinners, its
power still continues. May all opposers see the wisdom of ceasing from
their opposition, and be made partakers of the blood of sprinkling, and
the baptism of the Holy Ghost; obeying him, and praising his salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 53](isa053)

</div>
