<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa011)  [Next](isa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 12:0</span></span>

This is a hymn of praise suited to the times of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 12:1</span></span>

The song of praise in this chapter is suitable for the return of the
outcasts of Israel from their long captivity, but it is especially
suitable to the case of a sinner, when he first finds peace and joy in
believing; to that of a believer, when his peace is renewed after
corrections for backslidings; and to that of the whole company of the
redeemed, when they meet before the throne of God in heaven. The promise
is sure, and the blessings contained in it are very rich; and the
benefits enjoyed through Jesus Christ, call for the most enlarged
thanksgivings. By Jesus Christ, the Root of Jesse, the Divine anger
against mankind was turned away, for he is our Peace. Those to whom God
is reconciled, he comforts. They are taught to triumph in God and their
interest in him. I will trust him to prepare me for his salvation, and
preserve me to it. I will trust him with all my concerns, not doubting
but he will make all to work for good. Faith in God is a sovereign
remedy against tormenting fears. Many Christians have God for their
strength, who have him not for their song; they walk in darkness: but
those who have God for their strength ought to make him their song; that
is, give him the glory of it, and take to themselves the comfort of it.
This salvation is from the love of God the Father, it comes to us
through God the Son, it is applied by the new-creating power of God the
Spirit. When this is seen by faith, the trembling sinner learns to hope
in God, and is delivered from fear. The purifying and sanctifying
influences of the Holy Ghost often are denoted under the emblem of
springing water. This work flows through the mediation of Christ, and is
conveyed to our souls by means of God's ordinances. Blessed be God, we
have wells of salvation opened on every side, and may draw from them the
waters of life and consolation. In the second part of this gospel song,
ver. [Isa 12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004), believers encourage
one another to praise God, and seek to draw others to join them in it.
No difference of opinions about the times and seasons, and other such
matters, ought to divide the hearts of Christians. Let it be our care
that we may be placed amongst those to whom he will say, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 13](isa013)

</div>
