<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa039)  [Next](isa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

([Isa 40:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)) The preaching of the
gospel, and glad tidings of the coming of Christ.

([Isa 40:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)) The almighty power of
God.

([Isa 40:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)) The folly of idolatry.

([Isa 40:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)) Against unbelief.

[Isaiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 40:1</span></span>

All human life is a warfare; the Christian life is the most so; but the
struggle will not last always. Troubles are removed in love, when sin is
pardoned. In the great atonement of the death of Christ, the mercy of
God is exercised to the glory of his justice. In Christ, and his
sufferings, true penitents receive of the Lord's hand double for all
their sins; for the satisfaction Christ made by his death was of
infinite value. The prophet had some reference to the return of the Jews
from Babylon. But this is a small event, compared with that pointed out
by the Holy Ghost in the New Testament, when John the Baptist proclaimed
the approach of Christ. When eastern princes marched through desert
countries, ways were prepared for them, and hinderances removed. And may
the Lord prepare our hearts by the teaching of his word and the
convictions of his Spirit, that high and proud thoughts may be brought
down, good desires planted, crooked and rugged tempers made straight and
softened, and every hinderance removed, that we may be ready for his
will on earth, and prepared for his heavenly kingdom. What are all that
belongs to fallen man, or all that he does, but as the grass and the
flower thereof! And what will all the titles and possessions of a dying
sinner avail, when they leave him under condemnation! The word of the
Lord can do that for us, which all flesh cannot. The glad tidings of the
coming of Christ were to be sent forth to the ends of the earth. Satan
is the strong man armed; but our Lord Jesus is stronger; and he shall
proceed, and do all that he purposes. Christ is the good Shepherd; he
shows tender care for young converts, weak believers, and those of a
sorrowful spirit. By his word he requires no more service, and by his
providence he inflicts no more trouble, than he will strengthen them
for. May we know our Shepherd's voice, and follow him, proving ourselves
his sheep.

[Isaiah 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 40:12</span></span>

All created beings shrink to nothing in comparison with the Creator.
When the Lord, by his Spirit, made the world, none directed his Spirit,
or gave advice what to do, or how to do it. The nations, in comparison
of him, are as a drop which remains in the bucket, compared with the
vast ocean; or as the small dust in the balance, which does not turn it,
compared with all the earth. This magnifies God's love to the world,
that, though it is of such small account and value with him, yet, for
the redemption of it, he gave his only-begotten Son, [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016). The services of the church can
make no addition to him. Our souls must have perished for ever, if the
only Son of the Father had not given himself for us.

[Isaiah 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 40:18</span></span>

Whatever we esteem or love, fear or hope in, more than God, that
creature we make equal with God, though we do not make images or worship
them. He that is so poor, that he has scarcely a sacrifice to offer, yet
will not be without a god of his own. They spared no cost upon their
idols; we grudge what is spent in the service of our God. To prove the
greatness of God, the prophet appeals to all ages and nations. Those who
are ignorant of this, are willingly ignorant. God has the command of all
creatures, and of all created things. The prophet directs us to use our
reason as well as our senses; to consider who created the hosts of
heaven, and to pay our homage to Him. Not one fails to fulfil his will.
And let us not forget, that He spake all the promises, and engaged to
perform them.

[Isaiah 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 40:27</span></span>

The people of God are reproved for their unbelief and distrust of God.
Let them remember they took the names Jacob and Israel, from one who
found God faithful to him in all his straits. And they bore these names
as a people in covenant with Him. Many foolish frets, and foolish fears,
would vanish before inquiry into the causes. It is bad to have evil
thoughts rise in our minds, but worse to turn them into evil words. What
they had known, and had heard, was sufficient to silence all these fears
and distrusts. Where God had begun the work of grace, he will perfect
it. He will help those who, in humble dependence on him, help
themselves. As the day, so shall the strength be. In the strength of
Divine grace their souls shall ascend above the world. They shall run
the way of God's commandments cheerfully. Let us watch against unbelief,
pride, and self-confidence. If we go forth in our own strength, we shall
faint, and utterly fall; but having our hearts and our hopes in heaven,
we shall be carried above all difficulties, and be enabled to lay hold
of the prize of our high calling in Christ Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 41](isa041)

</div>
