<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa015)  [Next](isa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 16:0</span></span>

([Isa 16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)) Moab is exhorted to
yield obedience.

([Isa 16:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)) The pride and the
judgments of Moab.

[Isaiah 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 16:1</span></span>

God tells sinners what they may do to prevent ruin; so he does to Moab.
Let them send the tribute they formerly engaged to pay to Judah. Take it
as good advice. Break off thy sins by righteousness, it may lengthen thy
quiet. And this may be applied to the great gospel duty of submission to
Christ. Send him the lamb, the best you have, yourselves a living
sacrifice. When you come to God, the great Ruler, come in the name of
the Lamb, the Lamb of God. Those who will not submit to Christ, shall be
as a bird that wanders from her nest, which shall be snatched up by the
next bird of prey. Those who will not yield to the fear of God, shall be
made to yield to the fear of every thing else. He advises them to be
kind to the seed of Israel. Those that expect to find favour when in
trouble themselves, must show favour to those in trouble. What is here
said concerning the throne of Hezekiah, also belongs, in a much higher
sense, to the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Though by subjection to Him we
may not enjoy worldly riches or honours, but may be exposed to poverty
and contempt, we shall have peace of conscience and eternal life.

[Isaiah 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 16:6</span></span>

Those who will not be counselled, cannot be helped. More souls are
ruined by pride than by any other sin whatever. Also, the very proud are
commonly very passionate. With lies many seek to gain the gratification
of pride and passion, but they shall not compass proud and angry
projects. Moab was famous for fields and vineyards; but they shall be
laid waste by the invading army. God can soon turn laughter into
mourning, and joy into heaviness. In God let us always rejoice with holy
triumph; in earthly things let us always rejoice with holy trembling.
The prophet looks with concern on the desolations of such a pleasant
country; it causes inward grief. The false gods of Moab are unable to
help; and the God of Israel, the only true God, can and will make good
what he has spoken. Let Moab know her ruin is very near, and prepare.
The most awful declarations of Divine wrath, discover the way of escape
to those who take warning. There is no escape, but by submission to the
Son of David, and devoting ourselves to him. And, at length, when the
appointed time comes, all the glory, prosperity, and multitude of the
wicked shall perish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 17](isa017)

</div>
