<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa020)  [Next](isa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 21:0</span></span>

([Isa 21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)) The taking of Babylon.

([Isa 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011), [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012)) Of the Edomites.

([Isa 21:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)) Of the Arabs.

[Isaiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 21:1</span></span>

Babylon was a flat country, abundantly watered. The destruction of
Babylon, so often prophesied of by Isaiah, was typical of the
destruction of the great foe of the New Testament church, foretold in
the Revelation. To the poor oppressed captives it would be welcome news;
to the proud oppressors it would be grievous. Let this check vain mirth
and sensual pleasures, that we know not in what heaviness the mirth may
end. Here is the alarm given to Babylon, when forced by Cyrus. An ass
and a camel seem to be the symbols of the Medes and Persians. Babylon's
idols shall be so far from protecting her, that they shall be broken
down. True believers are the corn of God's floor; hypocrites are but as
chaff and straw, with which the wheat is now mixed, but from which it
shall be separated. The corn of God's floor must expect to be threshed
by afflictions and persecutions. God's Israel of old was afflicted. Even
then God owns it is his still. In all events concerning the church,
past, present, and to come, we must look to God, who has power to do any
thing for his church, and grace to do every thing that is for her good.

[Isaiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 21:11</span></span>

God's prophets and ministers are as watchmen in the city in a time of
peace, to see that all is safe. As watchmen in the camp in time of war,
to warn of the motions of the enemy. After a long sleep in sin and
security, it is time to rise, to awake out of sleep. We have a great
deal of work to do, a long journey to go; it is time to be stirring.
After a long dark night is there any hope of the day dawning? What
tidings of the night? What happens to-night? We must never be secure.
But many make curious inquiries of the watchmen. They would willingly
have nice questions solved, or difficult prophecies interpreted; but
they do not seek into the state of their own souls, about the way of
salvation, and the path of duty. The watchman answers by way of
prophecy. There comes first a morning of light, and peace, and
opportunity; but afterward comes a night of trouble and calamity. If
there be a morning of youth and health, there will come a night of
sickness and old age; if a morning of prosperity in the family, in the
public, yet we must look for changes. It is our wisdom to improve the
present morning, in preparation for the night that is coming after it.
Inquire, return, come. We are urged to do it quickly, for there is no
time to trifle. Those that return and come to God, will find they have a
great deal of work to do, and but little time to do it in.

[Isaiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 21:13</span></span>

The Arabians lived in tents, and kept cattle. A destroying army shall be
brought upon them, and make them an easy prey. We know not what straits
we may be brought into before we die. Those may know the want of
necessary food who now eat bread to the full. Neither the skill of
archers, nor the courage of mighty men, can protect from the judgments
of God. That is poor glory, which will thus quickly come to nothing.
Thus hath the Lord said to me; and no word of his shall fall to the
ground. We may be sure the Strength of Israel will not lie. Happy are
those only whose riches and glory are out of the reach of invaders; all
other prosperity will speedily pass away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 22](isa022)

</div>
