<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam003)  [Next](jam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 4:0</span></span>

([Jam 4:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)) Here are cautions
against corrupt affections, and love of this world, which is enmity to
God.

([Jam 4:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)) Exhortations to
undertake no affairs of life, without constant regard to the will and
providence of God.

[James 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 4:1</span></span>

Since all wars and fightings come from the corruptions of our own
hearts, it is right to mortify those lusts that war in the members.
Wordly and fleshly lusts are distempers, which will not allow content or
satisfaction. Sinful desires and affections stop prayer, and the working
of our desires toward God. And let us beware that we do not abuse or
misuse the mercies received, by the disposition of the heart when
prayers are granted When men ask of God prosperity, they often ask with
wrong aims and intentions. If we thus seek the things of this world, it
is just in God to deny them. Unbelieving and cold desires beg denials;
and we may be sure that when prayers are rather the language of lusts
than of graces, they will return empty. Here is a decided warning to
avoid all criminal friendships with this world. Worldly-mindedness is
enmity to God. An enemy may be reconciled, but "enmity" never can be
reconciled. A man may have a large portion in things of this life, and
yet be kept in the love of God; but he who sets his heart upon the
world, who will conform to it rather than lose its friendship, is an
enemy to God. So that any one who resolves at all events to be upon
friendly terms with the world, must be the enemy of God. Did then the
Jews, or the loose professors of Christianity, think the Scripture spake
in vain against this worldly-mindedness? or does the Holy Spirit who
dwells in all Christians, or the new nature which he creates, produce
such fruit? Natural corruption shows itself by envying. The spirit of
the world teaches us to lay up, or lay out for ourselves, according to
our own fancies; God the Holy Spirit teaches us to be willing to do good
to all about us, as we are able. The grace of God will correct and cure
the spirit by nature in us; and where he gives grace, he gives another
spirit than that of the world. The proud resist God: in their
understanding they resist the truths of God; in their will they resist
the laws of God; in their passions they resist the providence of God;
therefore, no wonder that God resists the proud. How wretched the state
of those who make God their enemy! God will give more grace to the
humble, because they see their need of it, pray for it are thankful for
it, and such shall have it. Submit to God, [Jam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007). Submit your understanding to the
truth of God; submit your wills to the will of his precept, the will of
his providence. Submit yourselves to God, for he is ready to do you
good. If we yield to temptations, the devil will continually follow us;
but if we put on the whole armour of God, and stand out against him, he
will leave us. Let sinners then submit to God, and seek his grace and
favour; resisting the devil. All sin must be wept over; here, in godly
sorrow, or, hereafter, in eternal misery. And the Lord will not refuse
to comfort one who really mourns for sin, or to exalt one who humbles
himself before him.

[James 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 4:11</span></span>

Our lips must be governed by the law of kindness, as well as truth and
justice. Christians are brethren. And to break God's commands, is to
speak evil of them, and to judge them, as if they laid too great a
restraint upon us. We have the law of God, which is a rule to all; let
us not presume to set up our own notions and opinions as a rule to those
about us, and let us be careful that we be not condemned of the Lord.
"Go to now," is a call to any one to consider his conduct as being
wrong. How apt worldly and contriving men are to leave God out of their
plans! How vain it is to look for any thing good without God's blessing
and guidance! The frailty, shortness, and uncertainty of life, ought to
check the vanity and presumptuous confidence of all projects for
futurity. We can fix the hour and minute of the sun's rising and setting
to-morrow, but we cannot fix the certain time of a vapour being
scattered. So short, unreal, and fading is human life, and all the
prosperity or enjoyment that attends it; though bliss or woe for ever
must be according to our conduct during this fleeting moment. We are
always to depend on the will of God. Our times are not in our own hands,
but at the disposal of God. Our heads may be filled with cares and
contrivances for ourselves, or our families, or our friends; but
Providence often throws our plans into confusion. All we design, and all
we do, should be with submissive dependence on God. It is foolish, and
it is hurtful, to boast of worldly things and aspiring projects; it will
bring great disappointment, and will prove destruction in the end.
Omissions are sins which will be brought into judgment, as well as
commissions. He that does not the good he knows should be done, as well
as he who does the evil he knows should not be done, will be condemned.
Oh that we were as careful not to omit prayer, and not to neglect to
meditate and examine our consciences, as we are not to commit gross
outward vices against light!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 5](jam005)

</div>
