<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam000)  [Next](jam002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

([Jam 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)) How to apply to God
under troubles, and how to behave in prosperous and in adverse
circumstances.

([Jam 1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)) To look upon all evil
as proceeding from ourselves, and all good from God.

([Jam 1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)) The duty of watching
against a rash temper, and of receiving the word of God with meekness.

([Jam 1:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)) And of living according
thereto.

([Jam 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026), [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027)) The difference between vain
pretences and real religion.

[James 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 1:1</span></span>

Christianity teaches men to be joyful under troubles: such exercises are
sent from God's love; and trials in the way of duty will brighten our
graces now, and our crown at last. Let us take care, in times of trial,
that patience, and not passion, is set to work in us: whatever is said
or done, let patience have the saying and doing of it. When the work of
patience is complete, it will furnish all that is necessary for our
Christian race and warfare. We should not pray so much for the removal
of affliction, as for wisdom to make a right use of it. And who does not
want wisdom to guide him under trials, both in regulating his own
spirit, and in managing his affairs? Here is something in answer to
every discouraging turn of the mind, when we go to God under a sense of
our own weakness and folly. If, after all, any should say, This may be
the case with some, but I fear I shall not succeed, the promise is, To
any that asketh, it shall be given. A mind that has single and
prevailing regard to its spiritual and eternal interest, and that keeps
steady in its purposes for God, will grow wise by afflictions, will
continue fervent in devotion, and rise above trials and oppositions.
When our faith and spirits rise and fall with second causes, there will
be unsteadiness in our words and actions. This may not always expose men
to contempt in the world, but such ways cannot please God. No condition
of life is such as to hinder rejoicing in God. Those of low degree may
rejoice, if they are exalted to be rich in faith and heirs of the
kingdom of God; and the rich may rejoice in humbling providences, that
lead to a humble and lowly disposition of mind. Worldly wealth is a
withering thing. Then, let him that is rich rejoice in the grace of God,
which makes and keeps him humble; and in the trials and exercises which
teach him to seek happiness in and from God, not from perishing
enjoyments.

[James 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 1:12</span></span>

It is not every man who suffers, that is blessed; but he who with
patience and constancy goes through all difficulties in the way of duty.
Afflictions cannot make us miserable, if it be not our own fault. The
tried Christian shall be a crowned one. The crown of life is promised to
all who have the love of God reigning in their hearts. Every soul that
truly loves God, shall have its trials in this world fully recompensed
in that world above, where love is made perfect. The commands of God,
and the dealings of his providence, try men's hearts, and show the
dispositions which prevail in them. But nothing sinful in the heart or
conduct can be ascribed to God. He is not the author of the dross,
though his fiery trial exposes it. Those who lay the blame of sin,
either upon their constitution, or upon their condition in the world, or
pretend they cannot keep from sinning, wrong God as if he were the
author of sin. Afflictions, as sent by God, are designed to draw out our
graces, but not our corruptions. The origin of evil and temptation is in
our own hearts. Stop the beginnings of sin, or all the evils that follow
must be wholly charged upon us. God has no pleasure in the death of men,
as he has no hand in their sin; but both sin and misery are owing to
themselves. As the sun is the same in nature and influences, though the
earth and clouds, often coming between, make it seem to us to vary, so
God is unchangeable, and our changes and shadows are not from any
changes or alterations in him. What the sun is in nature, God is in
grace, providence, and glory; and infinitely more. As every good gift is
from God, so particularly our being born again, and all its holy, happy
consequences come from him. A true Christian becomes as different a
person from what he was before the renewing influences of Divine grace,
as if he were formed over again. We should devote all our faculties to
God's service, that we may be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures.

[James 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 1:19</span></span>

Instead of blaming God under our trials, let us open our ears and hearts
to learn what he teaches by them. And if men would govern their tongues,
they must govern their passions. The worst thing we can bring to any
dispute, is anger. Here is an exhortation to lay apart, and to cast off
as a filthy garment, all sinful practices. This must reach to sins of
thought and affection, as well as of speech and practice; to every thing
corrupt and sinful. We must yield ourselves to the word of God, with
humble and teachable minds. Being willing to hear of our faults, taking
it not only patiently, but thankfully. It is the design of the word of
God to make us wise to salvation; and those who propose any mean or low
ends in attending upon it, dishonour the gospel, and disappoint their
own souls.

[James 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 1:22</span></span>

If we heard a sermon every day of the week, and an angel from heaven
were the preacher, yet, if we rested in hearing only, it would never
bring us to heaven. Mere hearers are self-deceivers; and self-deceit
will be found the worst deceit at last. If we flatter ourselves, it is
our own fault; the truth, as it is in Jesus, flatters no man. Let the
word of truth be carefully attended to, and it will set before us the
corruption of our nature, the disorders of our hearts and lives; and it
will tell us plainly what we are. Our sins are the spots the law
discovers: Christ's blood is the laver the gospel shows. But in vain do
we hear God's word, and look into the gospel glass, if we go away, and
forget our spots, instead of washing them off; and forget our remedy,
instead of applying to it. This is the case with those who do not hear
the word as they ought. In hearing the word, we look into it for counsel
and direction, and when we study it, it turns to our spiritual life.
Those who keep in the law and word of God, are, and shall be, blessed in
all their ways. His gracious recompence hereafter, would be connected
with his present peace and comfort. Every part of Divine revelation has
its use, in bringing the sinner to Christ for salvation, and in
directing and encouraging him to walk at liberty, by the Spirit of
adoption, according to the holy commands of God. And mark the
distinctness, it is not for his deeds, that any man is blessed, but in
his deed. It is not talking, but walking, that will bring us to heaven.
Christ will become more precious to the believer's soul, which by his
grace will become more fitted for the inheritance of the saints in
light.

[James 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 1:26</span></span>

When men take more pains to seem religious than really to be so, it is a
sign their religion is in vain. The not bridling the tongue, readiness
to speak of the faults of others, or to lessen their wisdom and piety,
are signs of a vain religion. The man who has a slandering tongue,
cannot have a truly humble, gracious heart. False religious may be known
by their impurity and uncharitableness. True religion teaches us to do
every thing as in the presence of God. An unspotted life must go with
unfeigned love and charity. Our true religion is equal to the measure in
which these things have place in our hearts and conduct. And let us
remember, that nothing avails in Christ Jesus, but faith that worketh by
love, purifies the heart, subdues carnal lusts, and obeys God's
commands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 2](jam002)

</div>
