<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg012)  [Next](jdg014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 13:0</span></span>

([Jdg 13:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)) The Philistines, Samson
announced.

([Jdg 13:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#008)) The angel appears to
Manoah.

([Jdg 13:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#015)) Manoah's sacrifice.

([Jdg 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#024), [Jdg
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025)) Birth of Samson.

[Judges 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 13:1</span></span>

Israel did evil: then God delivered them again into the hands of the
Philistines. When Israel was in this distress, Samson was born. His
parents had been long childless. Many eminent persons were born of such
mothers. Mercies long waited for, often prove signal mercies; and by
them others may be encouraged to continue their hope in God's mercy. The
angel notices her affliction. God often sends comfort to his people very
seasonably, when they feel their troubles most. This deliverer of Israel
must be devoted to God. Manoah's wife was satisfied that the messenger
was of God. She gave her husband a particular account, both of the
promise and of the precept. Husbands and wives should tell each other
their experiences of communion with God, and their improvements in
acquaintance with him, that they may help each other in the way that is
holy.

[Judges 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 13:8</span></span>

Blessed are those who have not seen, and yet, as Manoah, have believed.
Good men are more careful and desirous to know the duty to be done by
them, than to know the events concerning them: duty is ours, events are
God's. God will guide those by his counsel, who desire to know their
duty, and apply to him to teach them. Pious parents, especially, will
beg Divine assistance. The angel repeats the directions he had before
given. There is need of much care for the right ordering both of
ourselves and our children, that we may be duly separate from the world,
and living sacrifices to the Lord.

[Judges 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 13:15</span></span>

What Manoah asked for instruction in his duty, he was readily told; but
what he asked to gratify his curiosity, was denied. God has in his word
given full directions concerning our duty, but never designed to answer
other questionings. There are secret things which belong not to us, of
which we must be quite contented to be ignorant, while in this world.
The name of our Lord is wonderful and secret; but by his wonderful works
he makes himself known as far as is needful for us. Prayer is the ascent
of the soul to God. But without Christ in the heart by faith, our
services are offensive smoke; in him, acceptable flame. We may apply
this to Christ's sacrifice of himself for us; he ascended in the flame
of his own offering, for by his own blood he entered in once into the
holy place, [Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). In Manoah's
reflections there is great fear; We shall surely die. In his wife's
reflection there is great faith. As a help meet for him, she encouraged
him. Let believers who have had communion with God in the word and
prayer, to whom he has graciously manifested himself, and who have had
reason to think God has accepted their works, take encouragement from
thence in a cloudy and dark day. God would not have done what he has
done for my soul, if he had designed to forsake me, and leave me to
perish at last; for his work is perfect. Learn to reason as Manoah's
wife; If God designed me to perish under his wrath, he would not give me
tokens of his favour.

[Judges 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 13:24</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord began to move Samson when a youth. This was
evidence that the Lord blessed him. Where God gives his blessing, he
gives his Spirit to qualify for the blessing. Those are blessed indeed
in whom the Spirit of grace begins to work in the days of their
childhood. Samson drank no wine or strong drink, yet excelled in
strength and courage, for he had the Spirit of God moving him; therefore
be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 14](jdg014)

</div>
