<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg010)  [Next](jdg012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 11:0</span></span>

([Jdg 11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)) Jephthah and the
Gileadites.

(v. 12-28) He attempts to make peace.

([Jdg 11:29-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)) Jephthah's vow. He
vanquishes the Ammonites.

[Judges 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 11:1</span></span>

Men ought not to be blamed for their parentage, so long as they by their
personal merits roll away any reproach. God had forgiven Israel,
therefore Jephthah will forgive. He speaks not with confidence of his
success, knowing how justly God might suffer the Ammonites to prevail
for the further punishment of Israel. Nor does he speak with any
confidence at all in himself. If he succeed, it is the Lord delivers
them into his hand; he thereby reminds his countrymen to look up to God
as the Giver of victory. The same question as here, in fact, is put to
those who desire salvation by Christ. If he save you, will ye be willing
that he shall rule you? On no other terms will he save you. If he make
you happy, shall he make you holy? If he be your helper, shall he be
your Head? Jephthah, to obtain a little worldly honour, was willing to
expose his life: shall we be discouraged in our Christian warfare by the
difficulties we may meet with, when Christ has promised a crown of life
to him that overcometh?

[Judges 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 11:12</span></span>

One instance of the honour and respect we owe to God, as our God, is,
rightly to employ what he gives us to possess. Receive it from him, use
it for him, and part with it when he calls for it. The whole of this
message shows that Jephthah was well acquainted with the books of Moses.
His argument was clear, and his demand reasonable. Those who possess the
most courageous faith, will be the most disposed for peace, and the
readiest to make advances to obtain; but rapacity and ambition often
cloak their designs under a plea of equity, and render peaceful
endeavours of no avail.

[Judges 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 11:29</span></span>

Several important lessons are to be learned from Jephthah's vow. 1.
There may be remainders of distrust and doubting, even in the hearts of
true and great believers. 2. Our vows to God should not be as a purchase
of the favour we desire, but to express gratitude to him. 3. We need to
be very well-advised in making vows, lest we entangle ourselves. 4. What
we have solemnly vowed to God, we must perform, if it be possible and
lawful, though it be difficult and grievous to us. 5. It well becomes
children, obediently and cheerfully to submit to their parents in the
Lord. It is hard to say what Jephthah did in performance of his vow; but
it is thought that he did not offer his daughter as a burnt-offering.
Such a sacrifice would have been an abomination to the Lord; it is
supposed she was obliged to remain unmarried, and apart from her family.
Concerning this and some other such passages in the sacred history,
about which learned men are divided and in doubt, we need not perplex
ourselves; what is necessary to our salvation, thanks be to God, is
plain enough. If the reader recollects the promise of Christ concerning
the teaching of the Holy Spirit, and places himself under this heavenly
Teacher, the Holy Ghost will guide to all truth in every passage, so far
as it is needful to be understood.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 12](jdg012)

</div>
