<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg002)  [Next](jdg004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 3:0</span></span>

([Jdg 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)) The nations left to prove
Israel.

([Jdg 3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)) Othniel delivers Israel.

(v. 12-30) Ehud delivers Israel from Eglon.

([Jdg 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)) Shamgar delivers and
judges Israel.

[Judges 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 3:1</span></span>

As the Israelites were a type of the church on earth, they were not to
be idle and slothful. The Lord was pleased to try them by the remains of
the devoted nations they spared. Temptations and trials detect the
wickedness of the hearts of sinners; and strengthen he graces of
believers in their daily conflict with Satan, sin, and this evil world.
They must live in this world, but they are not of it, and are forbidden
to conform to it. This marks the difference between the followers of
Christ and mere professors. The friendship of the world is more fatal
than its enmity; the latter can only kill the body, but the former
murders many precious souls.

[Judges 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 3:8</span></span>

The first judge was Othniel: even in Joshua's time Othniel began to be
famous. Soon after Israel's settlement in Canaan their purity began to
be corrupted, and their peace disturbed. But affliction makes those cry
to God who before would scarcely speak to him. God returned in mercy to
them for their deliverance. The Spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel.
The Spirit of wisdom and courage to qualify him for the service, and the
Spirit of power to excite him to it. He first judged Israel, reproved
and reformed them, and then went to war. Let sin at home be conquered,
that worst of enemies, then enemies abroad will be more easily dealt
with. Thus let Christ be our Judge and Lawgiver, then he will save us.

[Judges 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 3:12</span></span>

When Israel sins again, God raises up a new oppressor. The Israelites
did ill, and the Moabites did worse; yet because God punishes the sins
of his own people in this world, Israel is weakened, and Moab
strengthened against them. If lesser troubles do not do the work, God
will send greater. When Israel prays again, God raises up Ehud. As a
judge, or minister of Divine justice, Ehud put to death Eglon, the king
of Moab, and thus executed the judgments of God upon him as an enemy to
God and Israel. But the law of being subject to principalities and
powers in all things lawful, is the rule of our conduct. No such
commissions are now given; to pretend to them is to blaspheme God.
Notice Ehud's address to Eglon. What message from God but a message of
vengeance can a proud rebel expect? Such a message is contained in the
word of God; his ministers are boldly to declare it, without fearing the
frown, or respecting the persons of sinners. But, blessed be God, they
have to deliver a message of mercy and of free salvation; the message of
vengeance belongs only to those who neglect the offers of grace. The
consequence of this victory was, that the land had rest eighty years. It
was a great while for the land to rest; yet what is that to the saints'
everlasting rest in the heavenly Canaan.

[Judges 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 3:31</span></span>

The side of the country which lay south-west, was infested by the
Philistines. God raised up Shamgar to deliver them; having neither sword
nor spear, he took an ox-goad, the instrument next at hand. God can make
those serviceable to his glory and to his church's good, whose birth,
education, and employment, are mean and obscure. It is no matter what
the weapon is, if God directs and strengthens the arm. Often he works by
unlikely means, that the excellency of the power may appear to be of
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 4](jdg004)

</div>
