<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg004)  [Next](jdg006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 5:0</span></span>

([Jdg 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)) Praise and glory ascribed
to God.

([Jdg 5:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)) The distress and
deliverance of Israel.

([Jdg 5:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)) Some commended, others
censured.

([Jdg 5:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)) Sisera's mother
disappointed.

[Judges 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 5:1</span></span>

No time should be lost in returning thanks to the Lord for his mercies;
for our praises are most acceptable, pleasant, and profitable, when they
flow from a full heart. By this, love and gratitude would be more
excited and more deeply fixed in the hearts of believers; the events
would be more known and longer remembered. Whatever Deborah, Barak, or
the army had done, the Lord must have all the praise. The will, the
power, and the success were all from Him.

[Judges 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 5:6</span></span>

Deborah describes the distressed state of Israel under the tyranny of
Jabin, that their salvation might appear more gracious. She shows what
brought this misery upon them. It was their idolatry. They chose new
gods, with new names. But under all these images, Satan was worshipped.
Deborah was a mother to Israel, by diligently promoting the salvation of
their souls. She calls on those who shared the advantages of this great
salvation, to offer up thanks to God for it. Let such as are restored,
not only to their liberty as other Israelites, but to their rank, speak
God's praises. This is the Lord's doing. In these acts of his, justice
was executed on his enemies. In times of persecution, God's ordinances,
the walls of salvation, whence the waters of life are drawn, are
resorted to at the hazard of the lives of those who attend them. At all
times Satan will endeavour to hinder the believer from drawing near to
the throne of grace. Notice God's kindness to his trembling people. It
is the glory of God to protect those who are most exposed, and to help
the weakest. Let us notice the benefit we have from the public peace,
the inhabitants of villages especially, and give God the praise.

[Judges 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 5:12</span></span>

Deborah called on her own soul to be in earnest. He that will set the
hearts of other men on fire with the love of Christ, must himself burn
with love. Praising God is a work we should awake to, and awake
ourselves unto. She notices who fought against Israel, who fought for
them, and who kept away. Who fought against them. They were obstinate
enemies to God's people, therefore the more dangerous. Who fought for
them. The several tribes that helped are here spoken of with honour; for
though God is above all to be glorified, those who are employed must
have their due praise, to encourage others. But the whole creation is at
war with those to whom God is an enemy. The river of Kishon fought
against their enemies. At most times it was shallow, yet now, probably
by the great rain that fell, it was so swelled, and the stream so deep
and strong, that those who attempted to pass, were drowned. Deborah's
own soul fought against them. When the soul is employed in holy
exercises, and heart-work is made of them, through the grace of God, the
strength of our spiritual enemies will be trodden down, and will fall
before us. She observes who kept away, and did not side with Israel, as
might have been expected. Thus many are kept from doing their duty by
the fear of trouble, the love of ease, and undue affection to their
worldly business and advantage. Narrow, selfish spirits care not what
becomes of God's church, so that they can but get, keep, and save money.
All seek their own, [Phi 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021). A
little will serve those for a pretence to stay at home, who have no mind
to engage in needful services, because there is difficulty and danger in
them. But we cannot keep away from the contest between the Lord and his
enemies; and if we do not actively endeavour to promote his cause in
this wicked world, we shall fall under the curse against the workers of
iniquity. Though He needs no human help, yet he is pleased to accept the
services of those who improve their talents to advance his cause. He
requires every man to do so.

[Judges 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 5:24</span></span>

Jael had a special blessing. Those whose lot is cast in the tent, in a
low and narrow sphere, if they serve God according to the powers he has
given them, shall not lose their reward. The mother of Sisera looked for
his return, not in the least fearing his success. Let us take heed of
indulging eager desires towards any temporal good, particularly toward
that which cherishes vain-glory, for that was what she here doted on.
What a picture does she present of an ungodly and sensual heart! How
shameful and childish these wishes of an aged mother and her attendants
for her son! And thus does God often bring ruin on his enemies when they
are most puffed up. Deborah concludes with a prayer to God for the
destruction of all his foes, and for the comfort of all his friends.
Such shall be the honour, and joy of all who love God in sincerity, they
shall shine for ever as the sun in the firmament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 6](jdg006)

</div>
