<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer029)  [Next](jer031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 30:0</span></span>

([Jer 30:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)) Troubles which shall be
before the restoration of Israel.

([Jer 30:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)) Encouragement to trust
Divine promises.

([Jer 30:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)) The blessings under
Christ, and the wrath on the wicked.

[Jeremiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 30:1</span></span>

Jeremiah is to write what God had spoken to him. The very words are such
as the Holy Ghost teaches. These are the words God ordered to be
written; and promises written by his order, are truly his word. He must
write a description of the trouble the people were now in, and were
likely to be in. A happy end should be put to these calamities. Though
the afflictions of the church may last long, they shall not last always.
The Jews shall be restored again. They shall obey, or hearken to the
Messiah, the Christ, the Son of David, their King. The deliverance of
the Jews from Babylon, is pointed out in the prophecy, but the
restoration and happy state of Israel and Judah, when converted to
Christ their King, are foretold; also the miseries of the nations before
the coming of Christ. All men must honour the Son as they honour the
Father, and come into the service and worship of God by him. Our
gracious Lord pardons the sins of the believer, and breaks off the yoke
of sin and Satan, that he may serve God without fear, in righteousness
and true holiness before him all the remainder of his days, as the
redeemed subject of Christ our King.

[Jeremiah 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 30:12</span></span>

When God is against a people, who will be for them? Who can be for them,
so as to do them any kindness? Incurable griefs are owing to incurable
lusts. Yet, though the captives suffered justly, and could not help
themselves, the Lord intended to appear for them, and to punish their
oppressors; and he will still do so. But every effort to heal ourselves
must prove fruitless, so long as we neglect the heavenly Advocate and
sanctifying Spirit. The dealings of His grace with every true convert,
and every returning backslider, are the same in effect as his
proceedings to the Jews.

[Jeremiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 30:18</span></span>

We have here further intimations of the favour of God for them after the
days of their calamity have expired. The proper work and office of
Christ, as Mediator, is to draw near unto God, for us, as the High
Priest of our profession. His own undertaking, in compliance with his
Father's will, and in compassion to fallen man, engaged him. Jesus
Christ was, in all this, truly wonderful. They shall be taken again into
covenant with the Lord, according to the covenant made with their
fathers. "I will be your God:" it is his good-will to us, which is the
summary of that part of the covenant. The wrath of God against the
wicked is very terrible, like a whirlwind. The purposes of his wrath, as
well as the purposes of his love, will all be fulfilled. God will
comfort all that turn to him; but those who approach him must have their
hearts engaged to do it with reverence, devotion, and faith. How will
they escape who neglect so great salvation?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 31](jer031)

</div>
