<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer002)  [Next](jer004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 3:0</span></span>

([Jer 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)) Exhortations to
repentance.

([Jer 3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)) Judah more guilty than
Israel.

([Jer 3:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)) But pardon is promised.

([Jer 3:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)) The children of Israel
express their sorrow and repentance.

[Jeremiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 3:1</span></span>

In repentance, it is good to think upon the sins of which we have been
guilty, and the places and companies where they have been committed. How
gently the Lord had corrected them! In receiving penitents, he is God,
and not man. Whatever thou hast said or done hitherto, wilt thou not
from this time apply to me? Will not this grace of God overcome thee?
Now pardon is proclaimed, wilt thou not take the benefit? They will hope
to find in him the tender compassions of a Father towards a returning
prodigal. They will come to him as the Guide of their youth: youth needs
a guide. Repenting sinners may encourage themselves that God will not
keep his anger to the end. All God's mercies, in every age, suggest
encouragement; and what can be so desirable for the young, as to have
the Lord for their Father, and the Guide of their youth? Let parents
daily direct their children earnestly to seek this blessing.

[Jeremiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 3:6</span></span>

If we mark the crimes of those who break off from a religious
profession, and the consequences, we see abundant reason to shun evil
ways. It is dreadful to be proved more criminal than those who have
actually perished in their sins; yet it will be small comfort in
everlasting punishment, for them to know that others were viler than
they.

[Jeremiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 3:12</span></span>

See God's readiness to pardon sin, and the blessings reserved for gospel
times. These words were proclaimed toward the north; to Israel, the ten
tribes, captive in Assyria. They are directed how to return. If we
confess our sins, the Lord is faithful and just to forgive them. These
promises are fully to come to pass in the bringing back the Jews in
after-ages. God will graciously receive those that return to him; and by
his grace, he takes them out from among the rest. The ark of the
covenant was not found after the captivity. The whole of that
dispensation was to be done away, which took place after the multitude
of believers had been greatly increased by the conversion of the
Gentiles, and of the Israelites scattered among them. A happy state of
the church is foretold. He can teach all to call him Father; but without
thorough change of heart and life, no man can be a child of God, and we
have no security for not departing from Him.

[Jeremiah 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 3:21</span></span>

Sin is turning aside to crooked ways. And forgetting the Lord our God is
at the bottom of all sin. By sin we bring ourselves into trouble. The
promise to those that return is, God will heal their backslidings, by
his pardoning mercy, his quieting peace, and his renewing grace. They
come devoting themselves to God. They come disclaiming all expectations
of relief and succour from any but the Lord. Therefore they come
depending upon him only. He is the Lord, and he only can save. It points
out the great salvation from sin Jesus Christ wrought out for us. They
come justifying God in their troubles, and judging themselves for their
sins. True penitents learn to call sin shame, even the sin they have
been most pleased with. True penitents learn to call sin death and ruin,
and to charge upon it all they suffer. While men harden themselves in
sin, contempt and misery are their portion: for he that covereth his
sins shall not prosper, but he that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall
find mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 4](jer004)

</div>
