<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer024)  [Next](jer026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 25:0</span></span>

([Jer 25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)) The Jews rebuked for not
obeying calls to repentance.

([Jer 25:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008)) Their captivity during
seventy years is expressly foretold.

([Jer 25:15-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)) Desolations upon the
nations shown by the emblem of a cup of wrath.

([Jer 25:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030)) The judgments again
declared.

[Jeremiah 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 25:1</span></span>

The call to turn from evil ways to the worship and service of God, and
for sinners to trust in Christ, and partake of his salvation, concerns
all men. God keeps an account how long we possess the means of grace;
and the longer we have them, the heavier will our account be if we have
not improved them. Rising early, points out the earnest desire that this
people should turn and live. Personal and particular reformation must be
insisted on as necessary to a national deliverance; and every one must
turn from his own evil way. Yet all was to no purpose. They would not
take the right and only method to turn away the wrath of God.

[Jeremiah 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 25:8</span></span>

The fixing of the time during which the Jewish captivity should last,
would not only confirm the prophecy, but also comfort the people of God,
and encourage faith and prayer. The ruin of Babylon is foretold: the rod
will be thrown into the fire when the correcting work is done. When the
set time to favour Zion is come, Babylon shall be punished for their
iniquity, as other nations have been punished for their sins. Every
threatening of the Scripture will certainly be accomplished.

[Jeremiah 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 25:15</span></span>

The evil and the good events of life are often represented in Scripture
as cups. Under this figure is represented the desolation then coming
upon that part of the world, of which Nebuchadnezzar, who had just began
to reign and act, was to be the instrument; but this destroying sword
would come from the hand of God. The desolations the sword should make
in all these kingdoms, are represented by the consequences of excessive
drinking. This may make us loathe the sin of drunkenness, that the
consequences of it are used to set forth such a woful condition.
Drunkenness deprives men of the use of their reason, makes men as mad.
It takes from them the valuable blessing, health; and is a sin which is
its own punishment. This may also make us dread the judgments of war. It
soon fills a nation with confusion. They will refuse to take the cup at
thy hand. They will not believe Jeremiah; but he must tell them it is
the word of the Lord of hosts, and it is in vain for them to struggle
against Almighty power. And if God's judgments begin with backsliding
professors, let not the wicked expect to escape.

[Jeremiah 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 25:30</span></span>

The Lord has just ground of controversy with every nation and every
person; and he will execute judgment on all the wicked. Who can avoid
trembling when God speaks in displeasure? The days are fully come; the
time fixed in the Divine counsels, which will make the nations wholly
desolate. The tender and delicate shall share the common calamity. Even
those who used to live in peace, and did nothing to provoke, shall not
escape. Blessed be God, there is a peaceable habitation above, for all
the sons of peace. The Lord will preserve his church and all believers
in all changes; for nothing can separate them from his love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 26](jer026)

</div>
