<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer000)  [Next](jer002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

([Jer 1:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)) Jeremiah's call to the
prophetic office.

([Jer 1:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)) A vision of an
almond-tree and of a seething-pot, Divine protection is promised.

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

Jeremiah's early call to the work and office of a prophet is stated. He
was to be a prophet, not to the Jews only, but to the neighbouring
nations. He is still a prophet to the whole world, and it would be well
if they would attend to these warnings. The Lord who formed us, knows
for what particular services and purposes he intended us. But unless he
sanctify us by his new-creating Spirit, we shall neither be fit for his
holy service on earth, nor his holy happiness in heaven. It becomes us
to have low thoughts of ourselves. Those who are young, should consider
that they are so, and not venture beyond their powers. But though a
sense of our own weakness and insufficiency should make us go humbly
about our work, it should not make us draw back when God calls us. Those
who have messages to deliver from God, must not fear the face of man.
The Lord, by a sign, gave Jeremiah such a gift as was necessary. God's
message should be delivered in his own words. Whatever wordly wise men
or politicians may think, the safety of kingdoms is decided according to
the purpose and word of God.

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

God gave Jeremiah a view of the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem by
the Chaldeans. The almond-tree, which is more forward in the spring than
any other, represented the speedy approach of judgments. God also showed
whence the intended ruin should arise. Jeremiah saw a seething-pot
boiling, representing Jerusalem and Judah in great commotion. The mouth
or face of the furnace or hearth, was toward the north; from whence the
fire and fuel were to come. The northern powers shall unite. The cause
of these judgments was the sin of Judah. The whole counsel of God must
be declared. The fear of God is the best remedy against the fear of man.
Better to have all men our enemies than God our enemy; those who are
sure they have God with them, need not, ought not to fear, whoever is
against them. Let us pray that we may be willing to give up personal
interests, and that nothing may move us from our duty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002)

</div>
