<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job022)  [Next](job024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 23:0</span></span>

([Job 23:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#001)) Job complains that God
has withdrawn.

([Job 23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008)) He asserts his own
integrity.

([Job 23:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013)) The Divine terrors.

[Job 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 23:1</span></span>

Job appeals from his friends to the just judgement of God. He wants to
have his cause tried quickly. Blessed be God, we may know where to find
him. He is in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself; and upon a
mercy-seat, waiting to be gracious. Thither the sinner may go; and there
the believer may order his cause before Him, with arguments taken from
his promises, his covenant, and his glory. A patient waiting for death
and judgment is our wisdom and duty, and it cannot be without a holy
fear and trembling. A passionate wishing for death or judgement is our
sin and folly, and ill becomes us, as it did Job.

[Job 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 23:8</span></span>

Job knew that the Lord was every where present; but his mind was in such
confusion, that he could get no fixed view of God's merciful presence,
so as to find comfort by spreading his case before him. His views were
all gloomy. God seemed to stand at a distance, and frown upon him. Yet
Job expressed his assurance that he should be brought forth, tried, and
approved, for he had obeyed the precepts of God. He had relished and
delighted in the truths and commandments of God. Here we should notice
that Job justified himself rather than God, or in opposition to him,
[Job 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002). Job might feel that he was
clear from the charges of his friends, but boldly to assert that, though
visited by the hand of God, it was not a chastisement of sin, was his
error. And he is guilty of a second, when he denies that there are
dealings of Providence with men in this present life, wherein the
injured find redress, and the evil are visited for their sins.

[Job 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 23:13</span></span>

As Job does not once question but that his trials are from the hand of
God, and that there is no such thing as chance, how does he account for
them? The principle on which he views them is, that the hope and reward
of the faithful servants of God are only laid up in another life; and he
maintains that it is plain to all, that the wicked are not treated
according to their deserts in this life, but often directly the reverse.
But though the obtaining of mercy, the first-fruits of the Spirit of
grace, pledges a God, who will certainly finish the work which he has
began; yet the afflicted believer is not to conclude that all prayer and
entreaty will be in vain, and that he should sink into despair, and
faint when he is reproved of Him. He cannot tell but the intention of
God in afflicting him may be to produce penitence and prayer in his
heart. May we learn to obey and trust the Lord, even in tribulation; to
live or die as he pleases: we know not for what good ends our lives may
be shortened or prolonged.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 24](job024)

</div>
