<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job038)  [Next](job040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 39:0</span></span>

God inquires of Job concerning several animals.

[Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 39:1</span></span>

In these questions the Lord continued to humble Job. In this chapter
several animals are spoken of, whose nature or situation particularly
show the power, wisdom, and manifold works of God. The wild ass. It is
better to labour and be good for something, than to ramble and be good
for nothing. From the untameableness of this and other creatures, we may
see, how unfit we are to give law to Providence, who cannot give law
even to a wild ass's colt. The unicorn, a strong, stately, proud
creature. He is able to serve, but not willing; and God challenges Job
to force him to it. It is a great mercy if, where God gives strength for
service, he gives a heart; it is what we should pray for, and reason
ourselves into, which the brutes cannot do. Those gifts are not always
the most valuable that make the finest show. Who would not rather have
the voice of the nightingale, than the tail of the peacock; the eye of
the eagle and her soaring wing, and the natural affection of the stork,
than the beautiful feathers of the ostrich, which can never rise above
the earth, and is without natural affection? The description of the
war-horse helps to explain the character of presumptuous sinners. Every
one turneth to his course, as the horse rushes into the battle. When a
man's heart is fully set in him to do evil, and he is carried on in a
wicked way, by the violence of his appetites and passions, there is no
making him fear the wrath of God, and the fatal consequences of sin.
Secure sinners think themselves as safe in their sins as the eagle in
her nest on high, in the clefts of the rocks; but I will bring thee down
from thence, saith the Lord, [Jer
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016). All these beautiful references
to the works of nature, should teach us a right view of the riches of
the wisdom of Him who made and sustains all things. The want of right
views concerning the wisdom of God, which is ever present in all things,
led Job to think and speak unworthily of Providence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 40](job040)

</div>
