<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job007)  [Next](job009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 8:0</span></span>

([Job 8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)) Bildad reproves Job.

([Job 8:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)) Hypocrites will be
destroyed.

([Job 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)) Bildad applies God's
just dealing to Job.

[Job 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 8:1</span></span>

Job spake much to the purpose; but Bildad, like an eager, angry
disputant, turns it all off with this, How long wilt thou speak these
things? Men's meaning is not taken aright, and then they are rebuked, as
if they were evil-doers. Even in disputes on religion, it is too common
to treat others with sharpness, and their arguments with contempt.
Bildad's discourse shows that he had not a favourable opinion of Job's
character. Job owned that God did not pervert judgment; yet it did not
therefore follow that his children were cast-aways, or that they did for
some great transgression. Extraordinary afflictions are not always the
punishment of extraordinary sins, sometimes they are the trials of
extraordinary graces: in judging of another's case, we ought to take the
favorable side. Bildad puts Job in hope, that if he were indeed upright,
he should yet see a good end of his present troubles. This is God's way
of enriching the souls of his people with graces and comforts. The
beginning is small, but the progress is to perfection. Dawning light
grows to noon-day.

[Job 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 8:8</span></span>

Bildad discourses well of hypocrites and evil-doers, and the fatal end
of all their hopes and joys. He proves this truth of the destruction of
the hopes and joys of hypocrites, by an appeal to former times. Bildad
refers to the testimony of the ancients. Those teach best that utter
words out of their heart, that speak from an experience of spiritual and
divine things. A rush growing in fenny ground, looking very green, but
withering in dry weather, represents the hypocrite's profession, which
is maintained only in times of prosperity. The spider's web, spun with
great skill, but easily swept away, represents a man's pretensions to
religion when without the grace of God in his heart. A formal professor
flatters himself in his own eyes, doubts not of his salvation, is
secure, and cheats the world with his vain confidences. The flourishing
of the tree, planted in the garden, striking root to the rock, yet after
a time cut down and thrown aside, represents wicked men, when most
firmly established, suddenly thrown down and forgotten. This doctrine of
the vanity of a hypocrite's confidence, or the prosperity of a wicked
man, is sound; but it was not applicable to the case of Job, if confined
to the present world.

[Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 8:20</span></span>

Bildad here assures Job, that as he was so he should fare; therefore
they concluded, that as he fared so he was. God will not cast away an
upright man; he may be cast down for a time, but he shall not be cast
away for ever. Sin brings ruin on persons and families. Yet to argue,
that Job was an ungodly, wicked man, was unjust and uncharitable. The
mistake in these reasonings arose from Job's friends not distinguishing
between the present state of trial and discipline, and the future state
of final judgment. May we choose the portion, possess the confidence,
bear the cross, and die the death of the righteous; and, in the mean
time, be careful neither to wound others by rash judgments, nor to
distress ourselves needlessly about the opinions of our
fellow-creatures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 9](job009)

</div>
