<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job041)  [Next](psa000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 42:0</span></span>

([Job 42:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001)) Job humbly submits unto
God.

([Job 42:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007)) Job intercedes for his
friends.

([Job 42:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010)) His renewed
prosperity.

[Job 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 42:1</span></span>

Job was now sensible of his guilt; he would no longer speak in his own
excuse; he abhorred himself as a sinner in heart and life, especially
for murmuring against God, and took shame to himself. When the
understanding is enlightened by the Spirit of grace, our knowledge of
Divine things as far exceeds what we had before, as the sight of the
eyes excels report and common fame. By the teachings of men, God reveals
his Son to us; but by the teachings of his Spirit he reveals his Son in
us, [Gal 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016), and changes us into the
same image, [Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018). It concerns us
to be deeply humbled for the sins of which we are convinced.
Self-loathing is ever the companion of true repentance. The Lord will
bring those whom he loveth, to adore him in self-abasement; while true
grace will always lead them to confess their sins without
self-justifying.

[Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 42:7</span></span>

After the Lord had convinced and humbled Job, and brought him to
repentance, he owned him, comforted him, and put honour upon him. The
devil had undertaken to prove Job a hypocrite, and his three friends had
condemned him as a wicked man; but if God say, Well done, thou good and
faithful servant, it is of little consequence who says otherwise. Job's
friends had wronged God, by making prosperity a mark of the true church,
and affliction a certain proof of God's wrath. Job had referred things
to the future judgment and the future state, more than his friends,
therefore he spake of God that which was right, better than his friends
had done. And as Job prayed and offered sacrifice for those that had
grieved and wounded his spirit, so Christ prayed for his persecutors,
and ever lives, making intercession for the transgressors. Job's friends
were good men, and belonged to God, and He would not let them be in
their mistake any more than Job; but having humbled him by a discourse
out of the whirlwind, he takes another way to humble them. They are not
to argue the matter again, but they must agree in a sacrifice and a
prayer, and that must reconcile them, Those who differ in judgment about
lesser things, yet are one in Christ the great Sacrifice, and ought
therefore to love and bear with one another. When God was angry with
Job's friends, he put them in a way to make peace with him. Our quarrels
with God always begin on our part, but the making peace begins on his.
Peace with God is to be had only in his own way, and upon his own terms.
These will never seem hard to those who know how to value this blessing:
they will be glad of it, like Job's friends, upon any terms, though ever
so humbling. Job did not insult over his friends, but God being
graciously reconciled to him, he was easily reconciled to them. In all
our prayers and services we should aim to be accepted of the Lord; not
to have praise of men, but to please God.

[Job 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 42:10</span></span>

In the beginning of this book we had Job's patience under his troubles,
for an example; here, for our encouragement to follow that example, we
have his happy end. His troubles began in Satan's malice, which God
restrained; his restoration began in God's mercy, which Satan could not
oppose. Mercy did not return when Job was disputing with his friends,
but when he was praying for them. God is served and pleased with our
warm devotions, not with our warm disputes. God doubled Job's
possessions. We may lose much for the Lord, but we shall not lose any
thing by him. Whether the Lord gives us health and temporal blessings or
not, if we patiently suffer according to his will, in the end we shall
be happy. Job's estate increased. The blessing of the Lord makes rich;
it is he that gives us power to get wealth, and gives success in honest
endeavours. The last days of a good man sometimes prove his best, his
last works his best works, his last comforts his best comforts; for his
path, like that of the morning light, shines more and more unto the
perfect day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Introduction](psa000)

</div>
