<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job030)  [Next](job032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 31:0</span></span>

([Job 31:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)) Job declares his
uprightness.

([Job 31:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)) His integrity.

([Job 31:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016)) Job merciful.

([Job 31:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024)) Job not guilty of
covetousness or idolatry.

([Job 31:33-40](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033)) Job not guilty of
hypocrisy and violence.

[Job 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 31:1</span></span>

Job did not speak the things here recorded by way of boasting, but in
answer to the charge of hypocrisy. He understood the spiritual nature of
God's commandments, as reaching to the thoughts and intents of the
heart. It is best to let our actions speak for us; but in some cases we
owe it to ourselves and to the cause of God, solemnly to protest our
innocence of the crimes of which we are falsely accused. The lusts of
the flesh, and the love of the world, are two fatal rocks on which
multitudes split; against these Job protests he was always careful to
stand upon his guard. And God takes more exact notice of us than we do
of ourselves; let us therefore walk circumspectly. He carefully avoided
all sinful means of getting wealth. He dreaded all forbidden profit as
much as all forbidden pleasure. What we have in the world may be used
with comfort, or lost with comfort, if honestly gotten. Without strict
honestly and faithfulness in all our dealings, we can have no good
evidence of true godliness. Yet how many professors are unable to abide
this touchstone!

[Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 31:9</span></span>

All the defilements of the life come from a deceived heart. Lust is a
fire in the soul: those that indulge it, are said to burn. It consumes
all that is good there, and lays the conscience waste. It kindles the
fire of God's wrath, which, if not quenched by the blood of Christ, will
consume even to eternal destruction. It consumes the body; it consumes
the substance. Burning lusts bring burning judgments. Job had a numerous
household, and he managed it well. He considered that he had a Master in
heaven; and as we are undone if God should be severe with us, we ought
to be mild and gentle towards all with whom we have to do.

[Job 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 31:16</span></span>

Job's conscience gave testimony concerning his just and charitable
behaviour toward the poor. He is most large upon this head, because in
this matter he was particularly accused. He was tender of all, and
hurtful to none. Notice the principles by which Job was restrained from
being uncharitable and unmerciful. He stood in awe of the Lord, as
certainly against him, if he should wrong the poor. Regard to worldly
interests may restrain a man from actual crimes; but the grace of God
alone can make him hate, dread, and shun sinful thoughts and desires.

[Job 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 31:24</span></span>

Job protests, 1. That he never set his heart upon the wealth of this
world. How few prosperous professors can appeal to the Lord, that they
have not rejoiced because their gains were great! Through the
determination to be rich, numbers ruin their souls, or pierce themselves
with many sorrows. 2. He never was guilty of idolatry. The source of
idolatry is in the heart, and it corrupts men, and provokes God to send
judgments upon a nation. 3. He neither desired nor delighted in the hurt
of the worst enemy he had. If others bear malice to us, that will not
justify us in bearing malice to them. 4. He had never been unkind to
strangers. Hospitality is a Christian duty, [Pe1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#009).

[Job 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 31:33</span></span>

Job clears himself from the charge of hypocrisy. We are loth to confess
our faults, willing to excuse them, and to lay the blame upon others.
But he that thus covers his sins, shall not prosper, [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013). He speaks of his courage in
what is good, as an evidence of his sincerity in it. When men get
estates unjustly, they are justly deprived of comfort from them; it was
sown wheat, but shall come up thistles. What men do not come honestly
by, will never do them any good. The words of Job are ended. They end
with a bold assertion, that, with respect to accusation against his
moral and religious character as the cause for his sufferings, he could
appeal to God. But, however confident Job was, we shall see he was
mistaken, [Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004), [Job
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005); [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008). Let us all judge ourselves;
wherein we are guilty, let us seek forgiveness in that blood which
cleanseth from all sin; and may the Lord have mercy upon us, and write
his laws in our hearts!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 32](job032)

</div>
