<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job036)  [Next](job038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 37:0</span></span>

([Job 37:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001)) Elihu observes the
power of God.

([Job 37:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#014)) Job required to
explain the works of nature.

([Job 37:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#021)) God is great, and is
to be feared.

[Job 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 37:1</span></span>

The changes of the weather are the subject of a great deal of our
thoughts and common talk; but how seldom do we think and speak of these
things, as Elihu, with a regard to God, the director of them! We must
notice the glory of God, not only in the thunder and lightning, but in
the more common and less awful changes of the weather; as the snow and
rain. Nature directs all creatures to shelter themselves from a storm;
and shall man only be unprovided with a refuge? Oh that men would listen
to the voice of God, who in many ways warns them to flee from the wrath
to come; and invites them to accept his salvation, and to be happy. The
ill opinion which men entertain of the Divine direction, peculiarly
appears in their murmurs about the weather, though the whole result of
the year proves the folly of their complaints. Believers should avoid
this; no days are bad as God makes them, though we make many bad by our
sins.

[Job 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 37:14</span></span>

Due thoughts of the works of God will help to reconcile us to all his
providences. As God has a powerful, freezing north wind, so he has a
thawing, composing south wind: the Spirit is compared to both, because
he both convinces and comforts, [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016). The best of men are much in the
dark concerning the glorious perfections of the Divine nature and the
Divine government. Those who, through grace, know much of God, know
nothing, in comparison with what is to be known, and of what will be
known, when that which is perfect is come.

[Job 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 37:21</span></span>

Elihu concludes his discourse with some great sayings concerning the
glory of God. Light always is, but is not always to be seen. When clouds
come between, the sun is darkened in the clear day. The light of God's
favour shines ever towards his faithful servants, though it be not
always seen. Sins are clouds, and often hinder us from seeing that
bright light which is in the face of God. Also, as to those thick clouds
of sorrow which often darken our minds, the Lord hath a wind which
passes and clears them away. What is that wind? It is his Holy Spirit.
As the wind dispels and sweeps away the clouds which are gathered in the
air, so the Spirit of God clears our souls from the clouds and fogs of
ignorance and unbelief, of sin and lust. From all these clouds the Holy
Spirit of God frees us in the work of regeneration. And from all the
clouds which trouble our consciences, the Holy Spirit sets us free in
the work of consolation. Now that God is about to speak, Elihu delivers
a few words, as the sum of all his discourse. With God is terrible
majesty. Sooner or later all men shall fear him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 38](job038)

</div>
