<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job000)  [Next](job002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

([Job 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)) The piety and prosperity
of Job.

([Job 1:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)) Satan obtains leave to
try Job.

([Job 1:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#013)) The loss of Job's
property, and the death of his children.

([Job 1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)) Job's patience and
piety.

[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 1:1</span></span>

Job was prosperous, and yet pious. Though it is hard and rare, it is not
impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. By God's
grace the temptations of worldly wealth may be overcome. The account of
Job's piety and prosperity comes before the history of his great
afflictions, showing that neither will secure from troubles. While Job
beheld the harmony and comforts of his sons with satisfaction, his
knowledge of the human heart made him fearful for them. He sent and
sanctified them, reminding them to examine themselves, to confess their
sins, to seek forgiveness; and as one who hoped for acceptance with God
through the promised Saviour, he offered a burnt-offering for each. We
perceive his care for their souls, his knowledge of the sinful state of
man, his entire dependence on God's mercy in the way he had appointed.

[Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 1:6</span></span>

Job's afflictions began from the malice of Satan, by the Lord's
permission, for wise and holy purposes. There is an evil spirit, the
enemy of God, and of all righteousness, who is continually seeking to
distress, to lead astray, and, if possible, to destroy those who love
God. How far his influence may extend, we cannot say; but probably much
unsteadiness and unhappiness in Christians may be ascribed to him. While
we are on this earth we are within his reach. Hence it concerns us to be
sober and vigilant, [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008). See how
Satan censures Job. This is the common way of slanderers, to suggest
that which they have no reason to think is true. But as there is nothing
we should dread more than really being hypocrites, so there is nothing
we need dread less than being called and counted so without cause. It is
not wrong to look at the eternal recompence in our obedience; but it is
wrong to aim at worldly advantages in our religion. God's people are
taken under his special protection; they, and all that belong to them.
The blessing of the Lord makes rich; Satan himself owns it. God suffered
Job to be tried, as he suffered Peter to be sifted. It is our comfort
that God has the devil in a chain, [Rev
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001). He has no power to lead men to
sin, but what they give him themselves; nor any power to afflict men,
but what is given him from above. All this is here described to us after
the manner of men. The Scripture speaks thus to teach us that God
directs the affairs of the world.

[Job 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 1:13</span></span>

Satan brought Job's troubles upon him on the day that his children began
their course of feasting. The troubles all came upon Job at once; while
one messenger of evil tidings was speaking, another followed. His
dearest and most valuable possessions were his ten children; news is
brought him that they are killed. They were taken away when he had most
need of them to comfort him under other losses. In God only have we a
help present at all times.

[Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 1:20</span></span>

Job humbled himself under the hand of God. He reasons from the common
state of human life, which he describes. We brought nothing of this
world's goods into the world, but have them from others; and it is
certain we can carry nothing out, but must leave them to others. Job,
under all his losses, is but reduced to his first state. He is but where
he must have been at last, and is only unclothed, or unloaded rather, a
little sooner than he expected. If we put off our clothes before we go
to bed, it is some inconvenience, but it may be the better borne when it
is near bed-time. The same who gave hath taken away. See how Job looks
above instruments, and keeps his eye upon the First Cause. Afflictions
must not divert us from, but quicken us to religion. If in all our
troubles we look to the Lord, he will support us. The Lord is righteous.
All we have is from his gift; we have forfeited it by sin, and ought not
to complain if he takes any part from us. Discontent and impatience
charge God with folly. Against these Job carefully watched; and so must
we, acknowledging that as God has done right, but we have done wickedly,
so God has done wisely, but we have done very foolishly. And may the
malice and power of Satan render that Saviour more precious to our
souls, who came to destroy the works of the devil; who, for our
salvation, suffered from that enemy far more than Job suffered, or we
can think.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 2](job002)

</div>
