<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job005)  [Next](job007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 6:0</span></span>

([Job 6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)) Job justifies his
complaints.

([Job 6:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008)) He wishes for death.

(v. 14-30) Job reproves his friends as unkind.

[Job 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 6:1</span></span>

Job still justifies himself in his complaints. In addition to outward
troubles, the inward sense of God's wrath took away all his courage and
resolution. The feeling sense of the wrath of God is harder to bear than
any outward afflictions. What then did the Saviour endure in the garden
and on the cross, when he bare our sins, and his soul was made a
sacrifice to Divine justice for us! Whatever burden of affliction, in
body or estate, God is pleased to lay upon us, we may well submit to it
as long as he continues to us the use of our reason, and the peace of
our conscience; but if either of these is disturbed, our case is very
pitiable. Job reflects upon his friends for their censures. He complains
he had nothing offered for his relief, but what was in itself tasteless,
loathsome, and burdensome.

[Job 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 6:8</span></span>

Job had desired death as the happy end of his miseries. For this,
Eliphaz had reproved him, but he asks for it again with more vehemence
than before. It was very rash to speak thus of God destroying him. Who,
for one hour, could endure the wrath of the Almighty, if he let loose
his hand against him? Let us rather say with David, O spare me a little.
Job grounds his comfort upon the testimony of his conscience, that he
had been, in some degree, serviceable to the glory of God. Those who
have grace in them, who have the evidence of it, and have it in
exercise, have wisdom in them, which will be their help in the worst of
times.

[Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 6:14</span></span>

In his prosperity Job formed great expectations from his friends, but
now was disappointed. This he compares to the failing of brooks in
summer. Those who rest their expectations on the creature, will find it
fail when it should help them; whereas those who make God their
confidence, have help in the time of need, [Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016). Those who make gold their hope,
sooner or later will be ashamed of it, and of their confidence in it. It
is our wisdom to cease from man. Let us put all our confidence in the
Rock of ages, not in broken reeds; in the Fountain of life, not in
broken cisterns. The application is very close; "for now ye are
nothing." It were well for us, if we had always such convictions of the
vanity of the creature, as we have had, or shall have, on a sick-bed, a
death-bed, or in trouble of conscience. Job upbraids his friends with
their hard usage. Though in want, he desired no more from them than a
good look and a good word. It often happens that, even when we expect
little from man, we have less; but from God, even when we expect much,
we have more. Though Job differed from them, yet he was ready to yield
as soon as it was made to appear that he was in error. Though Job had
been in fault, yet they ought not to have given him such hard usage. His
righteousness he holds fast, and will not let it go. He felt that there
had not been such iniquity in him as they supposed. But it is best to
commit our characters to Him who keeps our souls; in the great day every
upright believer shall have praise of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 7](job007)

</div>
