<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job035)  [Next](job037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 36:0</span></span>

([Job 36:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001)) Elihu desires Job's
attention.

([Job 36:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005)) The methods in which
God deals with men.

([Job 36:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#015)) Elihu counsels Job.

([Job 36:24-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#024)) The wonders in the
works of creation.

[Job 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 36:1</span></span>

Elihu only maintained that the affliction was sent for his trial; and
lengthened because Job was not yet thoroughly humbled under it. He
sought to ascribe righteousness to his Maker; to clear this truth, that
God is righteous in all his ways. Such knowledge must be learned from
the word and Spirit of God, for naturally we are estranged from it. The
fitness of Elihu's discourse to the dispute between Job and his friends
is plain. It pointed out to Job the true reason of those trials with
which he had been visited. It taught that God had acted in mercy towards
him, and the spiritual benefit he was to derive from them. It corrected
the mistake of his friends, and showed that Job's calamities were for
good.

[Job 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 36:5</span></span>

Elihu here shows that God acts as righteous Governor. He is always ready
to defend those that are injured. If our eye is ever toward God in duty,
his eye will be ever upon us in mercy, and, when we are at the lowest,
will not overlook us. God intends, when he afflicts us, to discover past
sins to us, and to bring them to our remembrance. Also, to dispose our
hearts to be taught: affliction makes people willing to learn, through
the grace of God working with and by it. And further, to deter us from
sinning for the future. It is a command, to have no more to do with sin.
If we faithfully serve God, we have the promise of the life that now is,
and the comforts of it, as far as is for God's glory and our good: and
who would desire them any further? We have the possession of inward
pleasures, the great peace which those have that love God's law. If the
affliction fail in its work, let men expect the furnace to be heated
till they are consumed. Those that die without knowledge, die without
grace, and are undone for ever. See the nature of hypocrisy; it lies in
the heart: that is for the world and the flesh, while perhaps the
outside seems to be for God and religion. Whether sinners die in youth,
or live long to heap up wrath, their case is dreadful. The souls of the
wicked live after death, but it is in everlasting misery.

[Job 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 36:15</span></span>

Elihu shows that Job caused the continuance of his own trouble. He
cautions him not to persist in frowardness. Even good men need to be
kept to their duty by the fear of God's wrath; the wisest and best have
enough in them to deserve his stroke. Let not Job continue his unjust
quarrel with God and his providence. And let us never dare to think
favourably of sin, never indulge it, nor allow ourselves in it. Elihu
thinks Job needed this caution, he having chosen rather to gratify his
pride and humour by contending with God, than to mortify them by
submitting, and accepting the punishment. It is absurd for us to think
to teach Him who is himself the Fountain of light, truth, knowledge, and
instruction. He teaches by the Bible, and that is the best book; teaches
by his Son, and he is the best Master. He is just in all proceedings.

[Job 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 36:24</span></span>

Elihu endeavours to fill Job with high thought of God, and so to
persuade him into cheerful submission to his providence. Man may see
God's works, and is capable of discerning his hand in them, which the
beasts are not, therefore they ought to give him the glory. But while
the worker of iniquity ought to tremble, the true believer should
rejoice. Children should hear with pleasure their Father's voice, even
when he speaks in terror to his enemies. There is no light but there may
be a cloud to intercept it. The light of the favour of God, the light of
his countenance, the most blessed light of all, even that light has many
a cloud. The clouds of our sins cause the Lord to his face, and hinder
the light of his loving-kindness from shining on our souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 37](job037)

</div>
