<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job032)  [Next](job034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 33:0</span></span>

([Job 33:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001)) Elihu offers to reason
with Job.

([Job 33:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#008)) Elihu blames Job for
reflecting upon God.

([Job 33:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014)) God calls men to
repentance.

([Job 33:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019)) God sends afflictions
for good.

([Job 33:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#029)) Elihu entreats Job's
attention.

[Job 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 33:1</span></span>

Job had desired a judge to decide his appeal. Elihu was one according to
his wish, a man like himself. If we would rightly convince men, it must
be by reason, not by terror; by fair argument, not by a heavy hand.

[Job 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 33:8</span></span>

Elihu charges Job with reflecting upon the justice and goodness of God.
When we hear any thing said to God's dishonour, we ought to bear our
testimony against it. Job had represented God as severe in marking what
he did amiss. Elihu urges that he had spoken wrong, and that he ought to
humble himself before God, and by repentance to unsay it. God is not
accountable to us. It is unreasonable for weak, sinful creatures, to
strive with a God of infinite wisdom, power, and goodness. He acts with
perfect justice, wisdom, and goodness, where we cannot perceive it.

[Job 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 33:14</span></span>

God speaks to us by conscience, by providences, and by ministers; of all
these Elihu discourses. There was not then, that we know of, any Divine
revelation in writing, though now it is our principal guide. When God
designs men's good, by the convictions and dictates of their own
consciences, he opens the heart, as Lydia's, and opens the ears, so that
conviction finds or forces its way in. The end and design of these
admonitions are to keep men from sin, particularly the sin of pride.
While sinners are pursuing evil purposes, and indulging their pride,
their souls are hastening to destruction. That which turns men from sin,
saves them from hell. What a mercy it is to be under the restraints of
an awakened conscience!

[Job 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 33:19</span></span>

Job complained of his diseases, and judged by them that God was angry
with him; his friends did so too: but Elihu shows that God often
afflicts the body for good to the soul. This thought will be of great
use for our getting good from sickness, in and by which God speaks to
men. Pain is the fruit of sin; yet, by the grace of God, the pain of the
body is often made a means of good to the soul. When afflictions have
done their work, they shall be removed. A ransom or propitiation is
found. Jesus Christ is the Messenger and the Ransom, so Elihu calls him,
as Job had called him his Redeemer, for he is both the Purchaser and the
Price, the Priest and the sacrifice. So high was the value of souls,
that nothing less would redeem them; and so great the hurt done by sin,
that nothing less would atone for it, than the blood of the Son of God,
who gave his life a ransom for many. A blessed change follows. Recovery
from sickness is a mercy indeed, when it proceeds from the remission of
sin. All that truly repent of their sins, shall find mercy with God. The
works of darkness are unfruitful works; all the gains of sin will come
far short of the damage. We must, with a broken and contrite heart,
confess our sins to God, [Jo1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009). We
must confess the fact of sin; and not try to justify or excuse
ourselves. We must confess the fault of sin; I have perverted that which
was right. We must confess the folly of sin; So foolish have I been and
ignorant. Is there not good reason why we should make such a confession?

[Job 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 33:29</span></span>

Elihu shows that God's great and gracious design toward the children of
men, is, to save them from being for ever miserable, and to bring them
to be for ever happy. By whatever means we are kept back from the we
shall bless the Lord for them at least, and should bless him for them
though they be painful and distressing. Those that perish for ever are
without excuse, for they would not be healed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 34](job034)

</div>
