<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh017)  [Next](joh019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 18:0</span></span>

([Joh 18:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)) Christ taken in the
garden.

([Joh 18:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013)) Christ before Annas
and Caiaphas.

([Joh 18:28-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)) Christ before Pilate.

[John 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 18:1</span></span>

Sin began in the garden of Eden, there the curse was pronounced, there
the Redeemer was promised; and in a garden that promised Seed entered
into conflict with the old serpent. Christ was buried also in a garden.
Let us, when we walk in our gardens, take occasion from thence to
mediate on Christ's sufferings in a garden. Our Lord Jesus, knowing all
things that should come upon him, went forth and asked, Whom seek ye?
When the people would have forced him to a crown, he withdrew, [Joh
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015), but when they came to force him
to a cross, he offered himself; for he came into this world to suffer,
and went to the other world to reign. He showed plainly what he could
have done; when he struck them down he could have struck them dead, but
he would not do so. It must have been the effect of Divine power, that
the officers and soldiers let the disciples go away quietly, after the
resistance which had been offered. Christ set us an example of meekness
in sufferings, and a pattern of submission to God's will in every thing
that concerns us. It is but a cup, a small matter. It is a cup that is
given us; sufferings are gifts. It is given us by a Father, who has a
father's authority, and does us no wrong; a father's affection, and
means us no hurt. From the example of our Saviour we should learn how to
receive our lighter afflictions, and to ask ourselves whether we ought
to oppose our Father's will, or to distrust his love. We were bound with
the cords of our iniquities, with the yoke of our transgressions.
Christ, being made a sin-offering for us, to free us from those bonds,
himself submitted to be bound for us. To his bonds we owe our liberty;
thus the Son makes us free.

[John 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 18:13</span></span>

Simon Peter denied his Master. The particulars have been noticed in the
remarks on the other Gospels. The beginning of sin is as the letting
forth of water. The sin of lying is a fruitful sin; one lie needs
another to support it, and that another. If a call to expose ourselves
to danger be clear, we may hope God will enable us to honour him; if it
be not, we may fear that God will leave us to shame ourselves. They said
nothing concerning the miracles of Jesus, by which he had done so much
good, and which proved his doctrine. Thus the enemies of Christ, whilst
they quarrel with his truth, wilfully shut their eyes against it. He
appeals to those who heard him. The doctrine of Christ may safely appeal
to all that know it, and those who judge in truth bear witness to it.
Our resentment of injuries must never be passionate. He reasoned with
the man that did him the injury, and so may we.

[John 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 18:28</span></span>

It was unjust to put one to death who had done so much good, therefore
the Jews were willing to save themselves from reproach. Many fear the
scandal of an ill thing, more than the sin of it. Christ had said he
should be delivered to the Gentiles, and they should put him to death;
hereby that saying was fulfilled. He had said that he should be
crucified, lifted up. If the Jews had judged him by their law, he had
been stoned; crucifying never was used among the Jews. It is determined
concerning us, though not discovered to us, what death we shall die:
this should free us from disquiet about that matter. Lord, what, when,
and how, thou hast appointed.

[John 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 18:33</span></span>

Art thou the King of the Jews? that King of the Jews who has been so
long expected? Messiah the Prince; art thou he? Dost thou call thyself
so, and wouldest thou be thought so? Christ answered this question with
another; not for evasion, but that Pilate might consider what he did. He
never took upon him any earthly power, never were any traitorous
principles or practices laid to him. Christ gave an account of the
nature of his kingdom. Its nature is not worldly; it is a kingdom within
men, set up in their hearts and consciences; its riches spiritual, its
power spiritual, and it glory within. Its supports are not worldly; its
weapons are spiritual; it needed not, nor used, force to maintain and
advance it, nor opposed any kingdom but that of sin and Satan. Its
object and design are not worldly. When Christ said, I am the Truth, he
said, in effect, I am a King. He conquers by the convincing evidence of
truth; he rules by the commanding power of truth. The subjects of this
kingdom are those that are of the truth. Pilate put a good question, he
said, What is truth? When we search the Scriptures, and attend the
ministry of the word, it must be with this inquiry, What is truth? and
with this prayer, Lead me in thy truth; into all truth. But many put
this question, who have not patience to preserve in their search after
truth; or not humility enough to receive it. By this solemn declaration
of Christ's innocence, it appears, that though the Lord Jesus was
treated as the worst of evil-doers, he never deserved such treatment.
But it unfolds the design of his death; that he died as a Sacrifice for
our sins. Pilate was willing to please all sides; and was governed more
by worldly wisdom than by the rules of justice. Sin is a robber, yet is
foolishly chosen by many rather than Christ, who would truly enrich us.
Let us endeavour to make our accusers ashamed as Christ did; and let us
beware of crucifying Christ afresh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 19](joh019)

</div>
