<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh008)  [Next](joh010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 9:0</span></span>

([Joh 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)) Christ give sight to one
born blind.

([Joh 9:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008)) The account given by the
blind man.

([Joh 9:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#013)) The Pharisees question
the man that had been blind.

([Joh 9:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#018)) They ask concerning
him.

([Joh 9:24-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)) They cast him out.

([Joh 9:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#035)) Christ's words to the
man that had been blind.

([Joh 9:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)) He reproves the
Pharisees.

[John 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 9:1</span></span>

Christ cured many who were blind by disease or accident; here he cured
one born blind. Thus he showed his power to help in the most desperate
cases, and the work of his grace upon the souls of sinners, which gives
sight to those blind by nature. This poor man could not see Christ, but
Christ saw him. And if we know or apprehend anything of Christ, it is
because we were first known of him. Christ says of uncommon calamities,
that they are not always to be looked on as special punishments of sin;
sometimes they are for the glory of God, and to manifest his works. Our
life is our day, in which it concerns us to do the work of the day. We
must be busy, and not waste day-time; it will be time to rest when our
day is done, for it is but a day. The approach of death should quicken
us to improve all our opportunities of doing and getting good. What good
we have an opportunity to do, we should do quickly. And he that will
never do a good work till there is nothing to be objected against, will
leave many a good work for ever undone, [Ecc
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#004). Christ magnified his power, in
making a blind man to see, doing that which one would think more likely
to make a seeing man blind. Human reason cannot judge of the Lord's
methods; he uses means and instruments that men despise. Those that
would be healed by Christ must be ruled by him. He came back from the
pool wondering and wondered at; he came seeing. This represents the
benefits in attending on ordinances of Christ's appointment; souls go
weak, and come away strengthened; go doubting, and come away satisfied;
go mourning, and come away rejoicing; go blind, and come away seeing.

[John 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 9:8</span></span>

Those whose eyes are opened, and whose hearts are cleansed by grace,
being known to be the same person, but widely different in character,
live as monuments to the Redeemer's glory, and recommend his grace to
all who desire the same precious salvation. It is good to observe the
way and method of God's works, and they will appear the more wonderful.
Apply this spiritually. In the work of grace wrought upon the soul we
see the change, but we see not the hand that makes it: the way of the
Spirit is like that of the wind, which thou hearest the sound of, but
canst not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes.

[John 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 9:13</span></span>

Christ not only worked miracles on the sabbath, but in such a manner as
would give offence to the Jews, for he would not seem to yield to the
scribes and Pharisees. Their zeal for mere rites consumed the
substantial matters of religion; therefore Christ would not give place
to them. Also, works of necessity and mercy are allowed, and the sabbath
rest is to be kept, in order to the sabbath work. How many blind eyes
have been opened by the preaching of the gospel on the Lord's day! how
many impotent souls cured on that day! Much unrighteous and uncharitable
judging comes from men's adding their own fancies to God's appointments.
How perfect in wisdom and holiness was our Redeemer, when his enemies
could find nothing against him, but the oft-refuted charge of breaking
the sabbath! May we be enabled, by well-doing, to silence the ignorance
of foolish men.

[John 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 9:18</span></span>

The Pharisees vainly hoped to disprove this notable miracle. They
expected a Messiah, but could not bear to think that this Jesus should
be he, because his precepts were all contrary to their traditions, and
because they expected a Messiah in outward pomp and splendour. The fear
of man brings a snare, [Pro 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025), and
often makes people deny and disown Christ and his truths and ways, and
act against their consciences. The unlearned and poor, who are
simple-hearted, readily draw proper inferences from the evidences of the
light of the gospel; but those whose desires are another way, though
ever learning, never come to the knowledge of the truth.

[John 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 9:24</span></span>

As Christ's mercies are most valued by those who have felt the want of
them, that have been blind, and now see; so the most powerful and
lasting affections to Christ, arise from actual knowledge of him. In the
work of grace in the soul, though we cannot tell when, and how, and by
what steps the blessed change was wrought, yet we may take the comfort,
if we can say, through grace, Whereas I was blind, now I see. I did live
a worldly, sensual life, but, thanks be to God, it is now otherwise with
me, [Eph 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008). The unbelief of those
who enjoy the means of knowledge and conviction, is indeed marvellous.
All who have felt the power and grace of the Lord Jesus, wonder at the
wilfulness of others who reject him. He argues strongly against them,
not only that Jesus was not a sinner, but that he was of God. We may
each of us know by this, whether we are of God or not. What do we? What
do we for God? What do we for our souls? What do we more than others?

[John 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 9:35</span></span>

Christ owns those who own him and his truth and ways. There is
particular notice taken of such a suffer in the cause of Christ, and for
the testimony of a good conscience. Our Lord Jesus graciously reveals
himself to the man. Now he was made sensible what an unspeakable mercy
it was, to be cured of his blindness, that he might see the Son of God.
None but God is to be worshipped; so that in worshipping Jesus, he owned
him to be God. All who believe in him, will worship him.

[John 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 9:39</span></span>

Christ came into the world to give sight to those who were spiritually
blind. Also, that those who see might be made blind; that those who have
a high conceit of their own wisdom, might be sealed up in ignorance. The
preaching of the cross was thought to be folly by such as by carnal
wisdom knew not God. Nothing fortifies men's corrupt hearts against the
convictions of the word, more than the high opinion which others have of
them; as if all that gained applause with men, must obtain acceptance
with God. Christ silenced them. But the sin of the self-conceited and
self-confident remains; they reject the gospel of grace, therefore the
guilt of their sin remains unpardoned, and the power of their sin
remains unbroken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 10](joh010)

</div>
