<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh001)  [Next](joh003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 2:0</span></span>

([Joh 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)) The miracle at Cana.

([Joh 2:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)) Christ casts the buyers
and sellers out of the temple.

([Joh 2:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)) Many believe in Christ.

[John 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 2:1</span></span>

It is very desirable when there is a marriage, to have Christ own and
bless it. Those that would have Christ with them at their marriage, must
invite him by prayer, and he will come. While in this world we sometimes
find ourselves in straits, even when we think ourselves in fulness.
There was want at a marriage feast. Those who are come to care for the
things of the world, must look for trouble, and count upon
disappointment. In our addresses to Christ, we must humbly spread our
case before him, and then refer ourselves to him to do as he pleases. In
Christ's reply to his mother there was no disrespect. He used the same
word when speaking to her with affection from the cross; yet it is a
standing testimony against the idolatry of after-ages, in giving undue
honours to his mother. His hour is come when we know not what to do.
Delays of mercy are not denials of prayer. Those that expect Christ's
favours, must observe his orders with ready obedience. The way of duty
is the way to mercy; and Christ's methods must not be objected against.
The beginning of Moses' miracles was turning water into blood, [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020); the beginning of Christ's
miracles was turning water into wine; which may remind us of the
difference between the law of Moses and the gospel of Christ. He showed
that he improves creature-comforts to all true believers, and make them
comforts indeed. And Christ's works are all for use. Has he turned thy
water into wine, given thee knowledge and grace? it is to profit withal;
therefore draw out now, and use it. It was the best wine. Christ's works
commend themselves even to those who know not their Author. What was
produced by miracles, always was the best in its kind. Though Christ
hereby allows a right use of wine, he does not in the least do away his
own caution, which is, that our hearts be not at any time overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, [Luk
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034). Though we need not scruple to
feast with our friends on proper occasions, yet every social interview
should be so conducted, that we might invite the Redeemer to join with
us, if he were now on earth; and all levity, luxury, and excess offend
him.

[John 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 2:12</span></span>

The first public work in which we find Christ engaged, was driving from
the temple the traders whom the covetous priests and rulers encouraged
to make a market-place of its courts. Those now make God's house a house
of merchandise, whose minds are filled with cares about worldly business
when attending religious exercises, or who perform Divine offices for
love of gain. Christ, having thus cleansed the temple, gave a sign to
those who demanded it, to prove his authority for so doing. He foretells
his death by the Jews' malice, Destroy ye this temple; I will permit you
to destroy it. He foretells his resurrection by his own power; In three
days I will raise it up. Christ took again his own life. Men mistake by
understanding that according to the letter, which the Scripture speaks
by way of figure. When Jesus was risen from the dead, his disciples
remembered he has said this. It helps much in understanding the Divine
word, to observe the fulfilling of the Scriptures.

[John 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 2:23</span></span>

Our Lord knew all men, their nature, dispositions, affections, designs,
so as we do not know any man, not even ourselves. He knows his crafty
enemies, and all their secret projects; his false friends, and their
true characters. He knows who are truly his, knows their uprightness,
and knows their weaknesses. We know what is done by men; Christ knows
what is in them, he tries the heart. Beware of a dead faith, or a formal
profession: carnal, empty professors are not to be trusted, and however
men impose on others or themselves, they cannot impose on the
heart-searching God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 3](joh003)

</div>
