<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos004)  [Next](jos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 5:0</span></span>

([Jos 5:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)) The Canaanites are
afraid, Circumcision renewed.

([Jos 5:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)) The passover at Gilgal
The manna ceases.

([Jos 5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)) The Captain of the
Lord's host appears to Joshua.

[Joshua 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 5:1</span></span>

How dreadful is their case, who see the wrath of God advancing towards
them, without being able to turn it aside, or escape it! Such will be
the horrible situation of the wicked; nor can words express the anguish
of their feelings, or the greatness of their terror. Oh that they would
now take warning, and before it be too late, flee for refuge to lay hold
upon that hope set before them in the gospel! God impressed these fears
on the Canaanites, and dispirited them. This gave a short rest to the
Israelites, and circumcision rolled away the reproach of Egypt. They
were hereby owned to be the free-born children of God, having the seal
of the covenant. When God glorifies himself in perfecting the salvation
of his people, he not only silences all enemies, but rolls back their
reproaches upon themselves.

[Joshua 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 5:10</span></span>

A solemn passover was kept, at the time appointed by the law, in the
plains of Jericho, in defiance of the Canaanites round about them. It
was a performance of the promise, that when they went up to keep the
feasts, their land should be under the special protection of the Divine
providence, [Exo 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024). Notice is
taken of the ceasing of the manna as soon as they had eaten the old corn
of the land. For as it came just when they needed, so it continued as
long as they needed it. This teaches us not to expect supplies by
miracles, when they may be had in a common way. The word and ordinances
of God are spiritual manna, with which God nourishes his people in this
wilderness. Though often forfeited, yet they are continued while we are
here; but when we come to the heavenly Canaan, this manna will cease,
for we shall no longer need it.

[Joshua 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 5:13</span></span>

We read not of any appearance of God's glory to Joshua till now. There
appeared to him one as a man to be noticed. This Man was the Son of God,
the eternal Word. Joshua gave him Divine honours: he received them,
which a created angel would not have done, and he is called Jehovah,
[Jos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002). To Abraham he appeared as a
traveller; to Joshua as a man of war. Christ will be to his people what
their faith needs. Christ had his sword drawn, which encouraged Joshua
to carry on the war with vigour. Christ's sword drawn in his hand,
denotes how ready he is for the defence and salvation of his people. His
sword turns every way. Joshua will know whether he is a friend or a foe.
The cause between the Israelites and Canaanites, between Christ and
Beelzebub, will not admit of any man's refusing to take one part or the
other, as he may do in worldly contests. Joshua's inquiry shows an
earnest desire to know the will of Christ, and a cheerful readiness and
resolution to do it. All true Christians must fight under Christ's
banner, and they will conquer by his presence and assistance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 6](jos006)

</div>
