<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 11:0</span></span>

([Jos 11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)) Divers kings overcome at
the waters of Merom.

([Jos 11:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)) Hazor is taken and
burned.

([Jos 11:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015)) All that country
subdued, the Anakims cut off.

[Joshua 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 11:1</span></span>

The wonders God wrought for the Israelites were to encourage them to act
vigorously themselves. Thus the war against Satan's kingdom, carried on
by preaching the gospel, was at first forwarded by miracles; but being
fully proved to be of God, we are now left to the Divine grace in the
usual course, in the use of the sword of the Spirit. God encouraged
Joshua. Fresh dangers and difficulties make it necessary to seek fresh
supports from the word of God, which we have nigh unto us for use in
every time of need. God proportions our trials to our strength, and our
strength to our trials. Joshua's obedience in destroying the horses and
chariots, shows his self-denial in compliance with God's command. The
possession of things on which the carnal heart is prone to depend, is
hurtful to the life of faith, and the walk with God; therefore it is
better to be without worldly advantages, than to have the soul
endangered by them.

[Joshua 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 11:10</span></span>

The Canaanites filled up the measure of their iniquity, and were, as a
judgment, left to the pride, obstinacy, and enmity of their hearts, and
to the power of Satan; all restraints being withdrawn, while the
dispensations of Providence tended to drive them to despair. They
brought on themselves the vengeance they justly merited, of which the
Israelites were to be executioners, by the command the Lord gave to
Moses.

[Joshua 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 11:15</span></span>

Never let the sons of Anak be a terror to the Israel of God, for their
day to fall will come. The land rested from war. It ended not in a peace
with the Canaanites, that was forbidden, but in a peace from them. There
is a rest, a rest from war, remaining for the people of God, into which
they shall enter, when their warfare is accomplished. That which was now
done, is compared with what had been said to Moses. God's word and his
works, if viewed together, will be found mutually to set each other
forth. If we make conscience of our duty, we need not question the
performance of the promise. But the believer must never put off his
armour, or expect lasting peace, till he closes his eyes in death; nay,
as his strength and usefulness increase, he may expect more heavy
trials; yet the Lord will not permit any enemies to assault the believer
till he has prepared him for the battle. Christ Jesus ever lives to
plead for his people, and their faith shall not fail, however Satan may
be permitted to assault them. And however tedious, sharp, and difficult
the believer's warfare, his patience in tribulation may be encouraged by
the joyfulness of hope; for he will, ere long, rest from sin and from
sorrow in the Canaan above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012)

</div>
