<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos002)  [Next](jos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 3:0</span></span>

([Jos 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)) The Israelites come to
Jordan.

([Jos 3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007)) The Lord encourages
Joshua - Joshua encourages the people.

([Jos 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014)) The Israelites pass
through Jordan on dry land.

[Joshua 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 3:1</span></span>

The Israelites came to Jordan in faith, having been told that they
should pass it. In the way of duty, let us proceed as far as we can, and
depend on the Lord. Joshua led them. Particular notice is taken of his
early rising, as afterwards upon other occasions, which shows how little
he sought his own ease. Those who would bring great things to pass, must
rise early. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty. All in public
stations should always attend to the duty of their place. The people
were to follow the ark. Thus must we walk after the rule of the word,
and the direction of the Spirit, in everything; so shall peace be upon
us as upon the Israel of God; but we must follow our ministers only as
they follow Christ. All their way through the wilderness was an
untrodden path, but most so this through Jordan. While we are here, we
must expect and prepare to pass ways that we have not passed before; but
in the path of duty we may proceed with boldness and cheerfulness.
Whether we are called to suffer poverty, pain, labour, persecution,
reproach, or death, we are following the Author and Finisher of our
faith; nor can we set our feet in any dangerous or difficult spot,
through our whole journey, but faith will there see the prints of the
Redeemer's feet, who trod that very path to glory above, and bids us
follow him, that where he is, we may be also. They were to sanctify
themselves. Would we experience the effects of God's love and power, we
must put away sin, and be careful not to grieve the Holy Spirit of God.

[Joshua 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 3:7</span></span>

The waters of Jordan shall be cut off. This must be done in such a way
as never was done, but in the dividing of the Red sea. That miracle is
here repeated; God has the same power to finish the salvation of his
people, as to begin it; the WORD of the Lord was as truly with Joshua as
with Moses. God's appearances for his people ought to encourage faith
and hope. God's work is perfect, he will keep his people. Jordan's flood
cannot keep out Israel, Canaan's force cannot turn them out again.

[Joshua 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 3:14</span></span>

Jordan overflowed all its banks. This magnified the power of God, and
his kindness to Israel. Although those who oppose the salvation of God's
people have all advantages, yet God can and will conquer. This passage
over Jordan, as an entrance to Canaan, after their long, weary
wanderings in the wilderness, shadowed out the believer's passage
through death to heaven, after he has finished his wanderings in this
sinful world. Jesus, typified by the ark, hath gone before, and he
crossed the river when it most flooded the country around. Let us
treasure up experiences of His faithful and tender care, that they may
help our faith and hope in the last conflict.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 4](jos004)

</div>
