<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1007)  [Next](kg1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 8:0</span></span>

([Kg1 8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)) The dedication of the
temple.

([Kg1 8:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)) The occasion.

(v. 22-53) Solomon's prayer.

([Kg1 8:54-61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)) His blessing and
exhortation.

([Kg1 8:62-66](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062)) Solomon's
peace-offerings.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 8:1</span></span>

The bringing in the ark, is the end which must crown the work: this was
done with great solemnity. The ark was fixed in the place appointed for
its rest in the inner part of the house, whence they expected God to
speak to them, even in the most holy place. The staves of the ark were
drawn out, so as to direct the high priest to the mercy-seat over the
ark, when he went in, once a year, to sprinkle the blood there; so that
they continued of use, though there was no longer occasion to carry it
by them. The glory of God appearing in a cloud may signify, 1. The
darkness of that dispensation, in comparison with the light of the
gospel, by which, with open face, we behold, as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord. 2. The darkness of our present state, in comparison with the
sight of God, which will be the happiness of heaven, where the Divine
glory is unveiled.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 8:12</span></span>

Solomon encouraged the priests, who were much astonished at the dark
cloud. The dark dispensations of Providence should quicken us in fleeing
for refuge to the hope of the gospel. Nothing can more reconcile us to
them, than to consider what God has said, and to compare his word and
works together. Whatever good we do, we must look on it as the
performance of God's promise to us, not of our promises to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 8:22</span></span>

In this excellent prayer, Solomon does as we should do in every prayer;
he gives glory to God. Fresh experiences of the truth of God's promises
call for larger praises. He sues for grace and favour from God. The
experiences we have of God's performing his promises, should encourage
us to depend upon them, and to plead them with him; and those who expect
further mercies, must be thankful for former mercies. God's promises
must be the guide of our desires, and the ground of our hopes and
expectations in prayer. The sacrifices, the incense, and the whole
service of the temple, were all typical of the Redeemer's offices,
oblation, and intercession. The temple, therefore, was continually to be
remembered. Under one word, "forgive," Solomon expressed all that he
could ask in behalf of his people. For, as all misery springs from sin,
forgiveness of sin prepares the way for the removal of every evil, and
the receiving of every good. Without it, no deliverance can prove a
blessing. In addition to the teaching of the word of God, Solomon
entreated the Lord himself to teach the people to profit by all, even by
their chastisements. They shall know every man the plague of his own
heart, what it is that pains him; and shall spread their hands in prayer
toward this house; whether the trouble be of body or mind, they shall
represent it before God. Inward burdens seem especially meant. Sin is
the plague of our own hearts; our in-dwelling corruptions are our
spiritual diseases: every true Israelite endeavours to know these, that
he may mortify them, and watch against the risings of them. These drive
him to his knees; lamenting these, he spreads forth his hands in prayer.
After many particulars, Solomon concludes with the general request, that
God would hearken to his praying people. No place, now, under the
gospel, can add to the prayers made in or towards it. The substance is
Christ; whatever we ask in his name, it shall be given us. In this
manner the Israel of God is established and sanctified, the backslider
is recovered and healed. In this manner the stranger is brought nigh,
the mourner is comforted, the name of God is glorified. Sin is the cause
of all our troubles; repentance and forgiveness lead to all human
happiness.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">kg1 8:54</span></span>

Never was a congregation dismissed with what was more likely to affect
them, and to abide with them. What Solomon asks for in this prayer, is
still granted in the intercession of Christ, of which his supplication
was a type. We shall receive grace sufficient, suitable, and seasonable,
in every time of need. No human heart is of itself willing to obey the
gospel call to repentance, faith, and newness of life, walking in all
the commandments of the Lord, yet Solomon exhorts the people to be
perfect. This is the scriptural method, it is our duty to obey the
command of the law and the call of the gospel, seeing we have broken the
law. When our hearts are inclined thereto, feeling our sinfulness and
weakness, we pray for Divine assistance; thus are we made able to serve
God through Jesus Christ.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 8:62](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">kg1 8:62</span></span>

Solomon offered a great sacrifice. He kept the feast of tabernacles, as
it seems, after the feast of dedication. Thus should we go home,
rejoicing, from holy ordinances, thankful for God's Goodness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 9](kg1009)

</div>
