<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 18:0</span></span>

(v. 1-16) Elijah sends Ahab notice of his coming.

([Kg1 18:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)) Elijah meets Ahab.

(v. 21-40) Elijah's trial of the false prophets.

([Kg1 18:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)) Elijah, by prayer,
obtains rain.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

The severest judgments, of themselves, will not humble or change the
hearts of sinners; nothing, except the blood of Jesus Christ, can atone
for the guilt of sin; nothing, except the sanctifying Spirit of God, can
purge away its pollution. The priests and the Levites were gone to Judah
and Jerusalem, [Ch2 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013), [Ch2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#014), but instead of them God raised
up prophets, who read and expounded the word. They probably were from
the schools of the prophets, first set up by Samuel. They had not the
spirit of prophecy as Elijah, but taught the people to keep close to the
God of Israel. These Jezebel sought to destroy. The few that escaped
death were forced to hide themselves. God has his remnant among all
sorts, high and low; and that faith, fear, and love of his name, which
are the fruits of the Holy Spirit, will be accepted through the
Redeemer. See how wonderfully God raises up friends for his ministers
and people, for their shelter in difficult times. Bread and water were
now scarce, yet Obadiah will find enough for God's prophets, to keep
them alive. Ahab's care was not to lose all the beasts; but he took no
care about his soul, not to lose that. He took pains to seek grass, but
none to seek the favour of God; fencing against the effect, but not
inquiring how to remove the cause. But it bodes well with a people, when
God calls his ministers to stand forth, and show themselves. And we may
the better endure the bread of affliction, while our eyes see our
teachers.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 18:17</span></span>

One may guess how people stand affected to God, by observing how they
stand affected to his people and ministers. It has been the lot of the
best and most useful men, like Elijah, to be called and counted the
troublers of the land. But those who cause God's judgments do the
mischief, not he that foretells them, and warns the nation to repent.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 18:21</span></span>

Many of the people wavered in their judgment, and varied in their
practice. Elijah called upon them to determine whether Jehovah or Baal
was the self-existent, supreme God, the Creator, Governor, and Judge of
the world, and to follow him alone. It is dangerous to halt between the
service of God and the service of sin, the dominion of Christ and the
dominion of our lusts. If Jesus be the only Saviour, let us cleave to
him alone for every thing; if the Bible be the world of God, let us
reverence and receive the whole of it, and submit our understanding to
the Divine teaching it contains. Elijah proposed to bring the matter to
a trial. Baal had all the outward advantages, but the event encourages
all God's witnesses and advocates never to fear the face of man. The God
that answers by fire, let him be God: the atonement was to be made by
sacrifice, before the judgment could be removed in mercy. The God
therefore that has power to pardon sin, and to signify it by consuming
the sin-offering, must needs be the God that can relieve from the
calamity. God never required his worshippers to honour him in the manner
of the worshippers of Baal; but the service of the devil, though
sometimes it pleases and pampers the body, yet, in other things, really
is cruel to it, as in envy and drunkenness. God requires that we mortify
our lusts and corruptions; but bodily penances and severities are no
pleasure to him. Who has required these things at your hands? A few
words uttered in assured faith, and with fervent affection for the glory
of God, and love to the souls of men, or thirstings after the Lord's
image and his favour, form the effectual, fervent prayer of the
righteous man, which availeth much. Elijah sought not his own glory, but
that of God, for the good of the people. The people are all agreed,
convinced, and satisfied; Jehovah, he is the God. Some, we hope, had
their hearts turned, but most of them were convinced only, not
converted. Blessed are they that have not seen what these saw, yet have
believed, and have been wrought upon by it, more than they that saw it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 18:41</span></span>

Israel, being so far reformed as to acknowledge the Lord to be God, and
to consent to the execution of Baal's prophets, was so far accepted,
that God poured out blessing upon the land. Elijah long continued
praying. Though the answer of our fervent and believing supplications
does not come quickly, we must continue earnest in prayer, and not faint
or give over. A little cloud at length appeared, which soon overspread
the heavens, and watered the earth. Great blessings often arise from
small beginnings, showers of plenty from a cloud of span long. Let us
never despise the day of small things, but hope and wait for great
things from it. From what small beginnings have great matters arisen! It
is thus in all the gracious proceedings of God with the soul. Scarcely
to be perceived are the first workings of his Spirit in the heart, which
grow up at last to the wonder of men, and applause of angels. Elijah
hastened Ahab home, and attended him. God will strengthen his people for
every service to which his commandments and providence call them. The
awful displays of Divine justice and holiness dismay the sinner, extort
confessions, and dispose to outward obedience while the impression
lasts; but the view of these, with mercy, love, and truth in Christ
Jesus, is needful to draw the soul to self-abasement, trust, and love.
The Holy Spirit employs both in the conversion of sinners; when sinners
are impressed with Divine truths, they should be exhorted to set about
the duties to which the Saviour calls his disciples.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
