<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2007)  [Next](kg2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 8:0</span></span>

([Kg2 8:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001)) A famine in Israel, The
Shunammite obtains her land.

([Kg2 8:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#007)) Elisha consulted by
Hazael, Death of Benhadad.

([Kg2 8:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016)) Jehoram's wicked reign
in Judah.

([Kg2 8:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#025)) Ahaziah's wicked reign
in Judah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 8:1</span></span>

The kindness of the good Shunammite to Elisha, was rewarded by the care
taken of her in famine. It is well to foresee an evil, and wisdom, when
we foresee it, to hide ourselves if we lawfully may do so. When the
famine was over, she returned out of the land of the Philistines; that
was no proper place for an Israelite, any longer than there was
necessity for it. Time was when she dwelt so securely among her own
people, that she had no occasion to be spoken for to the king; but there
is much uncertainty in this life, so that things or persons may fail us
which we most depend upon, and those befriend us which we think we shall
never need. Sometimes events, small in themselves, prove of consequence,
as here; for they made the king ready to believe Gehazi's narrative,
when thus confirmed. It made him ready to grant her request, and to
support a life which was given once and again by miracle.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 8:7</span></span>

Among other changes of men's minds by affliction, it often gives other
thoughts of God's ministers, and teaches to value the counsels and
prayers of those whom they have hated and despised. It was not in
Hazael's countenance that Elisha read what he would do, but God revealed
it to him, and it fetched tears from his eyes: the more foresight men
have, the more grief they are liable to. It is possible for a man, under
the convictions and restraints of natural conscience, to express great
abhorrence of a sin, yet afterwards to be reconciled to it. Those that
are little and low in the world, cannot imagine how strong the
temptations of power and prosperity are, which, if ever they arrive at,
they will find how deceitful their hearts are, how much worse than they
suspected. The devil ruins men, by saying they shall certainly recover
and do well, so rocking them asleep in security. Hazael's false account
was an injury to the king, who lost the benefit of the prophet's warning
to prepare for death, and an injury to Elisha, who would be counted a
false prophet. It is not certain that Hazael murdered his master, or if
he caused his death it may have been without any design. But he was a
dissembler, and afterwards proved a persecutor to Israel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 8:16</span></span>

A general idea is given of Jehoram's badness. His father, no doubt, had
him taught the true knowledge of the Lord, but did ill to marry him to
the daughter of Ahab; no good could come of union with an idolatrous
family.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 8:25</span></span>

Names do not make natures, but it was bad for Jehoshaphat's family to
borrow names from Ahab's. Ahaziah's relation to Ahab's family was the
occasion of his wickedness and of his fall. When men choose wives for
themselves, let them remember they are choosing mothers for their
children. Providence so ordered it, that Ahaziah might be cut off with
the house of Ahab, when the measure of their iniquity was full. Those
who partake with sinners in their sin, must expect to partake with them
in their plagues. May all the changes, troubles, and wickedness of the
world, make us more earnest to obtain an interest in the salvation of
Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 9](kg2009)

</div>
