<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev004)  [Next](lev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 5:0</span></span>

([Lev 5:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)) Concerning various
trespasses.

([Lev 5:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014)) Concerning trespasses
against the Lord.

[Leviticus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 5:1</span></span>

The offences here noticed are, 1. A man's concealing the truth, when he
was sworn as a witness to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth. If, in such a case, for fear of offending one that has
been his friend, or may be his enemy, a man refuses to give evidence, or
gives it but in part, he shall bear his iniquity. And that is a heavy
burden, which, if some course be not taken to get it removed, will sink
a man to hell. Let all that are called at any time to be witnesses,
think of this law, and be free and open in their evidence, and take heed
of prevaricating. An oath of the Lord is a sacred thing, not to be
trifled with. 2. A man's touching any thing that was ceremonially
unclean. Though his touching the unclean thing only made him
ceremonially defiled, yet neglecting to wash himself according to the
law, was either carelessness or contempt, and contracted moral guilt. As
soon as God, by his Spirit, convinces our consciences of any sin or
duty, we must follow the conviction, as not ashamed to own our former
mistake. 3. Rash swearing, that a man will do or not do such a thing. As
if the performance of his oath afterward prove unlawful, or what cannot
be done. Wisdom and watchfulness beforehand would prevent these
difficulties. In these cases the offender must confess his sin, and
bring his offering; but the offering was not accepted, unless
accompanied with confession and humble prayer for pardon. The confession
must be particular; that he hath sinned in that thing. Deceit lies in
generals; many will own they have sinned, for that all must own; but
their sins in any one particular they are unwilling to allow. The way to
be assured of pardon, and armed against sin for the future, is to
confess the exact truth. If any were very poor, they might bring some
flour, and that should be accepted. Thus the expense of the sin-offering
was brought lower than any other, to teach that no man's poverty shall
ever bar the way of his pardon. If the sinner brought two doves, one was
to be offered for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering. We
must first see that our peace be made with God, and then we may expect
that our services for his glory will be accepted by him. To show the
loathsomeness of sin, the flour, when offered, must not be made grateful
to the taste by oil, or to the smell by frankincense. God, by these
sacrifices, spoke comfort to those who had offended, that they might not
despair, nor pine away in their sins. Likewise caution not to offend any
more, remembering how expensive and troublesome it was to make
atonement.

[Leviticus 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 5:14</span></span>

Here are offerings to atone for trespasses against a neighbour. If a man
put to his own use unwittingly, any thing dedicated to God, he was to
bring this sacrifice. We are to be jealous over ourselves, to ask pardon
for the sin, and make satisfaction for the wrong, which we do but
suspect ourselves guilty of. The law of God is so very broad, the
occasions of sin in this guilty of. The law of God is so very broad, the
occasions of sin in this world are so numerous, and we are so prone to
evil, that we need to fear always, and to pray always, that we may be
kept from sin. Also we should look before us at every step. The true
Christian daily pleads guilty before God, and seeks forgiveness through
the blood of Christ. And the gospel salvation is so free, that the
poorest is not shut out; and so full, that the most burdened conscience
may find relief from it. Yet the evil of sin is so displayed as to cause
every pardoned sinner to abhor and dread it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 6](lev006)

</div>
