<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 16:0</span></span>

([Lev 16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)) The great day of
atonement.

(v. 15-34) The sacrifices on it, The scapegoat.

[Leviticus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 16:1</span></span>

Without entering into particulars of the sacrifices on the great day of
atonement, we may notice that it was to be a statute for ever, till that
dispensation be at an end. As long as we are continually sinning, we
continually need the atonement. The law of afflicting our souls for sin,
is a statue which will continue in force till we arrive where all tears,
even those of repentance, will be wiped from our eyes. The apostle
observes it as a proof that the sacrifices could not take away sin, and
cleanse the conscience from it, that in them there was a remembrance
made of sin every year, upon the day of atonement, [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001), [Heb
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#003). The repeating the sacrifices,
showed there was in them but a feeble effort toward making atonement;
this could be done only by offering up the body of Christ once for all;
and that sacrifice needed not to be repeated.

[Leviticus 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 16:15</span></span>

Here are typified the two great gospel privileges, of the remission of
sin, and access to God, both of which we owe to our Lord Jesus. See the
expiation of guilt. Christ is both the Maker and the Matter of the
atonement; for he is the Priest, the High Priest, that makes
reconciliation for the sins of the people. And as Christ is the High
Priest, so he is the Sacrifice with which atonement is made; for he is
all in all in our reconciliation to God. Thus he was figured by the two
goats. The slain goat was a type of Christ dying for our sins; the
scapegoat a type of Christ rising again for our justification. The
atonement is said to be completed by putting the sins of Israel upon the
head of the goat, which was sent away into a wilderness, a land not
inhabited; and the sending away of the goat represented the free and
full remission of their sins. He shall bear upon him all their
iniquities. Thus Christ, the Lamb of God, takes away the sin of the
world, by taking it upon himself, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029). The entrance into heaven, which
Christ made for us, was typified by the high priest's entrance into the
most holy place. See [Heb 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007). The
high priest was to come out again; but our Lord Jesus ever lives, making
intercession, and always appears in the presence of God for us. Here are
typified the two great gospel duties of faith and repentance. By faith
we put our hands upon the head of the offering; relying on Christ as the
Lord our Righteousness, pleading his satisfaction, as that which alone
is able to atone for our sins, and procure us a pardon. By repentance we
afflict our souls; not only fasting for a time from the delights of the
body, but inwardly sorrowing for sin, and living a life of self-denial,
assuring ourselves, that if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
By the atonement we obtain rest for our souls, and all the glorious
liberties of the children of God. Sinner, get the blood of Christ
effectually applied to thy soul, or else thou canst never look God in
the face with any comfort or acceptance. Take this blood of Christ,
apply it by faith, and see how it atones with God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017)

</div>
