<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev024)  [Next](lev026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 25:0</span></span>

([Lev 25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)) The sabbath of rest for
the land in the seventh year.

([Lev 25:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)) The jubilee of the
fiftieth year, Oppression forbidden.

([Lev 25:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)) Redemption of the land
and houses.

([Lev 25:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)) Compassion towards the
poor.

(v. 39-55) Laws respecting bondmen, Oppression forbidden.

[Leviticus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 25:1</span></span>

All labour was to cease in the seventh year, as much as daily labour on
the seventh day. These statues tell us to beware of covetousness, for a
man's life consists not in the abundance of his possessions. We are to
exercise willing dependence on God's providence for our support; to
consider ourselves the Lord's tenants or stewards, and to use our
possessions accordingly. This year of rest typified the spiritual rest
which all believers enter into through Christ. Through Him we are eased
of the burden of wordly care and labour, both being sanctified and
sweetened to us; and we are enabled and encouraged to live by faith.

[Leviticus 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 25:8</span></span>

The word "jubilee" signifies a peculiarly animated sound of the silver
trumpets. This sound was to be made on the evening of the great day of
atonement; for the proclamation of gospel liberty and salvation results
from the sacrifice of the Redeemer. It was provided that the lands
should not be sold away from their families. They could only be disposed
of, as it were, by leases till the year of jubilee, and then returned to
the owner or his heir. This tended to preserve their tribes and families
distinct, till the coming of the Messiah. The liberty every man was born
to, if sold or forfeited, should return at the year of jubilee. This was
typical of redemption by Christ from the slavery of sin and Satan, and
of being brought again to the liberty of the children of God. All
bargains ought to be made by this rule, "Ye shall not oppress one
another," not take advantage of one another's ignorance or necessity,
"but thou shalt fear thy God." The fear of God reigning in the heart,
would restrain from doing wrong to our neighbour in word or deed.
Assurance was given that they should be great gainers, by observing
these years of rest. If we are careful to do our duty, we may trust God
with our comfort. This was a miracle for an encouragement to all neither
sowed or reaped. This was a miracle for an encouragement to all God's
people, in all ages, to trust him in the way of duty. There is nothing
lost by faith and self-denial in obedience. Some asked, What shall we
eat the seventh year? Thus many Christians anticipate evils, questioning
what they shall do, and fearing to proceed in the way of duty. But we
have no right to anticipate evils, so as to distress ourselves about
them. To carnal minds we may appear to act absurdly, but the path of
duty is ever the path of safety.

[Leviticus 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 25:23</span></span>

If the land were not redeemed before the year of jubilee, it then
returned to him that sold or mortgaged it. This was a figure of the free
grace of God in Christ; by which, and not by any price or merit of our
own, we are restored to the favour of God. Houses in walled cities were
more the fruits of their own industry than land in the country, which
was the direct gift of God's bounty; therefore if a man sold a house in
a city, he might redeem it only within a year after the sale. This
encouraged strangers and proselytes to come and settle among them.

[Leviticus 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 25:35</span></span>

Poverty and decay are great grievances, and very common; the poor ye
have always with you. Thou shalt relieve him; by sympathy, pitying the
poor; by service, doing for them; and by supply, giving to them
according to their necessity, and thine ability. Poor debtors must not
be oppressed. Observe the arguments here used against extortion: "Fear
thy God." Relieve the poor, "that they may live with thee;" for they may
be serviceable to thee. The rich can as ill spare the poor, as the poor
can the rich. It becomes those that have received mercy to show mercy.

[Leviticus 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 25:39</span></span>

A native Israelite, if sold for debt, or for a crime, was to serve but
six years, and to go out the seventh. If he sold himself, through
poverty, both his work and his usage must be such as were fitting for a
son of Abraham. Masters are required to give to their servants that
which is just and equal, [Col 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001). At
the year of jubilee the servant should go out free, he and his children,
and should return to his own family. This typified redemption from the
service of sin and Satan, by the grace of God in Christ, whose truth
makes us free, [Joh 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032). We cannot
ransom our fellow-sinners, but we may point out Christ to them; while by
his grace our lives may adorn his gospel, express our love, show our
gratitude, and glorify his holy name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 26](lev026)

</div>
