<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev012)  [Next](lev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 13:0</span></span>

(v. 1-17) Directions to the priest to judge concerning leprosy.

(v. 18-44) Further directions.

([Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045), [Lev
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#046)) How the leper must be disposed
of.

([Lev 13:47-59](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#047)) The leprosy in
garments.

[Leviticus 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 13:1</span></span>

The plague of leprosy was an uncleanness, rather than a disease. Christ
is said to cleanse lepers, not to cure them. Common as the leprosy was
among the Hebrews, during and after their residence in Egypt, we have no
reason to believe that it was known among them before. Their distressed
state and employment in that land must have rendered them liable to
disease. But it was a plague often inflicted immediately by the hand of
God. Miriam's leprosy, and Gehazi's, and king Uzziah's, were punishments
of particular sins; no marvel there was care taken to distinguish it
from a common distemper. The judgment of it was referred to the priests.
And it was a figure of the moral pollutions of men's minds by sin, which
is the leprosy of the soul, defiling to the conscience, and from which
Christ alone can cleanse. The priest could only convict the leper, (by
the law is the knowledge of sin,) but Christ can cure the sinner, he can
take away sin. It is a work of great importance, but of great
difficulty, to judge of our spiritual state. We all have cause to
suspect ourselves, being conscious of sores and spots; but whether clean
or unclean is the question. As there were certain marks by which to know
it was leprosy, so there are marks of such as are in the gall of
bitterness. The priest must take time in making his judgment. This
teaches all, both ministers and people, not to be hasty in censures, nor
to judge anything before the time. If some men's sins go before unto
judgment, the sins of others follow after, and so do men's good works.
If the person suspected were found to be clean, yet he must wash his
clothes, because there had been ground for the suspicion. We have need
to be washed in the blood of Christ from our spots, though not leprosy
spots; for who can say, I am pure from sin?

[Leviticus 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 13:18</span></span>

The priest is told what judgment to make, if there were any appearance
of a leprosy in old sores; and such is the danger of those who having
escaped the pollutions of the world are again entangled therein. Or, in
a burn by accident, [Lev 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#024). The
burning of strife and contention often occasions the rising and breaking
out of that corruption, which proves that men are unclean. Human life
lies exposed to many grievances. With what troops of diseases are we
beset on every side; and thy all entered by sin! If the constitution be
healthy, and the body lively and easy, we are bound to glorify God with
our bodies. Particular note was taken of the leprosy, if in the head. If
the leprosy of sin has seized the head; if the judgment be corrupted,
and wicked principles, which support wicked practices, are embraced, it
is utter uncleanness, from which few are cleansed. Soundness in the
faith keeps leprosy from the head.

[Leviticus 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">lev 13:45</span></span>

When the priest had pronounced the leper unclean, it put a stop to his
business in the world, cut him off from his friends and relations, and
ruined all the comfort he could have in the world. He must humble
himself under the mighty hand of God, not insisting upon his cleanness,
when the priest had pronounced him unclean, but accepting the
punishment. Thus must we take to ourselves the shame that belongs to us,
and with broken hearts call ourselves "Unclean, unclean;" heart unclean,
life unclean; unclean by original corruption, unclean by actual
transgression; unclean, therefore deserving to be for ever shut out from
communion with God, and all hope of happiness in him; unclean, therefore
undone, if infinite mercy do not interpose. The leper must warn others
to take heed of coming near him. He must then be shut out of the camp,
and afterward, when they came to Canaan, be shut out of the city, town,
or village where he lived, and dwell with none but those that were
lepers like himself. This typified the purity which ought to be in the
gospel church.

[Leviticus 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lev 13:47</span></span>

The garment suspected to be tainted with leprosy was not to be burned
immediately. If, upon search, it was found that there was a leprous
spot, it must be burned, or at least that part of it. If it proved to be
free, it must be washed, and then might be used. This also sets forth
the great evil there is in sin. It not only defiles the sinner's
conscience, but it brings a stain upon all he has and all that he does.
And those who make their clothes servants to their pride and lust, may
see them thereby tainted with leprosy. But the robes of righteousness
never fret, nor are moth-eaten.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 14](lev014)

</div>
