<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev003)  [Next](lev005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 4:0</span></span>

([Lev 4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001)) The sin-offering of
ignorance for the priest.

([Lev 4:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013)) For the whole
congregation.

([Lev 4:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022)) For a ruler.

([Lev 4:27-35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027)) For any of the people.

[Leviticus 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 4:1</span></span>

Burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, and peace-offerings, had been offered
before the giving of the law upon mount Sinai; and in these the
patriarchs had respect to sin, to make atonement for it. But the Jews
were now put into a way of making atonement for sin, more particularly
by sacrifice, as a shadow of good things to come; yet the substance is
Christ, and that one offering of himself, by which he put away sin. The
sins for which the sin-offerings were appointed are supposed to be open
acts. They are supposed to be sins of commission, things which ought not
to have been done. Omissions are sins, and must come into judgment: yet
what had been omitted at one time, might be done at another; but a sin
committed was past recall. They are supposed to be sins committed
through ignorance. The law begins with the case of the anointed priest.
It is evident that God never had any infallible priest in his church
upon earth, when even the high priest was liable to fall into sins of
ignorance. All pretensions to act without error are sure marks of
Antichrist. The beast was to be carried without the camp, and there
burned to ashes. This was a sign of the duty of repentance, which is the
putting away sin as a detestable thing, which our soul hates. The
sin-offering is called sin. What they did to that, we must do to our
sins; the body of sin must be destroyed, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). The apostle applies the carrying
this sacrifice without the camp to Christ, [Heb
13:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011).

[Leviticus 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 4:13</span></span>

If the leaders of the people, through mistake, caused them to err, an
offering must be brought, that wrath might not come upon the whole
congregation. When sacrifices were offered, the persons, on whose behalf
they were devoted, were to lay their hands on the heads of the victims,
and to confess their sins. The elders were to do so, when the sacrifices
were offered for the whole congregation. The load of sin was supposed
then to be borne by the guiltless animal. When the offering is
completed, it is said, atonement is made, and the sin shall be forgiven.
The saving of churches and kingdoms from ruin, is owing to the
satisfaction and mediation of Christ.

[Leviticus 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 4:22</span></span>

Those who have power to call others to account, are themselves
accountable to the Ruler of rulers. The sin of the ruler, committed
through ignorance, must come to his knowledge, either by the check of
his own conscience, or by the reproof of his friends; both which even
the best and greatest, not only should submit to, but be thankful for.
That which I see not, teach thou me, and, Show me wherein I have erred,
are prayers we should put up to God every day; that if, through
ignorance, we fall into sin, we may not through ignorance abide in it.

[Leviticus 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 4:27</span></span>

Here is the law of the sin-offering for a common person. To be able to
plead, when charged with sin, that we did it ignorantly, and through the
surprise of temptation, will not bring us off, if we have no interest in
that great plea, Christ hath died. The sins of ignorance committed by a
common person, needed a sacrifice; the greatest are not above, the
meanest are not below Divine justice. None, if offenders, were
overlooked. Here rich and poor meet together; they are alike sinners,
and welcome to Christ. From all these laws concerning the sin-offerings,
we may learn to hate sin, and to watch against it; and to value Christ,
the great and true Sin-offering, whose blood cleanses from all sin,
which it was not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should
take away. For us to err, with the Bible in our hands, is the effect of
pride, sloth, and carelessness. We need to use frequent
self-examination, with serious study of the Scriptures, and earnest
prayer for the convincing influences of God the Holy Spirit; that we may
detect our sins of ignorance, repent, and obtain forgiveness through the
blood of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 5](lev005)

</div>
