<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk003)  [Next](luk005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 4:0</span></span>

([Luk 4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)) The temptation of
Christ.

(v. 14-30) Christ in the synagogue of Nazareth.

([Luk 4:31-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)) He casts out an unclean
spirit and heals the sick.

[Luke 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 4:1</span></span>

Christ's being led into the wilderness gave an advantage to the tempter;
for there he was alone, none were with him by whose prayers and advice
he might be helped in the hour of temptation. He who knew his own
strength might give Satan advantage; but we may not, who know our own
weakness. Being in all things made like unto his brethren, Jesus would,
like the other children of God, live in dependence upon the Divine
Providence and promise. The word of God is our sword, and faith in that
word is our shield. God has many ways of providing for his people, and
therefore is at all times to be depended upon in the way of duty. All
Satan's promises are deceitful; and if he is permitted to have any
influence in disposing of the kingdoms of the world and the glory of
them, he uses them as baits to insnare men to destruction. We should
reject at once and with abhorrence, every opportunity of sinful gain or
advancement, as a price offered for our souls; we should seek riches,
honours, and happiness in the worship and service of God only. Christ
will not worship Satan; nor, when he has the kingdoms of the world
delivered to him by his Father, will he suffer any remains of the
worship of the devil to continue in them. Satan also tempted Jesus to be
his own murderer, by unfitting confidence in his Father's protection,
such as he had no warrant for. Let not any abuse of Scripture by Satan
or by men abate our esteem, or cause us to abandon its use; but let us
study it still, seek to know it, and seek our defence from it in all
kinds of assaults. Let this word dwell richly in us, for it is our life.
Our victorious Redeemer conquered, not for himself only, but for us
also. The devil ended all the temptation. Christ let him try all his
force, and defeated him. Satan saw it was to no purpose to attack
Christ, who had nothing in him for his fiery darts to fasten upon. And
if we resist the devil, he will flee from us. Yet he departed but till
the season when he was again to be let loose upon Jesus, not as a
tempter, to draw him to sin, and so to strike at his head, at which he
now aimed and was wholly defeated in; but as a persecutor, to bring
Christ to suffer, and so to bruise his heel, which it was told him, he
should have to do, and would do, though it would be the breaking of his
own head, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). Though Satan
depart for a season, we shall never be out of his reach till removed
from this present evil world.

[Luke 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 4:14</span></span>

Christ taught in their synagogues, their places of public worship, where
they met to read, expound, and apply the word, to pray and praise. All
the gifts and graces of the Spirit were upon him and on him, without
measure. By Christ, sinners may be loosed from the bonds of guilt, and
by his Spirit and grace from the bondage of corruption. He came by the
word of his gospel, to bring light to those that sat in the dark, and by
the power of his grace, to give sight to those that were blind. And he
preached the acceptable year of the Lord. Let sinners attend to the
Saviour's invitation when liberty is thus proclaimed. Christ's name was
Wonderful; in nothing was he more so than in the word of his grace, and
the power that went along with it. We may well wonder that he should
speak such words of grace to such graceless wretches as mankind. Some
prejudice often furnishes an objection against the humbling doctrine of
the cross; and while it is the word of God that stirs up men's enmity,
they will blame the conduct or manner of the speaker. The doctrine of
God's sovereignty, his right to do his will, provokes proud men. They
will not seek his favour in his own way; and are angry when others have
the favours they neglect. Still is Jesus rejected by multitudes who hear
the same message from his words. While they crucify him afresh by their
sins, may we honour him as the Son of God, the Saviour of men, and seek
to show we do so by our obedience.

[Luke 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 4:31</span></span>

Christ's preaching much affected the people; and a working power went
with it to the consciences of men. These miracles showed Christ to be a
controller and conqueror of Satan, a healer of diseases. Where Christ
gives a new life, in recovery from sickness, it should be a new life,
spent more than ever in his service, to his glory. Our business should
be to spread abroad Christ's fame in every place, to beseech him in
behalf of those diseased in body or mind, and to use our influence in
bringing sinners to him, that his hands may be laid upon them for their
healing. He cast the devils out of many who were possessed. We were not
sent into this world to live to ourselves only, but to glorify God, and
to do good in our generation. The people sought him, and came unto him.
A desert is no desert, if we are with Christ there. He will continue
with us, by his word and Spirit, and extend the same blessings to other
nations, till, throughout the earth, the servants and worshippers of
Satan are brought to acknowledge him as the Christ, the Son of God, and
to find redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 5](luk005)

</div>
