<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk017)  [Next](luk019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 18:0</span></span>

([Luk 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)) The parable of the
importunate widow.

([Luk 18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009)) The Pharisee and the
publican.

([Luk 18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015)) Children brought to
Christ.

([Luk 18:18-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018)) The ruler hindered by
his riches.

([Luk 18:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031)) Christ foreshows his
death.

([Luk 18:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)) A blind man restored
to sight.

[Luke 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 18:1</span></span>

All God's people are praying people. Here earnest steadiness in prayer
for spiritual mercies is taught. The widow's earnestness prevailed even
with the unjust judge: she might fear lest it should set him more
against her; but our earnest prayer is pleasing to our God. Even to the
end there will still be ground for the same complaint of weakness of
faith.

[Luke 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 18:9</span></span>

This parable was to convince some who trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and despised others. God sees with what disposition and
design we come to him in holy ordinances. What the Pharisee said, shows
that he trusted to himself that he was righteous. We may suppose he was
free from gross and scandalous sins. All this was very well and
commendable. Miserable is the condition of those who come short of the
righteousness of this Pharisee, yet he was not accepted; and why not? He
went up to the temple to pray, but was full of himself and his own
goodness; the favour and grace of God he did not think worth asking. Let
us beware of presenting proud devotions to the Lord, and of despising
others. The publican's address to God was full of humility, and of
repentance for sin, and desire toward God. His prayer was short, but to
the purpose; God be merciful to me a sinner. Blessed be God, that we
have this short prayer upon record, as an answered prayer; and that we
are sure that he who prayed it, went to his house justified; for so
shall we be, if we pray it, as he did, through Jesus Christ. He owned
himself a sinner by nature, by practice, guilty before God. He had no
dependence but upon the mercy of God; upon that alone he relied. And
God's glory is to resist the proud, and give grace to the humble.
Justification is of God in Christ; therefore the self-condemned, and not
the self-righteous, are justified before God.

[Luke 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 18:15</span></span>

None are too little, too young, to be brought to Christ, who knows how
to show kindness to those not capable of doing service to him. It is the
mind of Christ, that little children should be brought to him. The
promise is to us, and to our seed; therefore He will bid them welcome to
him with us. And we must receive his kingdom as children, not by
purchase, and must call it our Father's gift.

[Luke 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 18:18</span></span>

Many have a great deal in them very commendable, yet perish for lack of
some one thing; so this ruler could not bear Christ's terms, which would
part between him and his estate. Many who are loth to leave Christ, yet
do leave him. After a long struggle between their convictions and their
corruptions, their corruptions carry the day. They are very sorry that
they cannot serve both; but if one must be quitted, it shall be their
God, not their wordly gain. Their boasted obedience will be found mere
outside show; the love of the world in some form or other lies at the
root. Men are apt to speak too much of what they have left and lost, of
what they have done and suffered for Christ, as Peter did. But we should
rather be ashamed that there has been any regret or difficulty in doing
it.

[Luke 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 18:31</span></span>

The Spirit of Christ, in the Old Testament prophets, testified
beforehand his sufferings, and the glory that should follow, [Pe1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011). The disciples' prejudices were
so strong, that they would not understand these things literally. They
were so intent upon the prophecies which spake of Christ's glory, that
they overlooked those which spake of his sufferings. People run into
mistakes, because they read their Bibles by halves, and are only for the
smooth things. We are as backward to learn the proper lessons from the
sufferings, crucifixion, and resurrection of Christ, as the disciples
were to what he told them as to those events; and for the same reason;
self-love, and a desire of worldly objects, close our understandings.

[Luke 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 18:35</span></span>

This poor blind man sat by the wayside, begging. He was not only blind,
but poor, the fitter emblem of the world of mankind which Christ came to
heal and save. The prayer of faith, guided by Christ's encouraging
promises, and grounded on them, shall not be in vain. The grace of
Christ ought to be thankfully acknowledged, to the glory of God. It is
for the glory of God if we follow Jesus, as those will do whose eyes are
opened. We must praise God for his mercies to others, as well as for
mercies to ourselves. Would we rightly understand these things, we must
come to Christ, like the blind man, earnestly beseeching him to open our
eyes, and to show us clearly the excellence of his precepts, and the
value of his salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 19](luk019)

</div>
