<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk019)  [Next](luk021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 20:0</span></span>

([Luk 20:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#001)) The priests and scribes
question Christ's authority.

([Luk 20:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#009)) The parable of the
vineyard and husbandmen.

([Luk 20:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020)) Of giving tribute.

([Luk 20:27-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#027)) Concerning the
resurrection.

([Luk 20:39-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#039)) The scribes silenced.

[Luke 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 20:1</span></span>

Men often pretend to examine the evidences of revelation, and the truth
of the gospel, when only seeking excuses for their own unbelief and
disobedience. Christ answered these priests and scribes with a plain
question about the baptism of John, which the common people could
answer. They all knew it was from heaven, nothing in it had an earthly
tendency. Those that bury the knowledge they have, are justly denied
further knowledge. It was just with Christ to refuse to give account of
his authority, to those who knew the baptism of John to be from heaven,
yet would not believe in him, nor own their knowledge.

[Luke 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 20:9</span></span>

Christ spake this parable against those who resolved not to own his
authority, though the evidence of it was so full. How many resemble the
Jews who murdered the prophets and crucified Christ, in their enmity to
God, and aversion to his service, desiring to live according to their
lusts, without control! Let all who are favoured with God's word, look
to it that they make proper use of their advantages. Awful will be the
doom, both of those who reject the Son, and of those who profess to
reverence Him, yet render not the fruits in due season. Though they
could not but own that for such a sin, such a punishment was just, yet
they could not bear to hear of it. It is the folly of sinners, that they
persevere in sinful ways, though they dread the destruction at the end
of those ways.

[Luke 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 20:20</span></span>

Those who are most crafty in their designs against Christ and his
gospel, cannot hide them. He did not give a direct answer, but reproved
them for offering to impose upon him; and they could not fasten upon any
thing wherewith to stir up either the governor or the people against
him. The wisdom which is from above, will direct all who teach the way
of God truly, to avoid the snares laid for them by wicked men; and will
teach our duty to God, to our rulers, and to all men, so clearly, that
opposers will have no evil to say of us.

[Luke 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 20:27</span></span>

It is common for those who design to undermine any truth of God, to load
it with difficulties. But we wrong ourselves, and wrong the truth of
Christ, when we form our notions of the world of spirits by this world
of sense. There are more worlds than one; a present visible world, and a
future unseen world; and let every one compare this world and that
world, and give the preference in his thoughts and cares to that which
deserves them. Believers shall obtain the resurrection from the dead,
that is the blessed resurrection. What shall be the happy state of the
inhabitants of that world, we cannot express or conceive, [Co1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009). Those that are entered into the
joy of their Lord, are entirely taken up therewith; when there is
perfection of holiness there will be no occasion for preservatives from
sin. And when God called himself the God of these patriarchs, he meant
that he was a God all-sufficient to them, [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001), their exceeding great Reward,
[Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001). He never did that for them
in this world, which answered the full extent of his undertaking;
therefore there must be another life, in which he will do that for them,
which will completely fulfil the promise.

[Luke 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 20:39</span></span>

The scribes commended the reply Christ made to the Sadducees about the
resurrection, but they were silenced by a question concerning the
Messiah. Christ, as God, was David's Lord; but Christ, as man, was
David's son. The scribes would receive the severest judgement for
defrauding the poor widows, and for their abuse of religion,
particularly of prayer, which they used as a pretence for carrying on
worldly and wicked plans. Dissembled piety is double sin. Then let us
beg of God to keep us from pride, ambition, covetousness, and every evil
thing; and to teach us to seek that honour which comes from him alone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 21](luk021)

</div>
