<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk021)  [Next](luk023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 22:0</span></span>

([Luk 22:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)) The treachery of Judas.

([Luk 22:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007)) The passover.

([Luk 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019), [Luk
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020)) The Lord's supper instituted.

(v. 21-38) Christ admonishes the disciples.

([Luk 22:39-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039)) Christ's agony in the
garden.

([Luk 22:47-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047)) Christ betrayed.

([Luk 22:54-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#054)) The fall of Peter.

([Luk 22:63-71](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063)) Christ confesses
himself to be the Son of God.

[Luke 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 22:1</span></span>

Christ knew all men, and had wise and holy ends in taking Judas to be a
disciple. How he who knew Christ so well, came to betray him, we are
here told; Satan entered into Judas. It is hard to say whether more
mischief is done to Christ's kingdom, by the power of its open enemies,
or by the treachery of its pretended friends; but without the latter,
its enemies could not do so much evil as they do.

[Luke 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 22:7</span></span>

Christ kept the ordinances of the law, particularly that of the
passover, to teach us to observe his gospel institutions, and most of
all that of the Lord's supper. Those who go upon Christ's word, need not
fear disappointment. According to the orders given them, the disciples
got all ready for the passover. Jesus bids this passover welcome. He
desired it, though he knew his sufferings would follow, because it was
in order to his Father's glory and man's redemption. He takes his leave
of all passovers, signifying thereby his doing away all the ordinances
of the ceremonial law, of which the passover was one of the earliest and
chief. That type was laid aside, because now in the kingdom of God the
substance was come.

[Luke 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 22:19</span></span>

The Lord's supper is a sign or memorial of Christ already come, who by
dying delivered us; his death is in special manner set before us in that
ordinance, by which we are reminded of it. The breaking of Christ's body
as a sacrifice for us, is therein brought to our remembrance by the
breaking of bread. Nothing can be more nourishing and satisfying to the
soul, than the doctrine of Christ's making atonement for sin, and the
assurance of an interest in that atonement. Therefore we do this in
remembrance of what He did for us, when he died for us; and for a
memorial of what we do, in joining ourselves to him in an everlasting
covenant. The shedding of Christ's blood, by which the atonement was
made, is represented by the wine in the cup.

[Luke 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 22:21</span></span>

How unbecoming is the worldly ambition of being the greatest, to the
character of a follower of Jesus, who took upon him the form of a
servant, and humbled himself to the death of the cross! In the way to
eternal happiness, we must expect to be assaulted and sifted by Satan.
If he cannot destroy, he will try to disgrace or distress us. Nothing
more certainly forebodes a fall, in a professed follower of Christ, than
self-confidence, with disregard to warnings, and contempt of danger.
Unless we watch and pray always, we may be drawn in the course of the
day into those sins which we were in the morning most resolved against.
If believers were left to themselves, they would fall; but they are kept
by the power of God, and the prayer of Christ. Our Lord gave notice of a
very great change of circumstances now approaching. The disciples must
not expect that their friends would be kind to them as they had been.
Therefore, he that has a purse, let him take it, for he may need it.
They must now expect that their enemies would be more fierce than they
had been, and they would need weapons. At the time the apostles
understood Christ to mean real weapons, but he spake only of the weapons
of the spiritual warfare. The sword of the Spirit is the sword with
which the disciples of Christ must furnish themselves.

[Luke 22:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 22:39</span></span>

Every description which the evangelists give of the state of mind in
which our Lord entered upon this conflict, proves the tremendous nature
of the assault, and the perfect foreknowledge of its terrors possessed
by the meek and lowly Jesus. Here are three things not in the other
evangelists. 1. When Christ was in his agony, there appeared to him an
angel from heaven, strengthening him. It was a part of his humiliation
that he was thus strengthened by a ministering spirit. 2. Being in
agony, he prayed more earnestly. Prayer, though never out of season, is
in a special manner seasonable when we are in an agony. 3. In this agony
his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down. This showed
the travail of his soul. We should pray also to be enabled to resist
unto the shedding of our blood, striving against sin, if ever called to
it. When next you dwell in imagination upon the delights of some
favourite sin, think of its effects as you behold them here! See its
fearful effects in the garden of Gethsemane, and desire, by the help of
God, deeply to hate and to forsake that enemy, to ransom sinners from
whom the Redeemer prayed, agonized, and bled.

[Luke 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 22:47</span></span>

Nothing can be a greater affront or grief to the Lord Jesus, than to be
betrayed by those who profess to be his followers, and say that they
love him. Many instances there are, of Christ's being betrayed by those
who, under the form of godliness, fight against the power of it. Jesus
here gave an illustrious example of his own rule of doing good to those
that hate us, as afterwards he did of praying for those that
despitefully use us. Corrupt nature warps our conduct to extremes; we
should seek for the Lord's direction before we act in difficult
circumstances. Christ was willing to wait for his triumphs till his
warfare was accomplished, and we must be so too. But the hour and the
power of darkness were short, and such the triumphs of the wicked always
will be.

[Luke 22:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 22:54</span></span>

Peter's fall was his denying that he knew Christ, and was his disciple;
disowning him because of distress and danger. He that has once told a
lie, is strongly tempted to persist: the beginning of that sin, like
strife, is as the letting forth of water. The Lord turned and looked
upon Peter. 1. It was a convincing look. Jesus turned and looked upon
him, as if he should say, Dost thou not know me, Peter? 2. It was a
chiding look. Let us think with what a rebuking countenance Christ may
justly look upon us when we have sinned. 3. It was an expostulating
look. Thou who wast the most forward to confess me to be the Son of God,
and didst solemnly promise thou wouldest never disown me! 4. It was a
compassionate look. Peter, how art thou fallen and undone if I do not
help thee! 5. It was a directing look, to go and bethink himself. 6. It
was a significant look; it signified the conveying of grace to Peter's
heart, to enable him to repent. The grace of God works in and by the
word of God, brings that to mind, and sets that home upon the
conscience, and so gives the soul the happy turn. Christ looked upon the
chief priests, and made no impression upon them as he did on Peter. It
was not the mere look from Christ, but the Divine grace with it, that
restored Peter.

[Luke 22:63](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">luk 22:63</span></span>

Those that condemned Jesus for a blasphemer, were the vilest
blasphemers. He referred them to his second coming, for the full proof
of his being the Christ, to their confusion, since they would not admit
the proof of it to their conviction. He owns himself to be the Son of
God, though he knew he should suffer for it. Upon this they ground his
condemnation. Their eyes being blinded, they rush on. Let us meditate on
this amazing transaction, and consider Him who endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 23](luk023)

</div>
