<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk010)  [Next](luk012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 11:0</span></span>

([Luk 11:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)) The disciples taught to
pray.

([Luk 11:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)) Christ encourages being
earnest in prayer.

([Luk 11:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014)) Christ casts out a
devil, The blasphemy of the Pharisees.

([Luk 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027), [Luk
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)) True happiness.

([Luk 11:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)) Christ reproves the
Jews.

(v. 37-54) He reproves the Pharisees.

[Luke 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 11:1</span></span>

"Lord, teach us to pray," is a good prayer, and a very needful one, for
Jesus Christ only can teach us, by his word and Spirit, how to pray.
Lord, teach me what it is to pray; Lord, stir up and quicken me to the
duty; Lord, direct me what to pray for; teach me what I should say.
Christ taught them a prayer, much the same that he had given before in
his sermon upon the mount. There are some differences in the words of
the Lord's prayer in Matthew and in Luke, but they are of no moment. Let
us in our requests, both for others and for ourselves, come to our
heavenly Father, confiding in his power and goodness.

[Luke 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 11:5</span></span>

Christ encourages fervency and constancy in prayer. We must come for
what we need, as a man does to his neighbour or friend, who is kind to
him. We must come for bread; for that which is needful. If God does not
answer our prayers speedily, yet he will in due time, if we continue to
pray. Observe what to pray for; we must ask for the Holy Spirit, not
only as necessary in order to our praying well, but as all spiritual
blessings are included in that one. For by the influences of the Holy
Spirit we are brought to know God and ourselves, to repent, believe in,
and love Christ, and so are made comfortable in this world, and meet for
happiness in the next. All these blessings our heavenly Father is more
ready to bestow on every one that asks for them, than an indulgent
parent is to give food to a hungry child. And this is the advantage of
the prayer of faith, that it quiets and establishes the heart in God.

[Luke 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 11:14</span></span>

Christ's thus casting out the devils, was really the destroying of their
power. The heart of every unconverted sinner is the devil's palace,
where he dwells, and where he rules. There is a kind of peace in the
heart of an unconverted soul, while the devil, as a strong man armed,
keeps it. The sinner is secure, has no doubt concerning the goodness of
his state, nor any dread of the judgment to come. But observe the
wonderful change made in conversion. The conversion of a soul to God, is
Christ's victory over the devil and his power in that soul, restoring
the soul to its liberty, and recovering his own interest in it and power
over it. All the endowments of mind of body are now employed for Christ.
Here is the condition of a hypocrite. The house is swept from common
sins, by a forced confession, as Pharaoh's; by a feigned contrition, as
Ahab's; or by a partial reformation, as Herod's. The house is swept, but
it is not washed; the heart is not made holy. Sweeping takes off only
the loose dirt, while the sin that besets the sinner, the beloved sin,
is untouched. The house is garnished with common gifts and graces. It is
not furnished with any true grace; it is all paint and varnish, not real
nor lasting. It was never given up to Christ, nor dwelt in by the
Spirit. Let us take heed of resting in that which a man may have, and
yet come short of heaven. The wicked spirits enter in without any
difficulty; they are welcomed, and they dwell there; there they work,
there they rule. From such an awful state let all earnestly pray to be
delivered.

[Luke 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 11:27</span></span>

While the scribes and Pharisees despised and blasphemed the discourses
of our Lord Jesus, this good woman admired them, and the wisdom and
power with which he spake. Christ led the woman to a higher
consideration. Though it is a great privilege to hear the word of God,
yet those only are truly blessed, that is, blessed of the Lord, that
hear it, keep it in memory, and keep to it as their way and rule.

[Luke 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 11:29</span></span>

Christ promised that there should be one sign more given, even the sign
of Jonah the prophet; which in Matthew is explained, as meaning the
resurrection of Christ; and he warned them to improve this sign. But
though Christ himself were the constant preacher in any congregation,
and worked miracles daily among them, yet unless his grace humbled their
hearts, they would not profit by his word. Let us not desire more
evidence and fuller teaching than the Lord is pleased to afford us. We
should pray without ceasing that our hearts and understandings may be
opened, that we may profit by the light we enjoy. And especially take
heed that the light which is in us be not darkness; for if our leading
principles be wrong, our judgment and practice must become more so.

[Luke 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 11:37</span></span>

We should all look to our hearts, that they may be cleansed and
new-created; and while we attend to the great things of the law and of
the gospel, we must not neglect the smallest matter God has appointed.
When any wait to catch something out of our mouths, that they may
insnare us, O Lord, give us thy prudence and thy patience, and
disappoint their evil purposes. Furnish us with such meekness and
patience that we may glory in reproaches, for Christ's sake, and that
thy Holy Spirit may rest upon us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 12](luk012)

</div>
