<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk012)  [Next](luk014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 13:0</span></span>

([Luk 13:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)) Christ exhorts to
repentance from the case of the Galileans and others.

([Luk 13:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)) Parable of the barren
fig-tree.

([Luk 13:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#010)) The infirm woman
strengthened.

([Luk 13:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)) The parables of the
mustard seed, and leaven.

([Luk 13:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#023)) Exhortation to enter
at the strait gate.

([Luk 13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031)) Christ's reproof to
Herod, and to the people of Jerusalem.

[Luke 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 13:1</span></span>

Mention was made to Christ of the death of some Galileans. This tragical
story is briefly related here, and is not met with in any historians. In
Christ's reply he spoke of another event, which, like it, gave an
instance of people taken away by sudden death. Towers, that are built
for safety, often prove to be men's destruction. He cautioned his
hearers not to blame great sufferers, as if they were therefore to be
accounted great sinners. As no place or employment can secure from the
stroke of death, we should consider the sudden removals of others as
warnings to ourselves. On these accounts Christ founded a call to
repentance. The same Jesus that bids us repent, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand, bids us repent, for otherwise we shall perish.

[Luke 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 13:6</span></span>

This parable of the barren fig-tree is intended to enforce the warning
given just before: the barren tree, except it brings forth fruit, will
be cut down. This parable in the first place refers to the nation and
people of the Jews. Yet it is, without doubt, for awakening all that
enjoy the means of grace, and the privileges of the visible church. When
God has borne long, we may hope that he will bear with us yet a little
longer, but we cannot expect that he will bear always.

[Luke 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 13:10</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus attended upon public worship on the sabbaths. Even bodily
infirmities, unless very grievous, should not keep us from public
worship on sabbath days. This woman came to Christ to be taught, and to
get good to her soul, and then he relieved her bodily infirmity. This
cure represents the work of Christ's grace upon the soul. And when
crooked souls are made straight, they will show it by glorifying God.
Christ knew that this ruler had a real enmity to him and to his gospel,
and that he did but cloak it with a pretended zeal for the sabbath day;
he really would not have them be healed any day; but if Jesus speaks the
word, and puts forth his healing power, sinners are set free. This
deliverance is often wrought on the Lord's day; and whatever labour
tends to put men in the way of receiving the blessing, agrees with the
design of that day.

[Luke 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 13:18</span></span>

Here is the progress of the gospel foretold in two parables, as in
Matthew 13. The kingdom of the Messiah is the kingdom of God. May grace
grow in our hearts; may our faith and love grow exceedingly, so as to
give undoubted evidence of their reality. May the example of God's
saints be blessed to those among whom they live; and may his grace flow
from heart to heart, until the little one becomes a thousand.

[Luke 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 13:23</span></span>

Our Saviour came to guide men's consciences, not to gratify their
curiosity. Ask not, How many shall be saved? But, Shall I be one of
them? Not, What shall become of such and such? But, What shall I do, and
what will become of me? Strive to enter in at the strait gate. This is
directed to each of us; it is, Strive ye. All that will be saved, must
enter in at the strait gate, must undergo a change of the whole man.
Those that would enter in, must strive to enter. Here are awakening
considerations, to enforce this exhortation. Oh that we may be all
awakened by them! They answer the question, Are there few that shall be
saved? But let none despond either as to themselves or others, for there
are last who shall be first, and first who shall be last. If we reach
heaven, we shall meet many there whom we little thought to meet, and
miss many whom we expected to find.

[Luke 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 13:31</span></span>

Christ, in calling Herod a fox, gave him his true character. The
greatest of men were accountable to God, therefore it became him to call
this proud king by his own name; but it is not an example for us. I
know, said our Lord, that I must die very shortly; when I die, I shall
be perfected, I shall have completed my undertaking. It is good for us
to look upon the time we have before us as but little, that we may
thereby be quickened to do the work of the day in its day. The
wickedness of persons and places which more than others profess religion
and relation to God, especially displeases and grieves the Lord Jesus.
The judgment of the great day will convince unbelievers; but let us
learn thankfully to welcome, and to profit by all who come in the name
of the Lord, to call us to partake of his great salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 14](luk014)

</div>
