<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk002)  [Next](luk004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 3:0</span></span>

([Luk 3:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001)) John the Baptist's
ministry.

([Luk 3:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015)) John the Baptist
testifies concerning Christ.

([Luk 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021), [Luk
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022)) The baptism of Christ.

(v. 23-38) The genealogy of Christ.

[Luke 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 3:1</span></span>

The scope and design of John's ministry were, to bring the people from
their sins, and to their Saviour. He came preaching, not a sect, or
party, but a profession; the sign or ceremony was washing with water. By
the words here used John preached the necessity of repentance, in order
to the remission of sins, and that the baptism of water was an outward
sign of that inward cleansing and renewal of heart, which attend, or are
the effects of true repentance, as well as a profession of it. Here is
the fulfilling of the Scriptures, [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003), in the ministry of John. When
way is made for the gospel into the heart, by taking down high thoughts,
and bringing them into obedience to Christ, by levelling the soul, and
removing all that hinders us in the way of Christ and his grace, then
preparation is made to welcome the salvation of God. Here are general
warnings and exhortations which John gave. The guilty, corrupted race of
mankind is become a generation of vipers; hateful to God, and hating one
another. There is no way of fleeing from the wrath to come, but by
repentance; and by the change of our way the change of our mind must be
shown. If we are not really holy, both in heart and life, our profession
of religion and relation to God and his church, will stand us in no
stead at all; the sorer will our destruction be, if we do not bring
forth fruits meet for repentance. John the Baptist gave instructions to
several sorts of persons. Those that profess and promise repentance,
must show it by reformation, according to their places and conditions.
The gospel requires mercy, not sacrifice; and its design is, to engage
us to do all the good we can, and to be just to all men. And the same
principle which leads men to forego unjust gain, leads to restore that
which is gained by wrong. John tells the soldiers their duty. Men should
be cautioned against the temptations of their employments. These answers
declared the present duty of the inquirers, and at once formed a test of
their sincerity. As none can or will accept Christ's salvation without
true repentance, so the evidence and effects of this repentance are here
marked out.

[Luke 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 3:15</span></span>

John the Baptist disowned being himself the Christ, but confirmed the
people in their expectations of the long-promised Messiah. He could only
exhort them to repent, and assure them of forgiveness upon repentance;
but he could not work repentance in them, nor confer remission on them.
Thus highly does it become us to speak of Christ, and thus humbly of
ourselves. John can do no more than baptize with water, in token that
they ought to purify and cleanse themselves; but Christ can, and will
baptize with the Holy Ghost; he can give the Spirit, to cleanse and
purify the heart, not only as water washes off the dirt on the outside,
but as fire clears out the dross that is within, and melts down the
metal, that it may be cast into a new mould. John was an affectionate
preacher; he was beseeching; he pressed things home upon his hearers. He
was a practical preacher; quickening them to their duty, and directing
them in it. He was a popular preacher; he addressed the people,
according to their capacity. He was an evangelical preacher. In all his
exhortations, he directed people to Christ. When we press duty upon
people, we must direct them to Christ, both for righteousness and
strength. He was a copious preacher; he shunned not to declare the whole
counsel of God. But a full stop was put to John's preaching when he was
in the midst of his usefulness. Herod being reproved by him for many
evils, shut up John in prison. Those who injure the faithful servants of
God, add still greater guilt to their other sins.

[Luke 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 3:21</span></span>

Christ did not confess sin, as others did, for he had none to confess;
but he prayed, as others did, and kept up communion with his Father.
Observe, all the three voices from heaven, by which the Father bare
witness to the Son, were pronounced while he was praying, or soon after,
[Luk 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#035); [Joh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028). The Holy Ghost descended in a
bodily shape like a dove upon him, and there came a voice from heaven,
from God the Father, from the excellent glory. Thus was a proof of the
Holy Trinity, of the Three Persons in the Godhead, given at the baptism
of Christ.

[Luke 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 3:23</span></span>

Matthew's list of the forefathers of Jesus showed that Christ was the
son of Abraham, in whom all the families of the earth are blessed, and
heir to the throne of David; but Luke shows that Jesus was the Seed of
the woman that should break the serpent's head, and traces the line up
to Adam, beginning with Eli, or Heli, the father, not of Joseph, but of
Mary. The seeming differences between the two evangelists in these lists
of names have been removed by learned men. But our salvation does not
depend upon our being able to solve these difficulties, nor is the
Divine authority of the Gospels at all weakened by them. The list of
names ends thus, "Who was the son of Adam, the son of God;" that is, the
offspring of God by creation. Christ was both the son of Adam and the
Son of God, that he might be a proper Mediator between God and the sons
of Adam, and might bring the sons of Adam to be, through him, the sons
of God. All flesh, as descended from the first Adam, is as grass, and
withers as the flower of the field; but he who partakes of the Holy
Spirit of life from the Second Adam, has that eternal happiness, which
by the gospel is preached unto us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 4](luk004)

</div>
