<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal001)  [Next](mal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 2:0</span></span>

([Mal 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)) The priests reproved for
neglecting their covenant.

([Mal 2:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)) The people reproved for
their evil practices.

[Malachi 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 2:1</span></span>

What is here said of the covenant of priesthood, is true of the covenant
of grace made with all believers, as spiritual priests. It is a covenant
of life and peace; it assures all believers of all happiness, both in
this world and in that to come. It is an honour to God's servants to be
employed as his messengers. The priest's lips should not keep knowledge
from his people, but keep it for them. The people are all concerned to
know the will of the Lord. We must not only consult the written word,
but desire instruction and advice from God's messengers, in the affairs
of our souls. Ministers must exert themselves to the utmost for the
conversion of sinners; and even among those called Israelites, there are
many to be turned from iniquity. Those ministers, and those only, are
likely to turn men from sin, who preach sound doctrine, and live holy
lives according to the Scripture. Many departed from this way; thus they
misled the people. Such as walk with God in peace and righteousness, and
turn others from sin, honour God; he will honour them, while those who
despise him shall be lightly esteemed.

[Malachi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 2:10</span></span>

Corrupt practices are the fruit of corrupt principles; and he who is
false to his God, will not be true to his fellow mortals. In contempt of
the marriage covenant, which God instituted, the Jews put away the wives
they had of their own nation, probably to make room for strange wives.
They made their lives bitter to them; yet, in the sight of others, they
pretend to be tender of them. Consider she is thy wife; thy own; the
nearest relation thou hast in the world. The wife is to be looked on,
not as a servant, but as a companion to the husband. There is an oath of
God between them, which is not to be trifled with. Man and wife should
continue to their lives' end, in holy love and peace. Did not God make
one, one Eve for one Adam? Yet God could have made another Eve.
Wherefore did he make but one woman for one man? It was that the
children might be made a seed to serve him. Husbands and wives must live
in the fear of God, that their seed may be a godly seed. The God of
Israel saith that he hateth putting away. Those who would be kept from
sin, must take heed to their spirits, for there all sin begins. Men will
find that their wrong conduct in their families springs from
selfishness, which disregards the welfare and happiness of others, when
opposed to their own passions and fancies. It is wearisome to God to
hear people justify themselves in wicked practices. Those who think God
can be a friend to sin, affront him, and deceive themselves. The
scoffers said, Where is the God of judgement? but the day of the Lord
will come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 3](mal003)

</div>
