<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar004)  [Next](mar006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 5:0</span></span>

(v. 1-20) The demoniac healed.

([Mar 5:21-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#021)) A woman healed.

([Mar 5:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035)) The daughter of Jairus
raised.

[Mark 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 5:1</span></span>

Some openly wilful sinners are like this madman. The commands of the law
are as chains and fetters, to restrain sinners from their wicked
courses; but they break those bands in sunder; and it is an evidence of
the power of the devil in them. A legion of soldiers consisted of six
thousand men, or more. What multitudes of fallen spirits there must be,
and all enemies to God and man, when here was a legion in one poor
wretched creature! Many there are that rise up against us. We are not a
match for our spiritual enemies, in our own strength; but in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, we shall be able to stand against them,
though there are legions of them. When the vilest transgressor is
delivered by the power of Jesus from the bondage of Satan, he will
gladly sit at the feet of his Deliverer, and hear his word, who delivers
the wretched slaves of Satan, and numbers them among his saints and
servants. When the people found that their swine were lost, they had a
dislike to Christ. Long-suffering and mercy may be seen, even in the
corrections by which men lose their property while their lives are
saved, and warning given them to seek the salvation of their souls. The
man joyfully proclaimed what great things Jesus had done for him. All
men marvelled, but few followed him. Many who cannot but wonder at the
works of Christ, yet do not, as they ought, wonder after him.

[Mark 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 5:21</span></span>

A despised gospel will go where it will be better received. One of the
rulers of a synagogue earnestly besought Christ for a little daughter,
about twelve years old, who was dying. Another cure was wrought by the
way. We should do good, not only when in the house, but when we walk by
the way, [Deu 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007). It is common with
people not to apply to Christ till they have tried in vain all other
helpers, and find them, as certainly they will, physicians of no value.
Some run to diversions and gay company; others plunge into business, or
even into intemperance; others go about to establish their own
righteousness, or torment themselves by vain superstitions. Many perish
in these ways; but none will ever find rest to the soul by such devices;
while those whom Christ heals of the disease of sin, find in themselves
an entire change for the better. As secret acts of sin, so secret acts
of faith, are known to the Lord Jesus. The woman told all the truth. It
is the will of Christ that his people should be comforted, and he has
power to command comfort to troubled spirits. The more simply we depend
on Him, and expect great things from him, the more we shall find in
ourselves that he is become our salvation. Those who, by faith, are
healed of their spiritual diseases, have reason to go in peace.

[Mark 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 5:35</span></span>

We may suppose Jairus hesitating whether he should ask Christ to go on
or not, when told that his daughter was dead. But have we not as much
occasion for the grace of God, and the comfort of his Spirit, for the
prayers of our ministers and Christian friends, when death is in the
house, as when sickness is there? Faith is the only remedy against grief
and fear at such a time. Believe the resurrection, then fear not. He
raised the dead child to life by a word of power. Such is the gospel
call to those who are by nature dead in trespasses and sins. It is by
the word of Christ that spiritual life is given. All who saw it, and
heard of it, admired the miracle, and Him that wrought it. Though we
cannot now expect to have our dead children or relatives restored, we
may hope to find comfort under our trials.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 6](mar006)

</div>
