<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar014)  [Next](mar016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 15:0</span></span>

([Mar 15:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)) Christ before Pilate.

([Mar 15:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)) Christ led to be
crucified.

([Mar 15:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#022)) The crucifixion.

([Mar 15:33-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033)) The death of Christ.

([Mar 15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)) His body buried.

[Mark 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 15:1</span></span>

They bound Christ. It is good for us often to remember the bonds of the
Lord Jesus, as bound with him who was bound for us. By delivering up the
King, they, in effect, delivered up the kingdom of God, which was,
therefore, as by their own consent, taken from them, and given to
another nation. Christ gave Pilate a direct answer, but would not answer
the witnesses, because the things they alleged were known to be false,
even Pilate himself was convinced they were so. Pilate thought that he
might appeal from the priests to the people, and that they would deliver
Jesus out of the priests' hands. But they were more and more urged by
the priests, and cried, Crucify him! Crucify him! Let us judge of
persons and things by their merits, and the standard of God's word, and
not by common report. The thought that no one ever was so shamefully
treated, as the only perfectly wise, holy, and excellent Person that
ever appeared on earth, leads the serious mind to strong views of man's
wickedness and enmity to God. Let us more and more abhor the evil
dispositions which marked the conduct of these persecutors.

[Mark 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 15:15</span></span>

Christ met death in its greatest terror. It was the death of the vilest
malefactors. Thus the cross and the shame are put together. God having
been dishonoured by the sin of man, Christ made satisfaction by
submitting to the greatest disgrace human nature could be loaded with.
It was a cursed death; thus it was branded by the Jewish law, [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023). The Roman soldiers mocked our
Lord Jesus as a King; thus in the high priest's hall the servants had
mocked him as a Prophet and Saviour. Shall a purple or scarlet robe be
matter of pride to a Christian, which was matter of reproach and shame
to Christ? He wore the crown of thorns which we deserved, that we might
wear the crown of glory which he merited. We were by sin liable to
everlasting shame and contempt; to deliver us, our Lord Jesus submitted
to shame and contempt. He was led forth with the workers of iniquity,
though he did no sin. The sufferings of the meek and holy Redeemer, are
ever a source of instruction to the believer, of which, in his best
hours, he cannot be weary. Did Jesus thus suffer, and shall I, a vile
sinner, fret or repine? Shall I indulge anger, or utter reproaches and
threats because of troubles and injuries?

[Mark 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 15:22</span></span>

The place where our Lord Jesus was crucified, was called the place of a
scull; it was the common place of execution; for he was in all respects
numbered with the transgressors. Whenever we look unto Christ crucified,
we must remember what was written over his head; he is a King, and we
must give up ourselves to be his subjects, as Israelites indeed. They
crucified two thieves with him, and him in the midst; they thereby
intended him great dishonour. But it was foretold that he should be
numbered with the transgressors, because he was made sin for us. Even
those who passed by railed at him. They told him to come down from the
cross, and they would believe; but they did not believe, though he gave
them a more convincing sign when he came up from the grave. With what
earnestness will the man who firmly believes the truth, as made known by
the sufferings of Christ, seek for salvation! With what gratitude will
he receive the dawning hope of forgiveness and eternal life, as
purchased for him by the sufferings and death of the Son of God! and
with what godly sorrow will he mourn over the sins which crucified the
Lord of glory!

[Mark 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 15:33</span></span>

There was a thick darkness over the land, from noon until three in the
afternoon. The Jews were doing their utmost to extinguish the Sun of
Righteousness. The darkness signified the cloud which the human soul of
Christ was under, when he was making it an offering for sin. He did not
complain that his disciples forsook him, but that his Father forsook
him. In this especially he was made sin for us. When Paul was to be
offered as a sacrifice for the service saints, he could joy and rejoice,
[Phi 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017); but it is another thing to
be offered as a sacrifice for the sin of sinners. At the same instant
that Jesus died, the veil of the temple was rent from the top to the
bottom. This spake terror to the unbelieving Jews, and was a sign of the
destruction of their church and nation. It speaks comfort to all
believing Christians, for it signified the laying open a new and living
way into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. The confidence with which
Christ had openly addressed God as his Father, and committed his soul
into his hands, seems greatly to have affected the centurion. Right
views of Christ crucified will reconcile the believer to the thought of
death; he longs to behold, love, and praise, as he ought, that Saviour
who was wounded and pierced to save him from the wrath to come.

[Mark 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 15:42</span></span>

We are here attending the burial of our Lord Jesus. Oh that we may by
grace be planted in the likeness of it! Joseph of Arimathea was one who
waited for the kingdom of God. Those who hope for a share in its
privileges, must own Christ's cause, when it seems to be crushed. This
man God raised up for his service. There was a special providence, that
Pilate should be so strict in his inquiry, that there might be no
pretence to say Jesus was alive. Pilate gave Joseph leave to take down
the body, and do what he pleased with it. Some of the women beheld where
Jesus was laid, that they might come after the sabbath to anoint the
dead body, because they had not time to do it before. Special notice was
taken of Christ's sepulchre, because he was to rise again. And he will
not forsake those who trust in him, and call upon him. Death, deprived
of its sting, will soon end the believer's sorrows, as it ended those of
the Saviour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016)

</div>
