<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat023)  [Next](mat025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 24:0</span></span>

([Mat 24:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)) Christ foretells the
destruction of the temple.

(v. 4-28) The troubles before the destruction of Jerusalem.

([Mat 24:29-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)) Christ foretells other
signs and miseries, to the end of the world.

([Mat 24:42-51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)) Exhortations to
watchfulness.

[Matthew 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 24:1</span></span>

Christ foretells the utter ruin and destruction coming upon the temple.
A believing foresight of the defacing of all worldly glory, will help to
keep us from admiring it, and overvaluing it. The most beautiful body
soon will be food for worms, and the most magnificent building a ruinous
heap. See ye not all these things? It will do us good so to see them as
to see through them, and see to the end of them. Our Lord having gone
with his disciples to the Mount of Olives, he set before them the order
of the times concerning the Jews, till the destruction of Jerusalem; and
as to men in general till the end of the world.

[Matthew 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 24:4</span></span>

The disciples had asked concerning the times, When these things should
be? Christ gave them no answer to that; but they had also asked, What
shall be the sign? This question he answers fully. The prophecy first
respects events near at hand, the destruction of Jerusalem, the end of
the Jewish church and state, the calling of the Gentiles, and the
setting up of Christ's kingdom in the world; but it also looks to the
general judgment; and toward the close, points more particularly to the
latter. What Christ here said to his disciples, tended more to promote
caution than to satisfy their curiosity; more to prepare them for the
events that should happen, than to give a distinct idea of the events.
This is that good understanding of the times which all should covet,
thence to infer what Israel ought to do. Our Saviour cautions his
disciples to stand on their guard against false teachers. And he
foretells wars and great commotions among nations. From the time that
the Jews rejected Christ, and he left their house desolate, the sword
never departed from them. See what comes of refusing the gospel. Those
who will not hear the messengers of peace, shall be made to hear the
messengers of war. But where the heart is fixed, trusting in God, it is
kept in peace, and is not afraid. It is against the mind of Christ, that
his people should have troubled hearts, even in troublous times. When we
looked forward to the eternity of misery that is before the obstinate
refusers of Christ and his gospel, we may truly say, The greatest
earthly judgments are but the beginning of sorrows. It is comforting
that some shall endure even to the end. Our Lord foretells the preaching
of the gospel in all the world. The end of the world shall not be till
the gospel has done its work. Christ foretells the ruin coming upon the
people of the Jews; and what he said here, would be of use to his
disciples, for their conduct and for their comfort. If God opens a door
of escape, we ought to make our escape, otherwise we do not trust God,
but tempt him. It becomes Christ's disciples, in times of public
trouble, to be much in prayer: that is never out of season, but in a
special manner seasonable when we are distressed on every side. Though
we must take what God sends, yet we may pray against sufferings; and it
is very trying to a good man, to be taken by any work of necessity from
the solemn service and worship of God on the sabbath day. But here is
one word of comfort, that for the elect's sake these days shall be made
shorter than their enemies designed, who would have cut all off, if God,
who used these foes to serve his own purpose, had not set bounds to
their wrath. Christ foretells the rapid spreading of the gospel in the
world. It is plainly seen as the lightning. Christ preached his gospel
openly. The Romans were like an eagle, and the ensign of their armies
was an eagle. When a people, by their sin, make themselves as loathsome
carcasses, nothing can be expected but that God should send enemies to
destroy them. It is very applicable to the day of judgment, the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ in that day, [Th2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001). Let us give diligence to make our
calling and election sure; then may we know that no enemy or deceiver
shall ever prevail against us.

[Matthew 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 24:29</span></span>

Christ foretells his second coming. It is usual for prophets to speak of
things as near and just at hand, to express the greatness and certainty
of them. Concerning Christ's second coming, it is foretold that there
shall be a great change, in order to the making all things new. Then
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds. At his first coming,
he was set for a sign that should be spoken against, but at his second
coming, a sign that should be admired. Sooner or later, all sinners will
be mourners; but repenting sinners look to Christ, and mourn after a
godly sort; and those who sow in those tears shall shortly reap in joy.
Impenitent sinners shall see Him whom they have pierced, and, though
they laugh now, shall mourn and weep in endless horror and despair. The
elect of God are scattered abroad; there are some in all places, and all
nations; but when that great gathering day comes, there shall not one of
them be missing. Distance of place shall keep none out of heaven. Our
Lord declares that the Jews should never cease to be a distinct people,
until all things he had been predicting were fulfilled. His prophecy
reaches to the day of final judgment; therefore he here, [Mat
24:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034), foretells that Judah shall
never cease to exist as a distinct people, so long as this world shall
endure. Men of the world scheme and plan for generation upon generation
here, but they plan not with reference to the overwhelming, approaching,
and most certain event of Christ's second coming, which shall do away
every human scheme, and set aside for ever all that God forbids. That
will be as surprising a day, as the deluge to the old world. Apply this,
first, to temporal judgments, particularly that which was then hastening
upon the nation and people of the Jews. Secondly, to the eternal
judgment. Christ here shows the state of the old world when the deluge
came. They were secure and careless; they knew not, until the flood
came; and they believed not. Did we know aright that all earthly things
must shortly pass away, we should not set our eyes and hearts so much
upon them as we do. The evil day is not the further off for men's
putting it far from them. What words can more strongly describe the
suddenness of our Saviour's coming! Men will be at their respective
businesses, and suddenly the Lord of glory will appear. Women will be in
their house employments, but in that moment every other work will be
laid aside, and every heart will turn inward and say, It is the Lord! Am
I prepared to meet him? Can I stand before him? And what, in fact, is
the day of judgment to the whole world, but the day of death to every
one?

[Matthew 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 24:42</span></span>

To watch for Christ's coming, is to maintain that temper of mind which
we would be willing that our Lord should find us in. We know we have but
a little time to live, we cannot know that we have a long time to live;
much less do we know the time fixed for the judgment. Our Lord's coming
will be happy to those that shall be found ready, but very dreadful to
those that are not. If a man, professing to be the servant of Christ, be
an unbeliever, covetous, ambitious, or a lover of pleasure, he will be
cut off. Those who choose the world for their portion in this life, will
have hell for their portion in the other life. May our Lord, when he
cometh, pronounce us blessed, and present us to the Father, washed in
his blood, purified by his Spirit, and fit to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 25](mat025)

</div>
