<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat002)  [Next](mat004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 3:0</span></span>

([Mat 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)) John the Baptist, His
preaching, manner of life, and baptism.

([Mat 3:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)) John reproves the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

([Mat 3:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)) The baptism of Jesus.

[Matthew 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 3:1</span></span>

After Malachi there was no prophet until John the Baptist came. He
appeared first in the wilderness of Judea. This was not an uninhabited
desert, but a part of the country not thickly peopled, nor much
enclosed. No place is so remote as to shut us out from the visits of
Divine grace. The doctrine he preached was repentance; "Repent ye." The
word here used, implies a total alteration in the mind, a change in the
judgment, disposition, and affections, another and a better bias of the
soul. Consider your ways, change your minds: you have thought amiss;
think again, and think aright. True penitents have other thoughts of God
and Christ, sin and holiness, of this world and the other, than they
had. The change of the mind produces a change of the way. That is gospel
repentance, which flows from a sight of Christ, from a sense of his
love, and from hopes of pardon and forgiveness through him. It is a
great encouragement to us to repent; repent, for your sins shall be
pardoned upon your repentance. Return to God in a way of duty, and he
will, through Christ, return unto you in the way of mercy. It is still
as necessary to repent and humble ourselves, to prepare the way of the
Lord, as it then was. There is a great deal to be done, to make way for
Christ into a soul, and nothing is more needful than the discovery of
sin, and a conviction that we cannot be saved by our own righteousness.
The way of sin and Satan is a crooked way; but to prepare a way for
Christ, the paths must be made straight, [Heb
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013). Those whose business it is to
call others to mourn for sin, and to mortify it, ought themselves to
live a serious life, a life of self-denial, and contempt of the world.
By giving others this example, John made way for Christ. Many came to
John's baptism, but few kept to the profession they made. There may be
many forward hearers, where there are few true believers. Curiosity, and
love for novelty and variety, may bring many to attend on good
preaching, and to be affected for a while, who never are subject to the
power of it. Those who received John's doctrine, testified their
repentance by confessing their sins. Those only are ready to receive
Jesus Christ as their righteousness, who are brought with sorrow and
shame to own their guilt. The benefits of the kingdom of heaven, now at
hand, were thereupon sealed to them by baptism. John washed them with
water, in token that God would cleanse them from all their iniquities,
thereby intimating, that by nature and practice all were polluted, and
could not be admitted among the people of God, unless washed from their
sins in the fountain Christ was to open, [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001).

[Matthew 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 3:7</span></span>

To make application to the souls of the hearers, is the life of
preaching; so it was of John's preaching. The Pharisees laid their chief
stress on outward observances, neglecting the weightier matters of the
moral law, and the spiritual meaning of their legal ceremonies. Others
of them were detestable hypocrites, making their pretences to holiness a
cloak for iniquity. The Sadducees ran into the opposite extreme, denying
the existence of spirits, and a future state. They were the scornful
infidels of that time and country. There is a wrath to come. It is the
great concern of every one to flee from that wrath. God, who delights
not in our ruin, has warned us; he warns by the written word, by
ministers, by conscience. And those are not worthy of the name of
penitents, or their privileges, who say they are sorry for their sins,
yet persist in them. It becomes penitents to be humble and low in their
own eyes, to be thankful for the least mercy, patient under the greatest
affliction, to be watchful against all appearances of sin, to abound in
every duty, and to be charitable in judging others. Here is a word of
caution, not to trust in outward privileges. There is a great deal which
carnal hearts are apt to say within themselves, to put aside the
convincing, commanding power of the word of God. Multitudes, by resting
in the honours and mere advantages of their being members of an outward
church, come short of heaven. Here is a word of terror to the careless
and secure. Our corrupt hearts cannot be made to produce good fruit,
unless the regenerating Spirit of Christ graft the good word of God upon
them. And every tree, however high in gifts and honours, however green
in outward professions and performances, if it bring not forth good
fruit, the fruits meet for repentance, is hewn down and cast into the
fire of God's wrath, the fittest place for barren trees: what else are
they good for? If not fit for fruit, they are fit for fuel. John shows
the design and intention of Christ's appearing, which they were now
speedily to expect. No outward forms can make us clean. No ordinances,
by whomsoever administered, or after whatever mode, can supply the want
of the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire. The purifying and
cleansing power of the Holy Spirit alone can produce that purity of
heart, and those holy affections, which accompany salvation. It is
Christ who baptizes with the Holy Ghost. This he did in the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit sent upon the apostles, [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004). This he does in the graces and
comforts of the Spirit, given to those that ask him, [Luk
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013); [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039); see [Act
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#016). Observe here, the outward
church is Christ's floor, [Isa 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010).
True believers are as wheat, substantial, useful, and valuable;
hypocrites are as chaff, light and empty, useless and worthless, carried
about with every wind; these are mixed, good and bad, in the same
outward communion. There is a day coming when the wheat and chaff shall
be separated. The last judgment will be the distinguishing day, when
saints and sinners shall be parted for ever. In heaven the saints are
brought together, and no longer scattered; they are safe, and no longer
exposed; separated from corrupt neighbours without, and corrupt
affections within, and there is no chaff among them. Hell is the
unquenchable fire, which will certainly be the portion and punishment of
hypocrites and unbelievers. Here life and death, good and evil, are set
before us: according as we now are in the field, we shall be then in the
floor.

[Matthew 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 3:13</span></span>

Christ's gracious condescensions are so surprising, that even the
strongest believers at first can hardly believe them; so deep and
mysterious, that even those who know his mind well, are apt to start
objections against the will of Christ. And those who have much of the
Spirit of God while here, see that they need to apply to Christ for
more. Christ does not deny that John had need to be baptized of him, yet
declares he will now be baptized of John. Christ is now in a state of
humiliation. Our Lord Jesus looked upon it as well becoming him to
fulfil all righteousness, to own every Divine institution, and to show
his readiness to comply with all God's righteous precepts. In and
through Christ, the heavens are opened to the children of men. This
descent of the Spirit upon Christ, showed that he was endued with his
sacred influences without measure. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance. At Christ's baptism there was a manifestation of the three
Persons in the sacred Trinity. The Father confirming the Son to be
Mediator; the Son solemnly entering upon the work; the Holy Spirit
descending on him, to be through his mediation communicated to his
people. In Him our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable, for He is the
altar that sanctifies every gift, [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). Out of Christ, God is a consuming
fire, but in Christ, a reconciled Father. This is the sum of the gospel,
which we must by faith cheerfully embrace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 4](mat004)

</div>
