<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat021)  [Next](mat023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 22:0</span></span>

([Mat 22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)) The parable of the
marriage feast.

([Mat 22:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)) The Pharisees question
Jesus as to the tribute.

([Mat 22:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)) The question of the
Sadducees as to the resurrection.

([Mat 22:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#034)) The substance of the
commandments.

([Mat 22:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#041)) Jesus questions the
Pharisees.

[Matthew 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 22:1</span></span>

The provision made for perishing souls in the gospel, is represented by
a royal feast made by a king, with eastern liberality, on the marriage
of his son. Our merciful God has not only provided food, but a royal
feast, for the perishing souls of his rebellious creatures. There is
enough and to spare, of every thing that can add to our present comfort
and everlasting happiness, in the salvation of his Son Jesus Christ. The
guests first invited were the Jews. When the prophets of the Old
Testament prevailed not, nor John the Baptist, nor Christ himself, who
told them the kingdom of God was at hand, the apostles and ministers of
the gospel were sent, after Christ's resurrection, to tell them it was
come, and to persuade them to accept the offer. The reason why sinners
come not to Christ and salvation by him, is, not because they cannot,
but because they will not. Making light of Christ, and of the great
salvation wrought out by him, is the damning sin of the world. They were
careless. Multitudes perish for ever through mere carelessness, who show
no direct aversion, but are careless as to their souls. Also the
business and profit of worldly employments hinder many in closing with
the Saviour. Both farmers and merchants must be diligent; but whatever
we have of the world in our hands, our care must be to keep it out of
our hearts, lest it come between us and Christ. The utter ruin coming
upon the Jewish church and nation, is here represented. Persecution of
Christ's faithful ministers fills up the measure of guilt of any people.
The offer of Christ and salvation to the Gentiles was not expected; it
was such a surprise as it would be to wayfaring men, to be invited to a
royal wedding-feast. The design of the gospel is to gather souls to
Christ; all the children of God scattered abroad, [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016); [Joh
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052). The case of hypocrites is
represented by the guest that had not on a wedding-garment. It concerns
all to prepare for the scrutiny; and those, and those only, who put on
the Lord Jesus, who have a Christian temper of mind, who live by faith
in Christ, and to whom he is all in all, have the wedding-garment. The
imputed righteousness of Christ, and the sanctification of the Spirit,
are both alike necessary. No man has the wedding-garment by nature, or
can form it for himself. The day is coming, when hypocrites will be
called to account for all their presumptuous intruding into gospel
ordinances, and usurpation of gospel privileges. Take him away. Those
that walk unworthy of Christianity, forfeit all the happiness they
presumptuously claimed. Our Saviour here passes out of the parable into
that which it teaches. Hypocrites go by the light of the gospel itself
down to utter darkness. Many are called to the wedding-feast, that is,
to salvation, but few have the wedding-garment, the righteousness of
Christ, the sanctification of the Spirit. Then let us examine ourselves
whether we are in the faith, and seek to be approved by the King.

[Matthew 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 22:15</span></span>

The Pharisees sent their disciples with the Herodians, a party among the
Jews, who were for full subjection to the Roman emperor. Though opposed
to each other, they joined against Christ. What they said of Christ was
right; whether they knew it or not, blessed be God we know it. Jesus
Christ was a faithful Teacher, and a bold reprover. Christ saw their
wickedness. Whatever mask the hypocrite puts on, our Lord Jesus sees
through it. Christ did not interpose as a judge in matters of this
nature, for his kingdom is not of this world, but he enjoins peaceable
subjection to the powers that be. His adversaries were reproved, and his
disciples were taught that the Christian religion is no enemy to civil
government. Christ is, and will be, the wonder, not only of his friends,
but of his enemies. They admire his wisdom, but will not be guided by
it; his power, but will not submit to it.

[Matthew 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 22:23</span></span>

The doctrines of Christ displeased the infidel Sadducees, as well as the
Pharisees and Herodians. He carried the great truths of the resurrection
and a future state, further than they had yet been reveled. There is no
arguing from the state of things in this world, as to what will take
place hereafter. Let truth be set in a clear light, and it appears in
full strength. Having thus silenced them, our Lord proceeded to show the
truth of the doctrine of the resurrection from the books of Moses. God
declared to Moses that he was the God of the patriarchs, who had died
long before; this shows that they were then in a state of being, capable
of enjoying his favour, and proves that the doctrine of the resurrection
is clearly taught in the Old Testament as well as in the New. But this
doctrine was kept for a more full revelation, after the resurrection of
Christ, who was the first-fruits of them that slept. All errors arise
from not knowing the Scriptures and the power of God. In this world
death takes away one after another, and so ends all earthly hopes, joys,
sorrows, and connexions. How wretched are those who look for nothing
better beyond the grave!

[Matthew 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 22:34</span></span>

An interpreter of the law asked our Lord a question, to try, not so much
his knowledge, as his judgment. The love of God is the first and great
commandment, and the sum of all the commands of the first table. Our
love of God must be sincere, not in word and tongue only. All our love
is too little to bestow upon him, therefore all the powers of the soul
must be engaged for him, and carried out toward him. To love our
neighbour as ourselves, is the second great commandment. There is a
self-love which is corrupt, and the root of the greatest sins, and it
must be put off and mortified; but there is a self-love which is the
rule of the greatest duty: we must have a due concern for the welfare of
our own souls and bodies. And we must love our neighbour as truly and
sincerely as we love ourselves; in many cases we must deny ourselves for
the good of others. By these two commandments let our hearts be formed
as by a mould.

[Matthew 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 22:41</span></span>

When Christ baffled his enemies, he asked what thoughts they had of the
promised Messiah? How he could be the Son of David and yet his Lord? He
quotes [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). If the Christ was
to be a mere man, who would not exist till many ages after David's
death, how could his forefather call him Lord? The Pharisees could not
answer it. Nor can any solve the difficulty except he allows the Messiah
to be the Son of God, and David's Lord equally with the Father. He took
upon him human nature, and so became God manifested in the flesh; in
this sense he is the Son of man and the Son of David. It behoves us
above all things seriously to inquire, "What think we of Christ?" Is he
altogether glorious in our eyes, and precious to our hearts? May Christ
be our joy, our confidence, our all. May we daily be made more like to
him, and more devoted to his service.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 23](mat023)

</div>
