<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat022)  [Next](mat024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 23:0</span></span>

([Mat 23:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)) Jesus reproves the
scribes and Pharisees.

(v. 13-33) Crimes of the Pharisees.

([Mat 23:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)) The guilt of
Jerusalem.

[Matthew 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 23:1</span></span>

The scribes and Pharisees explained the law of Moses, and enforced
obedience to it. They are charged with hypocrisy in religion. We can
only judge according to outward appearance; but God searches the heart.
They made phylacteries. These were scrolls of paper or parchment,
wherein were written four paragraphs of the law, to be worn on their
foreheads and left arms, [Exo 13:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002),
[Exo 13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011); [Deu
6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), [Deu
6:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013). They made these phylacteries
broad, that they might be thought more zealous for the law than others.
God appointed the Jews to make fringes upon their garments, [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038), to remind them of their being a
peculiar people; but the Pharisees made them larger than common, as if
they were thereby more religious than others. Pride was the darling,
reigning sin of the Pharisees, the sin that most easily beset them, and
which our Lord Jesus takes all occasions to speak against. For him that
is taught in the word to give respect to him that teaches, is
commendable; but for him that teaches, to demand it, to be puffed up
with it, is sinful. How much is all this against the spirit of
Christianity! The consistent disciple of Christ is pained by being put
into chief places. But who that looks around on the visible church,
would think this was the spirit required? It is plain that some measure
of this antichristian spirit prevails in every religious society, and in
every one of our hearts.

[Matthew 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 23:13</span></span>

The scribes and Pharisees were enemies to the gospel of Christ, and
therefore to the salvation of the souls of men. It is bad to keep away
from Christ ourselves, but worse also to keep others from him. Yet it is
no new thing for the show and form of godliness to be made a cloak to
the greatest enormities. But dissembled piety will be reckoned double
iniquity. They were very busy to turn souls to be of their party. Not
for the glory of God and the good of souls, but that they might have the
credit and advantage of making converts. Gain being their godliness, by
a thousand devices they made religion give way to their worldly
interests. They were very strict and precise in smaller matters of the
law, but careless and loose in weightier matters. It is not the
scrupling a little sin that Christ here reproves; if it be a sin, though
but a gnat, it must be strained out; but the doing that, and then
swallowing a camel, or, committing a greater sin. While they would seem
to be godly, they were neither sober nor righteous. We are really, what
we are inwardly. Outward motives may keep the outside clean, while the
inside is filthy; but if the heart and spirit be made new, there will be
newness of life; here we must begin with ourselves. The righteousness of
the scribes and Pharisees was like the ornaments of a grave, or dressing
up a dead body, only for show. The deceitfulness of sinners' hearts
appears in that they go down the streams of the sins of their own day,
while they fancy that they should have opposed the sins of former days.
We sometimes think, if we had lived when Christ was upon earth, that we
should not have despised and rejected him, as men then did; yet Christ
in his Spirit, in his word, in his ministers, is still no better
treated. And it is just with God to give those up to their hearts'
lusts, who obstinately persist in gratifying them. Christ gives men
their true characters.

[Matthew 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 23:34</span></span>

Our Lord declares the miseries the inhabitants of Jerusalem were about
to bring upon themselves, but he does not notice the sufferings he was
to undergo. A hen gathering her chickens under her wings, is an apt
emblem of the Saviour's tender love to those who trust in him, and his
faithful care of them. He calls sinners to take refuge under his tender
protection, keeps them safe, and nourishes them to eternal life. The
present dispersion and unbelief of the Jews, and their future conversion
to Christ, were here foretold. Jerusalem and her children had a large
share of guilt, and their punishment has been signal. But ere long,
deserved vengeance will fall on every church which is Christian in name
only. In the mean time the Saviour stands ready to receive all who come
to him. There is nothing between sinners and eternal happiness, but
their proud and unbelieving unwillingness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 24](mat024)

</div>
