<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat000)  [Next](mat002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

(v. 1-17) The genealogy of Jesus.

([Mat 1:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)) An angel appears to
Joseph.

[Matthew 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 1:1</span></span>

Concerning this genealogy of our Saviour, observe the chief intention.
It is not a needless genealogy. It is not a vain-glorious one, as those
of great men often are. It proves that our Lord Jesus is of the nation
and family out of which the Messiah was to arise. The promise of the
blessing was made to Abraham and his seed; of the dominion, to David and
his seed. It was promised to Abraham that Christ should descend from
him, [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003); [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018); and to David that he should
descend from him, [Sa2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012); [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), etc.; [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011); and, therefore, unless Jesus
is a son of David, and a son of Abraham, he is not the Messiah. Now this
is here proved from well-known records. When the Son of God was pleased
to take our nature, he came near to us, in our fallen, wretched
condition; but he was perfectly free from sin: and while we read the
names in his genealogy, we should not forget how low the Lord of glory
stooped to save the human race.

[Matthew 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 1:18</span></span>

Let us look to the circumstances under which the Son of God entered into
this lower world, till we learn to despise the vain honours of this
world, when compared with piety and holiness. The mystery of Christ's
becoming man is to be adored, not curiously inquired into. It was so
ordered that Christ should partake of our nature, yet that he should be
pure from the defilement of original sin, which has been communicated to
all the race of Adam. Observe, it is the thoughtful, not the unthinking,
whom God will guide. God's time to come with instruction to his people,
is when they are at a loss. Divine comforts most delight the soul when
under the pressure of perplexed thoughts. Joseph is told that Mary
should bring forth the Saviour of the world. He was to call his name
Jesus, a Saviour. Jesus is the same name with Joshua. And the reason of
that name is clear, for those whom Christ saves, he saves from their
sins; from the guilt of sin by the merit of his death, and from the
power of sin by the Spirit of his grace. In saving them from sin, he
saves them from wrath and the curse, and all misery, here and hereafter.
Christ came to save his people, not in their sins, but from their sins;
and so to redeem them from among men, to himself, who is separate from
sinners. Joseph did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, speedily,
without delay, and cheerfully, without dispute. By applying the general
rules of the written word, we should in all the steps of our lives,
particularly the great turns of them, take direction from God, and we
shall find this safe and comfortable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 2](mat002)

</div>
