<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num026)  [Next](num028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 27:0</span></span>

([Num 27:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)) The daughters of
Zelophehad apply for an inheritance, The law of inheritances.

([Num 27:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)) Moses warned of his
death.

([Num 27:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#015)) Joshua appointed to
succeed Moses.

[Numbers 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 27:1</span></span>

The five daughters of Zelophehad considered themselves as left
destitute, having neither father nor brother to inherit any land. Their
believing expectation that the word of the Lord would be performed in
due season, and their desire of an interest in the promised inheritance;
and the modest, candid manner in which they asked, without secret
murmurs or discontents, are a good example. They ask for a possession in
the land of Canaan. Herein they discovered, 1. Strong faith in the power
and promise of God, concerning the giving of the land of Canaan to
Israel. 2. And earnest desire of a place and name in the land of
promise, which was a type of heaven. 3. Respect and honour for their
father, whose name was dear to them now he was gone. He never had done
any thing that might bar his children's claim. It is a comfort to
parents when they come to die, if though they have smarted for their own
sin, yet they are not conscious of any of those iniquities which God
will visit on their children. God himself gives judgment. He takes
notice of the affairs, not only of nations, but of private families, and
orders them according to his will. The petition is granted. Those who
seek an inheritance in the land of promise, shall have what they seek
for, and other things shall be added to them.

[Numbers 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 27:12</span></span>

Moses must die, but he shall have the satisfaction of seeing the land of
promise. This sight of Canaan signified his believing prospect of the
better country, that is, the heavenly. Moses must die, but death does
not cut him off; it only brings him to rest with the holy patriarchs. It
is but to die as they died, having lived as they lived; and as their end
was peace, why should we fear any evil in the passage of that dark
valley?

[Numbers 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 27:15</span></span>

Envious spirits do not love their successors; but Moses was not one of
these. We should concern ourselves, both in our prayers and in our
endeavours, for the rising generation, that religion may be maintained
and advanced, when we are in our graves. God appoints a successor, even
Joshua; who had signalized himself by his courage in fighting Amalek,
his humility in ministering to Moses, and his faith and sincerity in
witnessing against the report of the evil spies. This man God appoints
to succeed Moses; a man in whom is the Spirit, the Spirit of grace. He
is a good man, fearing God and hating covetousness, and acting from
principle. He has the spirit of government; he is fit to do the work and
discharge the trusts of his place. He has a spirit of conduct and
courage; he had also the Spirit of prophecy. That man is not fully
qualified for any service in the church of Christ, who is destitute of
the graces and gifts of the Holy Spirit, whatever human abilities he may
possess. And in Joshua's succession we are reminded "that the law was
given by Moses," who by reason of our transgression could not bring us
to heaven; but "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ," for the salvation
of every believer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 28](num028)

</div>
