<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num022)  [Next](num024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 23:0</span></span>

([Num 23:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001)) Balak's sacrifice,
Balaam pronounces a blessing instead of a curse.

(v. 11-30) Balak's disappointment, and second sacrifice, Balaam again
blesses Israel.

[Numbers 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 23:1</span></span>

With the camps of Israel full in view, Balaam ordered seven altars to be
built, and a bullock and a ram to be offered on each. Oh the sottishness
of superstition, to imagine that God will be at man's beck! The curse is
turned into a blessing, by the overruling power of God, in love to
Israel. God designed to serve his own glory by Balaam, and therefore met
him. If God put a word into the mouth of Balaam, who would have defied
God and Israel, surely he will not be wanting to those who desire to
glorify God, and to edify his people; it shall be given what they should
speak. He who opened the mouth of the ass, caused the mouth of this
wicked man to speak words as contrary to the desire of his heart, as
those of the ass were to the powers of the brute. The miracle was as
great in the one case as in the other. Balaam pronounces Israel safe. He
owns he could do no more than God suffered him to do. He pronounces them
happy in their distinction from the rest of the nations. Happy in their
numbers, which made them both honourable and formidable. Happy in their
last end. Death is the end of all men; even the righteous must die, and
it is good for us to think of this with regard to ourselves, as Balaam
does here, speaking of his own death. He pronounces the righteous truly
blessed, not only while they live, but when they die; which makes their
death even more desirable than life itself. But there are many who
desire to die the death of the righteous, but do not endeavour to live
the life of the righteous; gladly would they have an end like theirs,
but not a way like theirs. They would be saints in heaven, but not
saints on earth. This saying of Balaam's is only a wish, not a prayer;
it is a vain wish, being only a wish for the end, without any care for
the means. Many seek to quiet their consciences with the promise of
future amendment, or take up with some false hope, while they neglect
the only way of salvation, by which a sinner can be righteous before
God.

[Numbers 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 23:11</span></span>

Balak was angry with Balaam. Thus a confession of God's overruling power
is extorted from a wicked prophet, to the confusion of a wicked prince.
A second time the curse is turned into a blessing; and this blessing is
both larger and stronger than the former. Men change their minds, and
break their words; but God never changes his mind, and therefore never
recalls his promise. And when in Scripture he is said to repent, it does
not mean any change of his mind; but only a change of his way. There was
sin in Jacob, and God saw it; but there was not such as might provoke
him to give them up to ruin. If the Lord sees that we trust in his
mercy, and accept of his salvation; that we indulge no secret lust, and
continue not in rebellion, but endeavour to serve and glorify him; we
may be sure that he looks upon us as accepted in Christ, that our sins
are all pardoned. Oh the wonders of providence and grace, the wonders of
redeeming love, of pardoning mercy, of the new-creating Spirit! Balak
had no hope of ruining Israel, and Balaam showed that he had more reason
to fear being ruined by them. Since Balaam cannot say what he would have
him, Balak wished him to say nothing. But though there are many devices
in man's heart, God's counsels shall stand. Yet they resolve to make
another attempt, though they had no promise on which to build their
hopes. Let us, who have a promise that the vision at the end shall speak
and not lie, continue earnest in prayer, [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 24](num024)

</div>
