<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 9:0</span></span>

([Num 9:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)) Of the Passover.

([Num 9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)) The removals of the
Israelites.

[Numbers 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 9:1</span></span>

God gave particular orders for the keeping of this passover, and, for
aught that appears, after this, they kept no passover till they came to
Canaan, [Jos 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010). It early showed
that the ceremonial institutions were not to continue always, as so soon
after they were appointed, some were suffered to sleep for many years.
But the ordinance of the Lord's Supper was not thus set aside in the
first days of the Christian church, although those were days of greater
difficulty and distress than Israel knew in the wilderness; nay, in the
times of persecution, the Lord's Supper was celebrated more frequently
than afterward. Israelites in the wilderness could not forget the
deliverance out of Egypt. There was danger of this when they came to
Canaan. Instructions were given concerning those who were ceremonially
unclean, when they were to eat the passover. Those whose minds and
consciences are defiled by sin, are unfit for communion with God, and
cannot partake with comfort of the gospel passover, till they are
cleansed by true repentance and faith. Observe with what trouble and
concern these men complained that they were kept back from offering to
the Lord. It should be a trouble to us, when by any occasion we are kept
back from the solemnities of a sabbath or a sacrament. Observe the
deliberation of Moses in resolving this case. Ministers must ask counsel
of God's mouth, not determine according to their own fancy or affection,
but according to the word of God to the best of their knowledge. And if,
in difficult cases, time is taken to spread the matter before God by
humble, believing prayer, the Holy Spirit assuredly will direct in the
good and right way. God gave directions in this case, and in other
similar cases, explanatory of the law of the passover. As those who,
against their minds, are forced to absent themselves from God's
ordinances, may expect the favours of God's grace under their
affliction, so those who, of choice, absent themselves, may expect God's
wrath for their sin. Be not deceived: God is not mocked.

[Numbers 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 9:15</span></span>

This cloud was appointed to be the visible sign and symbol of God's
presence with Israel. Thus we are taught to see God always near us, both
night and day. As long as the cloud rested on the tabernacle, so long
they continued in the same place. There is no time lost, while we are
waiting God's time. When the cloud was taken up, they removed, however
comfortably they were encamped. We are kept at uncertainty concerning
the time of our putting off the earthly house of this tabernacle, that
we may be always ready to remove at the command of the Lord. It is very
safe and pleasant going when we see God before us, and resting where he
appoints us to rest. The leading of this cloud is spoken of as
signifying the guidance of the blessed Spirit. We are not now to expect
such tokens of the Divine presence and guidance; but the promise is sure
to all God's spiritual Israel, that he will guide them by his counsel.
[Psa 73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024), even unto death, [Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014). All the children of God shall
be led by the Spirit of God, [Rom
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014). He will direct the paths of
those who in all their ways acknowledge him, [Pro
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006). At the commandment of the Lord,
our hearts should always move and rest, saying, Father, thy will be
done; dispose of me and mine as thou pleasest. What thou wilt, and where
thou wilt; only let me be thine, and always in the way of my duty. In
applying general precepts to particular circumstances, there should be
good counsel and fervent prayer. When any undertaking is evidently
wrong, or doubtfully right, and yet the mind leans that way, in such a
case "the moving of the cloud," as men sometimes miscall it, is
generally no more than a temptation Satan is permitted to propose; and
men fancy they are following the Lord, when they are following their own
wayward inclinations. The record of his mercy will conduct us with
unerring truth, through Christ, to everlasting peace. Follow the pillar
of the cloud and of fire. Lay the BIBLE to heart, and receive with
meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010)

</div>
