<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num019)  [Next](num021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 20:0</span></span>

([Num 20:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)) The people come to Zin,
They murmur for water, Moses directed to smite the rock, The infirmity
of Moses and Aaron.

([Num 20:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)) The Israelites are
refused a passage through Edom.

([Num 20:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022)) Aaron reigns the
priest's office to Eleazar, and dies in mount Hor.

[Numbers 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 20:1</span></span>

After thirty-eight years' tedious abode in the wilderness, the armies of
Israel advanced towards Canaan again. There was no water for the
congregation. We live in a wanting world, and wherever we are, must
expect to meet with something to put us out. It is a great mercy to have
plenty of water, a mercy which, if we found the want of, we should more
own the worth of. Hereupon they murmured against Moses and Aaron. They
spake the same absurd and brutish language their fathers had done. It
made their crime the worse, that they had smarted so long for the
discontent and distrusts of their fathers, yet they venture in the same
steps. Moses must again, in God's name, command water out of a rock for
them; God is as able as ever to supply his people with what is needful
for them. But Moses and Aaron acted wrong. They took much of the glory
of this work of wonder to themselves; "Must we fetch water?" As if it
were done by some power or worthiness of their own. They were to speak
to the rock, but they smote it. Therefore it is charged upon them, that
they did not sanctify God, that is, they did not give to him alone that
glory of this miracle which was due unto his name. And being provoked by
the people, Moses spake unadvisedly with his lips. The same pride of man
would still usurp the office of the appointed Mediator; and become to
ourselves wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
Such a state of sinful independence, such a rebellion of the soul
against its Saviour, the voice of God condemns in every page of the
gospel.

[Numbers 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 20:14</span></span>

The nearest way to Canaan from the place where Israel encamped, was
through the country of Edom. The ambassadors who were sent returned with
a denial. The Edomites feared to receive damage by the Israelites. And
had this numerous army been under any other discipline than that of the
righteous God himself, there might have been cause for this jealousy.
But Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing; and now the hatred
revived, when the blessing was about to be inherited. We must not think
it strange, if reasonable requests be denied by unreasonable men, and if
those whom God favours be affronted by men.

[Numbers 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 20:22</span></span>

God bids Aaron prepare to die. There is something of displeasure in
these orders. Aaron must not enter Canaan, because he had failed in his
duty at the waters of strife. There is much of mercy in them. Aaron,
though he dies for his transgression, dies with ease, and in honour. He
is gathered to his people, as one who dies in the arms of Divine grace.
There is much significancy in these orders. Aaron must not enter Canaan,
to show that the Levitical priesthood could make nothing perfect; that
must be done by bringing in a better hope. Aaron submits, and dies in
the method and manner appointed; and, for aught that appears, with as
much cheerfulness as if he had been going to bed. It was a great
satisfaction to Aaron to see his son, who was dear to him, preferred;
and his office preserved and secured: especially, to see in this a
figure of Christ's everlasting priesthood. A good man would desire, if
it were the will of God, not to outlive his usefulness. Why should we
covet to continue any longer in this world, than while we may do some
service in it for God and our generation?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 21](num021)

</div>
