<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num020)  [Next](num022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 21:0</span></span>

([Num 21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)) The Canaanites of Arad
destroyed.

([Num 21:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)) The people murmuring,
are plagued with fiery serpents, They repenting, are healed through the
brazen serpent.

([Num 21:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010)) Further journeys of
the Israelites.

([Num 21:21-35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)) Sihon and Og overcome,
Their land possessed.

[Numbers 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 21:1</span></span>

Before the people began their march round the country of Edom, the king
of Arad, a Canaanite, who inhabited the southern part of the country,
attacked them in the wilderness, and took some prisoners. This was to
lead the Israelites to look more thoroughly to the Lord.

[Numbers 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 21:4</span></span>

The children of Israel were wearied by a long march round the land of
Edom. They speak discontentedly of what God had done for them, and
distrustfully of what he would do. What will they be pleased with, whom
manna will not please? Let not the contempt which some cast on the word
of God, make us value it less. It is the bread of life, substantial
bread, and will nourish those who by faith feed upon it, to eternal
life, whoever may call it light bread. We see the righteous judgment God
brought upon them for murmuring. He sent fiery serpents among them,
which bit or stung many to death. It is to be feared that they would not
have owned the sin, if they had not felt the smart; but they relent
under the rod. And God made a wonderful provision for their relief. The
Jews themselves say it was not the sight of the brazen serpent that
cured; but in looking up to it, they looked up to God as the Lord that
healed them. There was much gospel in this. Our Saviour declared, [Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014), [Joh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015), that as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lifted up, that
whatsoever believeth in him, should not perish. Compare their disease
and ours. Sin bites like a serpent, and stings like an adder. Compare
the application of their remedy and ours. They looked and lived, and we,
if we believe, shall not perish. It is by faith that we look unto Jesus,
[Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002). Whosoever looked, however
desperate his case, or feeble his sight, or distant his place, was
certainly and perfectly cured. The Lord can relieve us from dangers and
distresses, by means which human reason never would have devised. Oh
that the venom of the old serpent, inflaming men's passions, and causing
them to commit sins which end in their eternal destruction, were as
sensibly felt, and the danger as plainly seen, as the Israelites felt
pain from the bite of the fiery serpents, and feared the death which
followed! Then none would shut their eyes to Christ, or turn from his
gospel. Then a crucified Saviour would be so valued, that all things
else would be accounted loss for him; then, without delay, and with
earnestness and simplicity, all would apply to him in the appointed way,
crying, Lord, save us; we perish! Nor would any abuse the freeness of
Christ's salvation, while they reckoned the price which it cost him.

[Numbers 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 21:10</span></span>

We have here the removes of the children of Israel, till they came to
the plains of Moab, from whence they passed over Jordan into Canaan. The
end of their pilgrimage was near. "They set forward." It were well if we
did thus; and the nearer we come to heaven, were so much the more active
and abundant in the work of the Lord. The wonderful success God granted
to his people, is here spoken of, and, among the rest, their actions on
the river Arnon, at Vaheb in Suphah, and other places on that river. In
every stage of our lives, nay, in every step, we should notice what God
has wrought for us; what he did at such a time, and what in such a
place, ought to be distinctly remembered. God blessed his people with a
supply of water. When we come to heaven, we shall remove to the well of
life, the fountain of living waters. They received it with joy and
thankfulness, which made the mercy doubly sweet. With joy must we draw
water out of the wells of salvation, [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003). As the brazen serpent was a
figure of Christ, who is lifted up for our cure, so is this well a
figure of the Spirit, who is poured forth for our comfort, and from whom
flow to us rivers of living waters, [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039). Does this well spring up in our
souls? If so, we should take the comfort to ourselves, and give the
glory to God. God promised to give water, but they must open the ground.
God's favours must be expected in the use of such means as are within
our power, but still the power is only of God.

[Numbers 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 21:21</span></span>

Sihon went with his forces against Israel, out of his own borders,
without provocation, and so ran upon his own ruin. The enemies of God's
church often perish by the counsels they think most wisely taken. Og,
king of Bashan, instead of being warned by the fate of his neighbours,
to make peace with Israel, makes war with them, which proves in like
manner his destruction. Wicked men do their utmost to secure themselves
and their possessions against the judgments of God; but all in vain,
when the day comes on which they must fall. God gave Israel success,
while Moses was with them, that he might see the beginning of the
glorious work, though he must not live to see it finished. This was, in
comparison, but as the day of small things, yet it was an earnest of
great things. We must prepare for fresh conflicts and enemies. We must
make no peace or truce with the powers of darkness, nor even treat with
them; nor should we expect any pause in our contest. But, trusting in
God, and obeying his commands, we shall be more than conquerors over
every enemy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 22](num022)

</div>
