<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1004)  [Next](pe2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 5:0</span></span>

([Pe1 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)) Elders exhorted and
encouraged.

([Pe1 5:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)) Younger Christians are to
submit to their elders, and to yield with humility and patience to God,
and to be sober, watchful, and stedfast in faith.

([Pe1 5:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010)) Prayers for their
growth and establishment.

[1 Peter 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 5:1</span></span>

The apostle Peter does not command, but exhorts. He does not claim power
to rule over all pastors and churches. It was the peculiar honour of
Peter and a few more, to be witnesses of Christ's sufferings; but it is
the privilege of all true Christians to partake of the glory that shall
be revealed. These poor, dispersed, suffering Christians, were the flock
of God, redeemed to God by the great Shepherd, living in holy love and
communion, according to the will of God. They are also dignified with
the title of God's heritage or clergy; his peculiar lot, chosen for his
own people, to enjoy his special favour, and to do him special service.
Christ is the chief Shepherd of the whole flock and heritage of God. And
all faithful ministers will receive a crown of unfading glory,
infinitely better and more honourable than all the authority, wealth,
and pleasure of the world.

[1 Peter 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 5:5</span></span>

Humility preserves peace and order in all Christian churches and
societies; pride disturbs them. Where God gives grace to be humble, he
will give wisdom, faith, and holiness. To be humble, and subject to our
reconciled God, will bring greater comfort to the soul than the
gratification of pride and ambition. But it is to be in due time; not in
thy fancied time, but God's own wisely appointed time. Does he wait, and
wilt not thou? What difficulties will not the firm belief of his wisdom,
power, and goodness get over! Then be humble under his hand. Cast "all
you care;" personal cares, family cares, cares for the present, and
cares for the future, for yourselves, for others, for the church, on
God. These are burdensome, and often very sinful, when they arise from
unbelief and distrust, when they torture and distract the mind, unfit us
for duties, and hinder our delight in the service of God. The remedy is,
to cast our care upon God, and leave every event to his wise and
gracious disposal. Firm belief that the Divine will and counsels are
right, calms the spirit of a man. Truly the godly too often forget this,
and fret themselves to no purpose. Refer all to God's disposal. The
golden mines of all spiritual comfort and good are wholly his, and the
Spirit itself. Then, will he not furnish what is fit for us, if we
humbly attend on him, and lay the care of providing for us, upon his
wisdom and love? The whole design of Satan is to devour and destroy
souls. He always is contriving whom he may insnare to eternal ruin. Our
duty plainly is, to be sober; to govern both the outward and the inward
man by the rules of temperance. To be vigilant; suspicious of constant
danger from this spiritual enemy, watchful and diligent to prevent his
designs. Be stedfast, or solid, by faith. A man cannot fight upon a
quagmire, there is no standing without firm ground to tread upon; this
faith alone furnishes. It lifts the soul to the firm advanced ground of
the promises, and fixes it there. The consideration of what others
suffer, is proper to encourage us to bear our share in any affliction;
and in whatever form Satan assaults us, or by whatever means, we may
know that our brethren experience the same.

[1 Peter 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 5:10</span></span>

In conclusion, the apostle prays to God for them, as the God of all
grace. Perfect implies their progress towards perfection. Stablish
imports the curing of our natural lightness and inconstancy. Strengthen
has respect to the growth of graces, especially where weakest and
lowest. Settle signifies to fix upon a sure foundation, and may refer to
Him who is the Foundation and Strength of believers. These expressions
show that perseverance and progress in grace are first to be sought
after by every Christian. The power of these doctrines on the hearts,
and the fruits in the lives, showed who are partakers of the grace of
God. The cherishing and increase of Christian love, and of affection one
to another, is no matter of empty compliment, but the stamp and badge of
Jesus Christ on his followers. Others may have a false peace for a time,
and wicked men may wish for it to themselves and to one another; but
theirs is a vain hope, and will come to nought. All solid peace is
founded on Christ, and flows from him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Introduction](pe2000)

</div>
