<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 2:0</span></span>

([Pe2 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)) Believers are cautioned
against false teachers, and the certainty of their punishment shown from
examples.

([Pe2 2:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)) An account of these
seducers, as exceedingly wicked.

([Pe2 2:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)) But as making high
pretences to liberty and purity.

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

Though the way of error is a hurtful way, many are always ready to walk
therein. Let us take care we give no occasion to the enemy to blaspheme
the holy name whereby we are called, or to speak evil of the way of
salvation by Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life.
These seducers used feigned words, they deceived the hearts of their
followers. Such are condemned already, and the wrath of God abides upon
them. God's usual method of proceeding is shown by examples. Angels were
cast down from all their glory and dignity, for their disobedience. If
creatures sin, even in heaven, they must suffer in hell. Sin is the work
of darkness, and darkness is the wages of sin. See how God dealt with
the old world. The number of offenders no more procures favour, than
their quality. If the sin be universal, the punishment shall likewise
extend to all. If in a fruitful soil the people abound in sin, God can
at once turn a fruitful land into barrenness, and a well-watered country
into ashes. No plans or politics can keep off judgments from a sinful
people. He who keeps fire and water from hurting his people, [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002), can make either destroy his
enemies; they are never safe. When God sends destruction on the ungodly,
he commands deliverance for the righteous. In bad company we cannot but
get either guilt or grief. Let the sins of others be troubles to us. Yet
it is possible for the children of the Lord, living among the most
profane, to retain their integrity; there being more power in the grace
of Christ, and his dwelling in them, than in the temptations of Satan,
or the example of the wicked, with all their terrors or allurements. In
our intentions and inclinations to commit sin, we meet with strange
hinderances, if we mark them When we intend mischief, God sends many
stops to hinder us, as if to say, Take heed what you do. His wisdom and
power will surely effect the purposes of his love, and the engagements
of his truth; while wicked men often escape suffering here, because they
are kept to the day of judgment, to be punished with the devil and his
angels.

[2 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 2:10</span></span>

Impure seducers and their abandoned followers, give themselves up to
their own fleshly minds. Refusing to bring every thought to the
obedience of Christ, they act against God's righteous precepts. They
walk after the flesh, they go on in sinful courses, and increase to
greater degrees of impurity and wickedness. They also despise those whom
God has set in authority over them, and requires them to honour. Outward
temporal good things are the wages sinners expect and promise
themselves. And none have more cause to tremble, than those who are bold
to gratify their sinful lusts, by presuming on the Divine grace and
mercy. Many such there have been, and are, who speak lightly of the
restraints of God's law, and deem themselves freed from obligations to
obey it. Let Christians stand at a distance from such.

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

The word of truth is the water of life, which refreshes the souls that
receive it; but deceivers spread and promote error, and are set forth as
empty, because there is no truth in them. As clouds hinder the light of
the sun, so do these darken counsel by words wherein there is no truth.
Seeing that these men increase darkness in this world, it is very just
that the mist of darkness should be their portion in the next. In the
midst of their talk of liberty, these men are the vilest slaves; their
own lusts gain a complete victory over them, and they are actually in
bondage. When men are entangled, they are easily overcome; therefore
Christians should keep close to the word of God, and watch against all
who seek to bewilder them. A state of apostacy is worse than a state of
ignorance. To bring an evil report upon the good way of God, and a false
charge against the way of truth, must expose to the heaviest
condemnation. How dreadful is the state here described! Yet though such
a case is deplorable, it is not utterly hopeless; the leper may be made
clean, and even the dead may be raised. Is thy backsliding a grief to
thee? Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003)

</div>
