<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro022)  [Next](pro024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

[Proverbs 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 23:1</span></span>

God's restraints of the appetite only say, Do thyself no harm.

[Proverbs 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 23:4</span></span>

Be not of those that will be rich. The things of this world are not
happiness and a portion for a soul; those that hold them ever so fast,
cannot hold them always, cannot hold them long.

[Proverbs 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 23:6</span></span>

Do not make thyself burdensome to any, especially those not sincere.
When we are called by God to his feast, and to let our souls delight
themselves, [Isa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006); [Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002), we may safely partake of the
Bread of life.

[Proverbs 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 23:9</span></span>

It is our duty to take all fit occasions to speak of Divine things; but
if what a wise man says will not be heard, let him hold his peace.

[Proverbs 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 23:10</span></span>

The fatherless are taken under God's special protection. He is their
Redeemer, who will take their part; and he is mighty, almighty.

[Proverbs 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 23:12</span></span>

Here is a parent instructing his child to give his mind to the
Scriptures. Here is a parent correcting his child: accompanied with
prayer, and blessed of God, it may prove a means of preventing his
destruction. Here is a parent encouraging his child, telling him what
would be for his good. And what a comfort it would be, if herein he
answered his expectation!

[Proverbs 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 23:17</span></span>

The believer's expectation shall not be disappointed; the end of his
trials, and of the sinner's prosperity, is at hand.

[Proverbs 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 23:19</span></span>

The gracious Saviour who purchased pardon and peace for his people, with
all the affection of a tender parent, counsels us to hear and be wise,
and is ready to guide our hearts in his way. Here we have an earnest
call to young people, to attend to the advice of their godly parents. If
the heart be guided, the steps will be guided. Buy the truth, and sell
it not; be willing to part with any thing for it. Do not part with it
for pleasures, honours, riches, or any thing in this world. The heart is
what the great God requires. We must not think to divide the heart
between God and the world; he will have all or none. Look to the rule of
God's word, the conduct of his providence, and the good examples of his
people. Particular cautions are given against sins most destructive to
wisdom and grace in the soul. It is really a shame to make a god of the
belly. Drunkenness stupifies men, and then all goes to ruin.
Licentiousness takes away the heart that should be given to God. Take
heed of any approaches toward this sin, it is very hard to retreat from
it. It bewitches men to their ruin.

[Proverbs 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 23:29</span></span>

Solomon warns against drunkenness. Those that would be kept from sin,
must keep from all the beginnings of it, and fear coming within reach of
its allurements. Foresee the punishment, what it will at last end in, if
repentance prevent not. It makes men quarrel. Drunkards wilfully make
woe and sorrow for themselves. It makes men impure and insolent. The
tongue grows unruly; the heart utters things contrary to reason,
religion, and common civility. It stupifies and besots men. They are in
danger of death, of damnation; as much exposed as if they slept upon the
top of a mast, yet feel secure. They fear no peril when the terrors of
the Lord are before them; they feel no pain when the judgments of God
are actually upon them. So lost is a drunkard to virtue and honour, so
wretchedly is his conscience seared, that he is not ashamed to say, I
will seek it again. With good reason we were bid to stop before the
beginning. Who that has common sense would contract a habit, or sell
himself to a sin, which tends to such guilt and misery, and exposes a
man every day to the danger of dying insensible, and awaking in hell?
Wisdom seems in these chapters to take up the discourse as at the
beginning of the book. They must be considered as the words of Christ to
the sinner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 24](pro024)

</div>
