<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa061)  [Next](psa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 62:0</span></span>

([Psa 62:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)) David's confidence in
God.

([Psa 62:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008)) No trust to be put in
worldly things.

[Psalms 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 62:1</span></span>

We are in the way both of duty and comfort, when our souls wait upon
God; when we cheerfully give up ourselves, and all our affairs, to his
will and wisdom; when we leave ourselves to all the ways of his
providence, and patiently expect the event, with full satisfaction in
his goodness. See the ground and reason of this dependence. By his grace
he has supported me, and by his providence delivered me. He only can be
my Rock and my salvation; creatures are nothing without him, therefore I
will look above them to him. Trusting in God, the heart is fixed. If God
be for us, we need not fear what man can do against us. David having put
his confidence in God, foresees the overthrow of his enemies. We have
found it good to wait upon the Lord, and should charge our souls to have
such constant dependence upon him, as may make us always easy. If God
will save my soul, I may well leave every thing else to his disposal,
knowing all shall turn to my salvation. And as David's faith in God
advances to an unshaken stedfastness, so his joy in God improves into a
holy triumph. Meditation and prayer are blessed means of strengthening
faith and hope.

[Psalms 62:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 62:8</span></span>

Those who have found the comfort of the ways of God themselves, will
invite others into those ways; we shall never have the less for others
sharing with us. the good counsel given is, to trust wholly in God. We
must so trust in him at all times, as not at any time to put that trust
in ourselves, or in any creature, which is to be put in him only. Trust
in him to guide us when in doubt, to protect us when in danger, to
supply us when in want, to strengthen us for every good word and work.
We must lay out wants and our wishes before him, and then patiently
submit our wills to his: this is pouring out our hearts. God is a refuge
for all, even for as many as will take shelter in him. The psalmist
warns against trusting in men. The multitude, those of low degree, are
changeable as the wind. The rich and noble seem to have much in their
power, and lavish promises; but those that depend on them, are
disappointed. Weighed in the balance of Scripture, all that man can do
to make us happy is lighter than vanity itself. It is hard to have
riches, and not to trust in them if they increase, though by lawful and
honest means; but we must take heed, lest we set our affections unduly
upon them. A smiling world is the most likely to draw the heart from
God, on whom alone it should be set. The consistent believer receives
all from God as a trust; and he seeks to use it to his glory, as a
steward who must render an account. God hath spoken as it were once for
all, that power belongs to him alone. He can punish and destroy. Mercy
also belongs to him; and his recompensing the imperfect services of
those that believe in him, blotting out their transgressions for the
Redeemer's sake, is a proof of abundant mercy, and encourages us to
trust in him. Let us trust in his mercy and grace, and abound in his
work, expecting mercies from him alone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 63](psa063)

</div>
