<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa087)  [Next](psa089) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 88](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 88:0</span></span>

([Psa 88:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)) The psalmist pours out
his soul to God in lamentation.

([Psa 88:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010)) He wrestles by faith,
in his prayer to God for comfort.

[Psalms 88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 88:1</span></span>

The first words of the psalmist are the only words of comfort and
support in this psalm. Thus greatly may good men be afflicted, and such
dismal thoughts may they have about their afflictions, and such dark
conclusion may they make about their end, through the power of
melancholy and the weakness of faith. He complained most of God's
displeasure. Even the children of God's love may sometimes think
themselves children of wrath and no outward trouble can be so hard upon
them as that. Probably the psalmist described his own case, yet he leads
to Christ. Thus are we called to look unto Jesus, wounded and bruised
for our iniquities. But the wrath of God poured the greatest bitterness
into his cup. This weighed him down into darkness and the deep.

[Psalms 88:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 88:10</span></span>

Departed souls may declare God's faithfulness, justice, and
lovingkindness; but deceased bodies can neither receive God's favours in
comfort, nor return them in praise. The psalmist resolved to continue in
prayer, and the more so, because deliverance did not come speedily.
Though our prayers are not soon answered, yet we must not give over
praying. The greater our troubles, the more earnest and serious we
should be in prayer. Nothing grieves a child of God so much as losing
sight of him; nor is there any thing he so much dreads as God's casting
off his soul. If the sun be clouded, that darkens the earth; but if the
sun should leave the earth, what a dungeon would it be! Even those
designed for God's favours, may for a time suffer his terrors. See how
deep those terrors wounded the psalmist. If friends are put far from us
by providences, or death, we have reason to look upon it as affliction.
Such was the calamitous state of a good man. But the pleas here used
were peculiarly suited to Christ. And we are not to think that the holy
Jesus suffered for us only at Gethsemane and on Calvary. His whole life
was labour and sorrow; he was afflicted as never man was, from his youth
up. He was prepared for that death of which he tasted through life. No
man could share in the sufferings by which other men were to be
redeemed. All forsook him, and fled. Oftentimes, blessed Jesus, do we
forsake thee; but do not forsake us, O take not thy Holy Spirit from us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 89](psa089)

</div>
