<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa048)  [Next](psa050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 49:0</span></span>

([Psa 49:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)) A call for attention.

([Psa 49:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)) Folly of worldlings.

([Psa 49:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)) Against fear of death.

[Psalms 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 49:1</span></span>

We seldom meet with a more solemn introduction: there is no truth of
greater importance. Let all hear this with application to ourselves. The
poor are in danger from undue desire toward the wealth of the world, as
rich people from undue delight in it. The psalmist begins with applying
it to himself, and that is the right method in which to treat of Divine
things. Before he sets down the folly of carnal security, he lays down,
from his own experience, the benefit and comfort of a holy, gracious
security, which they enjoy who trust in God, and not in their worldly
wealth. In the day of judgment, the iniquity of our heels, or of our
steps, our past sins, will compass us. In those days, worldly, wicked
people will be afraid; but wherefore should a man fear death who has God
with him?

[Psalms 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 49:6</span></span>

Here is a description of the spirit and way of worldly people. A man may
have wealth, and may have his heart enlarged in love, thankfulness, and
obedience, and may do good with it. Therefore it is not men's having
riches that proves them to be worldly, but their setting their hearts
upon them as the best things. Worldly men have only some floating
thoughts of the things of God, while their fixed thoughts, their inward
thoughts, are about the world; that lies nearest the heart. But with all
their wealth they cannot save the life of the dearest friend they have.
This looks further, to the eternal redemption to be wrought out by the
Messiah. The redemption of the soul shall cost very dear; but, being
once wrought, it shall never need to be repeated. And he, the Redeemer,
shall rise again before he sees corruption, and then shall live for
evermore, [Rev 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). This likewise
shows the folly of worldly people, who sell their souls for that which
will never buy them. With all their wealth they cannot secure themselves
from the stroke of death. Yet one generation after another applaud their
maxims; and the character of a fool, as drawn by heavenly Wisdom itself,
[Luk 12:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#016), continues to be
followed even among professed Christians. Death will ask the proud
sinner, Where is thy wealth, thy pomp? And in the morning of the
resurrection, when all that sleep in the dust shall awake, the upright
shall be advanced to the highest honour, when the wicked shall be filled
with everlasting shame and contempt, [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002). Let us now judge of things as
they will appear in that day. The beauty of holiness is that alone which
the grave cannot touch, or damage.

[Psalms 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 49:15</span></span>

Believers should not fear death. The distinction of men's outward
conditions, how great soever in life, makes none at death; but the
difference of men's spiritual states, though in this life it may seem of
small account, yet at and after death is very great. The soul is often
put for the life. The God of life, who was its Creator at first, can and
will be its Redeemer at last. It includes the salvation of the soul from
eternal ruin. Believers will be under strong temptation to envy the
prosperity of sinners. Men will praise thee, and cry thee up, as having
done well for thyself in raising an estate and family. But what will it
avail to be approved of men, if God condemn us? Those that are rich in
the graces and comforts of the Spirit, have something of which death
cannot strip them, nay, which death will improve; but as for worldly
possessions, as we brought nothing into the world, so it is certain that
we shall carry nothing out; we must leave all to others. The sum of the
whole matter is, that it can profit a man nothing to gain the whole
world, to become possessed of all its wealth and all its power, if he
lose his own soul, and is cast away for want of that holy and heavenly
wisdom which distinguishes man from the brutes, in his life and at his
death. And are there men who can prefer the lot of the rich sinner to
that of poor Lazarus, in life and death, and to eternity? Assuredly
there are. What need then we have of the teaching of the Holy Ghost;
when, with all our boasted powers, we are prone to such folly in the
most important of all concerns!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 50](psa050)

</div>
