<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa016)  [Next](psa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 17:0</span></span>

([Psa 17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)) David's integrity.

([Psa 17:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)) The character of his
enemies. His hope of happiness.

[Psalms 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 17:1</span></span>

This psalm is a prayer. Feigned prayers are fruitless; but if our hearts
lead our prayers, God will meet them with his favour. The psalmist had
been used to pray, so that it was not his distress and danger that now
first brought him to his duty. And he was encouraged by his faith to
expect God would notice his prayers. Constant resolution and
watchfulness against sins of the tongue, will be a good evidence of our
integrity. Aware of man's propensity to wicked works, and of his own
peculiar temptations, David had made God's word his preservative from
the paths of Satan, which lead to destruction. If we carefully avoid the
paths of sin, it will be very lead to destruction. If we carefully avoid
the paths of sin, it will be very comfortable in the reflection, when we
are in trouble. Those that are, through grace, going in God's paths,
should pray that their goings may be held up in those paths. David
prays, Lord, still hold me up. Those who would proceed and persevere in
the ways of God, must, by faith prayer, get daily fresh supplies of
grace and strength from him. Show thy marvellous loving-kindness,
distinguishing favours, not common mercies, but be gracious to me; do as
thou usest to do to those who love thy name.

[Psalms 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 17:8</span></span>

Being compassed with enemies, David prays to God to keep him in safety.
This prayer is a prediction that Christ would be preserved, through all
the hardships and difficulties of his humiliation, to the glories and
joys of his exalted state, and is a pattern to Christians to commit the
keeping of their souls to God, trusting him to preserve them to his
heavenly kingdom. Those are our worst enemies, that are enemies to our
souls. They are God's sword, which cannot move without him, and which he
will sheathe when he has done his work with it. They are his hand, by
which he chastises his people. There is no fleeing from God's hand, but
by fleeing to it. It is very comfortable, when we are in fear of the
power of man, to see it dependent upon, and in subjection to the power
of God. Most men look on the things of this world as the best things;
and they look no further, nor show any care to provide for another life.
The things of this world are called treasures, they are so accounted;
but to the soul, and when compared with eternal blessings, they are
trash. The most afflicted Christian need not envy the most prosperous
men of the world, who have their portion in this life. Clothed with
Christ's righteousness, having through his grace a good heart and a good
life, may we by faith behold God's face, and set him always before us.
When we awake every morning, may we be satisfied with his likeness set
before us in his word, and with his likeness stamped upon us by his
renewing grace. Happiness in the other world is prepared only for those
that are justified and sanctified: they shall be put in possession of it
when the soul awakes, at death, out of its slumber in the body, and when
the body awakes, at the resurrection, out of its slumber in the grave.
There is no satisfaction for a soul but in God, and in his good will
towards us, and his good work in us; yet that satisfaction will not be
perfect till we come to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 18](psa018)

</div>
