<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa093)  [Next](psa095) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 94](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 94:0</span></span>

([Psa 94:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)) The danger and folly of
persecutors.

([Psa 94:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012)) Comfort and peace to
the persecuted.

[Psalms 94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 94:1</span></span>

We may with boldness appeal to God; for he is the almighty Judge by whom
every man is judged. Let this encourage those who suffer wrong, to bear
it with silence, committing themselves to Him who judges righteously.
These prayers are prophecies, which speak terror to the sons of
violence. There will come a day of reckoning for all the hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against God, his truths, and ways, and
people. It would hardly be believed, if we did not witness it, that
millions of rational creatures should live, move, speak, hear,
understand, and do what they purpose, yet act as if they believed that
God would not punish the abuse of his gifts. As all knowledge is from
God, no doubt he knows all the thoughts of the children of men, and
knows that the imaginations of the thoughts of men's hearts are only
evil, and that continually. Even in good thoughts there is a want of
being fixed, which may be called vanity. It concerns us to keep a strict
watch over our thoughts, because God takes particular notice of them.
Thoughts are words to God.

[Psalms 94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 94:12</span></span>

That man is blessed, who, under the chastening of the Lord, is taught
his will and his truths, from his holy word, and by the Holy Spirit. He
should see mercy through his sufferings. There is a rest remaining for
the people of God after the days of their adversity, which shall not
last always. He that sends the trouble, will send the rest. The psalmist
found succour and relief only in the Lord, when all earthly friends
failed. We are beholden, not only to God's power, but to his pity, for
spiritual supports; and if we have been kept from falling into sin, or
shrinking from our duty, we should give him the glory, and encourage our
brethren. The psalmist had many troubled thoughts concerning the case he
was in, concerning the course he should take, and what was likely to be
the end of it. The indulgence of such contrivances and fears, adds to
care and distrust, and renders our views more gloomy and confused. Good
men sometimes have perplexed and distressed thoughts concerning God. But
let them look to the great and precious promises of the gospel. The
world's comforts give little delight to the soul, when hurried with
melancholy thoughts; but God's comforts bring that peace and pleasure
which the smiles of the world cannot give, and which the frowns of the
world cannot take away. God is his people's Refuge, to whom they may
flee, in whom they are safe, and may be secure. And he will reckon with
the wicked. A man cannot be more miserable than his own wickedness will
make him, if the Lord visit it upon him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 95](psa095)

</div>
