<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa011)  [Next](psa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 12:0</span></span>

The psalmist begs help of God, because there were none among men whom he
durst trust.

[Psalms 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 12:1</span></span>

This psalm furnishes good thoughts for bad times; a man may comfort
himself with such meditations and prayers. Let us see what makes the
times bad, and when they may be said to be so. Ask the children of this
world, What makes the times bad? they will tell you, Scarcity of money,
decay of trade, and the desolations of war, make the times bad: but the
Scripture lays the badness of the times on causes of another nature,
[Ti2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001), etc.: perilous times shall
come, for sin shall abound; and of this David complains. When piety
decays times really are bad. He who made man's mouth will call him to an
account for his proud, profane, dissembling, or even useless words. When
the poor and needy are oppressed, then the times are very bad. God
himself takes notice of the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of
the needy. When wickedness abounds, and is countenanced by those in
authority, then the times are very bad. See with what good things we are
here furnished for such bad times; and we cannot tell what times we may
be reserved for. 1. We have a God to go to, from whom we may ask and
expect the redress of all our grievances. 2. God will certainly punish
and restrain false and proud men. 3. God will work deliverance for his
oppressed people. His help is given in the fittest time. Though men are
false, God is faithful; though they are not to be trusted, God is. The
preciousness of God's word is compared to silver refined to the highest
degree. How many proofs have been given of its power and truth! God will
secure his chosen remnant, however bad the times are. As long as the
world stands, there will be a generation of proud and wicked men. But
all God's people are put into the hands of Christ our Saviour; there
they are in safety, for none can pluck them thence; being built on Him,
the Rock, they are safe, notwithstanding temptation or persecution come
with ever so much force upon them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 13](psa013)

</div>
