<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa047)  [Next](psa049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 48:0</span></span>

The glories of the church of Christ.

[Psalms 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 48:1</span></span>

Jerusalem is the city of our God: none on earth render him due honour
except the citizens of the spiritual Jerusalem. Happy the kingdom, the
city, the family, the heart, in which God is great, in which he is all.
There God is known. The clearer discoveries are made to us of the Lord
and his greatness, the more it is expected that we should abound in his
praises. The earth is, by sin, covered with deformity, therefore justly
might that spot of ground, which was beautified with holiness, be called
the joy of the whole earth; that which the whole earth has reason to
rejoice in, that God would thus in very deed dwell with man upon the
earth. The kings of the earth were afraid of it. Nothing in nature can
more fitly represent the overthrow of heathenism by the Spirit of the
gospel, than the wreck of a fleet in a storm. Both are by the mighty
power of the Lord.

[Psalms 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 48:8</span></span>

We have here the improvement which the people of God are to make of his
glorious and gracious appearances for them. Let our faith in the word of
God be hereby confirmed. Let our hope of the stability of the church be
encouraged. Let our minds be filled with good thoughts of God. All the
streams of mercy that flow down to us, must be traced to the fountain of
His loving-kindness. Let us give to God the glory of the great things he
has done for us. Let all the members of the church take comfort from
what the Lord does for his church. Let us observe the beauty, strength,
and safety of the church. Consider its strength; see it founded on
Christ the Rock, fortified by the Divine power, guarded by Him who
neither slumbers nor sleeps. See what precious ordinances are its
palaces, what precious promises are its bulwarks, that you may be
encouraged to join yourselves to it: and tell this to others. This God,
who has now done such great things for us, is unchangeable in his love
to us, and his care for us. If he is our God, he will lead and keep us
even to the last. He will so guide us, as to set us above the reach of
death, so that it shall not do us any real hurt. He will lead us to a
life in which there shall be no more death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 49](psa049)

</div>
