<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa008)  [Next](psa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 9:0</span></span>

([Psa 9:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)) David praises God for
protecting his people.

([Psa 9:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)) And for cause to praise
him.

[Psalms 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 9:1</span></span>

If we would praise God acceptably, we must praise him in sincerity, with
our whole heart. When we give thanks for some one particular mercy, we
should remember former mercies. Our joy must not be in the gift, so much
as in the Giver. The triumphs of the Redeemer ought to be the triumphs
of the redeemed. The almighty power of God is that which the strongest
and stoutest of his enemies are no way able to stand before. We are sure
that the judgment of God is according to truth, and that with him there
is no unrighteousness. His people may, by faith, flee to him as their
Refuge, and may depend on his power and promise for their safety, so
that no real hurt shall be done to them. Those who know him to be a God
of truth and faithfulness, will rejoice in his word of promise, and rest
upon that. Those who know him to be an everlasting Father, will trust
him with their souls as their main care, and trust in him at all times,
even to the end; and by constant care seek to approve themselves to him
in the whole course of their lives. Who is there that would not seek
him, who never hath forsaken those that seek Him?

[Psalms 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 9:11</span></span>

Those who believe that God is greatly to be praised, not only desire to
praise him better themselves, but desire that others may join with them.
There is a day coming, when it will appear that he has not forgotten the
cry of the humble; neither the cry of their blood, or the cry of their
prayers. We are never brought so low, so near to death, but God can
raise us up. If he has saved us from spiritual and eternal death, we may
thence hope, that in all our distresses he will be a very present help
to us. The overruling providence of God frequently so orders it, that
persecutors and oppressors are brought to ruin by the projects they
formed to destroy the people of God. Drunkards kill themselves;
prodigals beggar themselves; the contentious bring mischief upon
themselves: thus men's sins may be read in their punishment, and it
becomes plain to all, that the destruction of sinners is of themselves.
All wickedness came originally with the wicked one from hell; and those
who continue in sin, must go to that place of torment. The true state,
both of nations and of individuals, may be correctly estimated by this
one rule, whether in their doings they remember or forget God. David
encourages the people of God to wait for his salvation, though it should
be long deferred. God will make it appear that he never did forget them:
it is not possible he should. Strange that man, dust in his and about
him, should yet need some sharp affliction, some severe visitation from
God, to bring him to the knowledge of himself, and make him feel who and
what he is.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 10](psa010)

</div>
