<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 28:0</span></span>

([Psa 28:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)) A prayer in distress.

([Psa 28:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006)) Thanksgiving for
deliverance.

[Psalms 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 28:1</span></span>

David is very earnest in prayer. Observe his faith in prayer; God is my
rock, on whom I build my hope. Believers should not rest till they have
received some token that their prayers are heard. He prays that he may
not be numbered with the wicked. Save me from being entangled in the
snares they have laid for me. Save me from being infected with their
sins, and from doing as they do. Lord, never leave me to use such arts
of deceit and treachery for my safety, as they use for my ruin.
Believers dread the way of sinners; the best are sensible of the danger
they are in of being drawn aside: we should all pray earnestly to God
for his grace to keep us. Those who are careful not to partake with
sinners in their sins, have reason to hope that they shall not receive
their plagues. He speaks of the just judgments of the Lord on the
workers of iniquity, [Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004). This
is not the language of passion or revenge. It is a prophecy that there
will certainly come a day, when God will punish every man who persists
in his evil deeds. Sinners shall be reckoned with, not only for the
mischief they have done, but for the mischief they designed, and did
what they could to effect. Disregard of the works of the Lord, is the
cause of the sin of sinners, and becomes the cause of their ruin.

[Psalms 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 28:6</span></span>

Has God heard our supplications? Let us then bless his name. The Lord is
my strength, to support me, and carry me on through all my services and
sufferings. The heart that truly believes, shall in due time greatly
rejoice: we are to expect joy and peace in believing. God shall have the
praise of it: thus must we express our gratitude. The saints rejoice in
others' comfort as well as their own: we have the less benefit from the
light of the sun, nor from the light of God's countenance, for others'
sharing therein. The psalmist concludes with a short, but comprehensive
prayer. God's people are his inheritance, and precious in his eyes. He
prays that God would save them; that he would bless them with all good,
especially the plenty of his ordinances, which are food to the soul. And
direct their actions and overrule their affairs for good. Also, lift
them up for ever; not only those of that age, but his people in every
age to come; lift them up as high as heaven. There, and there only, will
saints be lifted up for ever, never more to sink, or be depressed. Save
us, Lord Jesus, from our sins; bless us, thou Son of Abraham, with the
blessing of righteousness; feed us, thou good Shepherd of the sheep, and
lift us up for ever from the dust, O thou, who art the Resurrection and
the Life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029)

</div>
