<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 45:0</span></span>

This psalm is a prophecy of Messiah the Prince, and points to him as a
Bridegroom espousing the church to himself, and as a King ruling in it,
and for it.

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

The psalmist's tongue was guided by the Spirit of God, as the pen is by
the hand of a ready writer. This psalm is touching the King Jesus, his
kingdom and government. It is a shame that this good matter is not more
the subject of our discourse. There is more in Christ to engage our
love, than there is or can be in any creature. This world and its charms
are ready to draw away our hearts from Christ; therefore we are
concerned to understand how much more worthy he is of our love. By his
word, his promise, his gospel, the good will of God is made known to us,
and the good work of God is begun and carried on in us. The psalmist,
[Psa 45:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003), joyfully foretells the
progress and success of the Messiah. The arrows of conviction are very
terrible in the hearts of sinners, till they are humbled and reconciled;
but the arrows of vengeance will be more so to his enemies who refuse to
submit. All who have seen his glory and tasted his grace, rejoice to see
him, by his word and Spirit, bring enemies and strangers under his
dominion.

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

The throne of this almighty King is established for ever. While the Holy
Spirit leads Christ's people to look to his cross, he teaches them to
see the evil of sin and the beauty of holiness; so that none of them can
feel encouragement to continue in sin. The Mediator is God, else he had
been neither able to do the Mediator's work, nor fit to wear the
Mediator's crown. God the Father, as his God in respect to his human
nature and mediatorial offices, has given to him the Holy Spirit without
measure. Thus anointed to be a Prophet, Priest, and King, Christ has
pre-eminence in the gladdening gifts and graces of the spirit, and from
his fulness communicates them to his brethren in human nature. The
Spirit is called the oil of gladness, because of the delight wherewith
Christ was filled, in carrying on his undertakings. The salvation of
sinners is the joy of angels, much more of the Son. And in proportion as
we are conformed to his holy image, we may expect the gladdening gifts
influences of the Comforter. The excellences of the Messiah, the
suitableness of his offices, and the sufficiency of his grace, seem to
be intended by the fragrance of his garments. The church formed of true
believers, is here compared to the queen, whom, by an everlasting
covenant, the Lord Jesus has betrothed to himself. This is the bride,
the Lamb's wife, whose graces are compared to fine linen, for their
purity; to gold, for their costliness: for as we owe our redemption, so
we owe our adorning, to the precious blood of the Son of God.

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

If we desire to share these blessings, we must hearken to Christ's word.
We must forget our carnal and sinful attachments and pursuits. He must
be our Lord as well as our Saviour; all idols must be thrown away, that
we may give him our whole heart. And here is good encouragement, thus to
break off from former alliances. The beauty of holiness, both on the
church and on particular believers, is, in the sight of Christ, of great
price, and very amiable. The work of grace is the workmanship of the
Spirit, it is the image of Christ upon the soul, a partaking of the
Divine nature. It is clear of all sin, there is none in it, nor any
comes from it. There is nothing glorious in the old man or corrupt
nature; but in the new man, or work of grace upon the soul, every thing
is glorious. The robe of Christ's righteousness, which he has wrought
out for his church, the Father imputes unto her, and bestows upon her.
None are brought to Christ, but those whom the Father brings. This notes
the conversion of souls to him. The robe of righteousness, and garments
of salvation, the change of raiment Christ has put upon her. Such as
strictly cleave to Christ, loving him in singleness of heart, are
companions of the bride, who partake of the very same grace, enjoy the
same privileges, and share in one common salvation. These, every one,
shall be brought to the King; not one lost or left behind. Instead of
the Old Testament church, there shall be a New Testament church, a
Gentile church. In the believing hope of our everlasting happiness in
the other world, let us always keep up the remembrance of Christ, as our
only way thither; and transmit the remembrance of him to succeeding
generations, that his name may endure for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046)

</div>
