<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa049)  [Next](psa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 50:0</span></span>

([Psa 50:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)) The glory of God.

([Psa 50:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)) Sacrifices to be
changed for prayers.

([Psa 50:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)) Sincere obedience
required.

[Psalms 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 50:1</span></span>

This psalm is a psalm of instruction. It tells of the coming of Christ
and the day of judgment, in which God will call men to account; and the
Holy Ghost is the Spirit of judgement. All the children of men are
concerned to know the right way of worshipping the Lord, in spirit and
in truth. In the great day, our God shall come, and make those hear his
judgement who would not hearken to his law. Happy are those who come
into the covenant of grace, by faith in the Redeemer's atoning
sacrifice, and show the sincerity of their love by fruits of
righteousness. When God rejects the services of those who rest in
outside performances, he will graciously accept those who seek him
aright. It is only by sacrifice, by Christ, the great Sacrifice, from
whom the sacrifices of the law derived what value they had, that we can
be accepted of God. True and righteous are his judgments; even sinners'
own consciences will be forced to acknowledge the righteousness of God.

[Psalms 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 50:7</span></span>

To obey is better than sacrifice, and to love God and our neighbour
better than all burnt-offerings. We are here warned not to rest in these
performances. And let us beware of resting in any form. God demands the
heart, and how can human inventions please him, when repentance, faith,
and holiness are neglected? In the day of distress we must apply to the
Lord by fervent prayer. Our troubles, though we see them coming from
God's hand, must drive us to him, not drive us from him. We must
acknowledge him in all our ways, depend upon his wisdom, power, and
goodness, and refer ourselves wholly to him, and so give him glory. Thus
must we keep up communion with God; meeting him with prayers under
trials, and with praises in deliverances. A believing supplicant shall
not only be graciously answered as to his petition, and so have cause
for praising God, but shall also have grace to praise him.

[Psalms 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 50:16</span></span>

Hypocrisy is wickedness, which God will judge. And it is too common, for
those who declare the Lord's statutes to others, to live in disobedience
to them themselves. This delusion arises from the abuse of God's
long-suffering, and a wilful mistake of his character and the intention
of his gospel. The sins of sinners will be fully proved on them in the
judgment of the great day. The day is coming when God will set their
sins in order, sins of childhood and youth, of riper age and old age, to
their everlasting shame and terror. Let those hitherto forgetful of God,
given up to wickedness, or in any way negligent of salvation, consider
their urgent danger. The patience of the Lord is very great. It is the
more wonderful, because sinners make such ill use of it; but if they
turn not, they shall be made to see their error when it is too late.
Those that forget God, forget themselves; and it will never be right
with them till they consider. Man's chief end is to glorify God: whoso
offers praise, glorifies him, and his spiritual sacrifices shall be
accepted. We must praise God, sacrifice praise, put it into the hands of
the Priest, our Lord Jesus, who is also the altar: we must be fervent in
spirit, praising the Lord. Let us thankfully accept God's mercy, and
endeavour to glorify him in word and deed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 51](psa051)

</div>
