<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa002)  [Next](psa004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 3:0</span></span>

([Psa 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001)) David complains to God of
his enemies, and confides in God.

([Psa 3:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)) He triumphs over his
fears, and gives God the glory, and takes to himself the comfort.

[Psalms 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 3:1</span></span>

An active believer, the more he is beaten off from God, either by the
rebukes of providence, or the reproaches of enemies, the faster hold he
will take, and the closer will he cleave to him. A child of God startles
at the very thought of despairing of help in God. See what God is to his
people, what he will be, what they have found him, what David found in
him. 1. Safety; a shield for me; which denotes the advantage of that
protection. 2. Honour; those whom God owns for his, have true honour put
upon them. 3. Joy and deliverance. If, in the worst of times, God's
people can lift up their heads with joy, knowing that all shall work for
good to them, they will own God as giving them both cause and hearts to
rejoice.

[Psalms 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 3:4</span></span>

Care and grief do us good, when they engage us to pray to God, as in
earnest. David had always found God ready to answer his prayers. Nothing
can fix a gulf between the communications of God's grace towards us, and
the working of his grace in us; between his favour and our faith. He had
always been very safe under the Divine protection. This is applicable to
the common mercies of every night, for which we ought to give thanks
every morning. Many lie down, and cannot sleep, through pain of body, or
anguish of mind, or the continual alarms of fear in the night. But it
seems here rather to be meant of the calmness of David's spirit, in the
midst of his dangers. The Lord, by his grace and the consolations of his
Spirit, made him easy. It is a great mercy, when we are in trouble, to
have our minds stayed upon God. Behold the Son of David composing
himself to his rest upon the cross, that bed of sorrows; commending his
Spirit into the Father's hands in full confidence of a joyful
resurrection. Behold this, O Christian: let faith teach thee how to
sleep, and how to die; while it assures thee that as sleep is a short
death, so death is only a longer sleep; the same God watches over thee,
in thy bed and in thy grave. David's faith became triumphant. He began
the psalm with complaints of the strength and malice of his enemies; but
concludes with rejoicing in the power and grace of his God, and now sees
more with him than against him. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord; he
has power to save, be the danger ever so great. All that have the Lord
for their God, are sure of salvation; for he who is their God, is the
God of Salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 4](psa004)

</div>
