<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa143)  [Next](psa145) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 144](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 144:0</span></span>

([Psa 144:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)) David acknowledges the
great goodness of God, and prays for help.

([Psa 144:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009)) He prays for the
prosperity of his kingdom.

[Psalms 144:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 144:1</span></span>

When men become eminent for things as to which they have had few
advantages, they should be more deeply sensible that God has been their
Teacher. Happy those to whom the Lord gives that noblest victory,
conquest and dominion over their own spirits. A prayer for further mercy
is fitly begun with a thanksgiving for former mercy. There was a special
power of God, inclining the people of Israel to be subject to David; it
was typical of the bringing souls into subjection to the Lord Jesus.
Man's days have little substance, considering how many thoughts and
cares of a never-dying soul are employed about a poor dying body. Man's
life is as a shadow that passes away. In their highest earthly
exaltation, believers will recollect how mean, sinful, and vile they are
in themselves; thus they will be preserved from self-importance and
presumption. God's time to help his people is, when they are sinking,
and all other helps fail.

[Psalms 144:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 144:9</span></span>

Fresh favours call for fresh returns of thanks; we must praise God for
the mercies we hope for by his promise, as well as those we have
received by his providence. To be saved from the hurtful sword, or from
wasting sickness, without deliverance from the dominion of sin and the
wrath to come, is but a small advantage. The public prosperity David
desired for his people, is stated. It adds much to the comfort and
happiness of parents in this world, to see their children likely to do
well. To see them as plants, not as weeds, not as thorns; to see them as
plants growing, not withered and blasted; to see them likely to bring
forth fruit unto God in their day; to see them in their youth growing
strong in the Spirit. Plenty is to be desired, that we may be thankful
to God, generous to our friends, and charitable to the poor; otherwise,
what profit is it to have our garners full? Also, uninterrupted peace.
War brings abundance of mischiefs, whether it be to attack others or to
defend ourselves. And in proportion as we do not adhere to the worship
and service of God, we cease to be a happy people. The subjects of the
Saviour, the Son of David, share the blessings of his authority and
victories, and are happy because they have the Lord for their God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 145](psa145)

</div>
