<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa120)  [Next](psa122) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 121](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 121:0</span></span>

The safety of the godly.

[Psalms 121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 121:1</span></span>

We must not rely upon men and means, instruments and second causes.
Shall I depend upon the strength of the hills? upon princes and great
men? No; my confidence is in God only. Or, we must lift up our eyes
above the hills; we must look to God who makes all earthly things to us
what they are. We must see all our help in God; from him we must expect
it, in his own way and time. This psalm teaches us to comfort ourselves
in the Lord, when difficulties and dangers are greatest. It is almighty
wisdom that contrives, and almighty power that works the safety of those
that put themselves under God's protection. He is a wakeful, watchful
Keeper; he is never weary; he not only does not sleep, but he does not
so much as slumber. Under this shade they may sit with delight and
assurance. He is always near his people for their protection and
refreshment. The right hand is the working hand; let them but turn to
their duty, and they shall find God ready to give them success. He will
take care that his people shall not fall. Thou shalt not be hurt,
neither by the open assaults, nor by the secret attempts of thine
enemies. The Lord shall prevent the evil thou fearest, and sanctify,
remove, or lighten the evil thou feelest. He will preserve the soul,
that it be not defiled by sin, and disturbed by affliction; he will
preserve it from perishing eternally. He will keep thee in life and
death; going out to thy labour in the morning of thy days, and coming
home to thy rest when the evening of old age calls thee in. It is a
protection for life. The Spirit, who is their Preserver and Comforter,
shall abide with them for ever. Let us be found in our work, assured
that the blessings promised in this psalm are ours.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 122](psa122)

</div>
