<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa117)  [Next](psa119) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 118:0</span></span>

(v. 1-18) It is good to trust in the Lord.

([Psa 118:19-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)) The coming of Christ
in his kingdom.

[Psalms 118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 118:1</span></span>

The account the psalmist here gives of his troubles is very applicable
to Christ: many hated him without a cause; nay, the Lord himself
chastened him sorely, bruised him, and put him to grief, that by his
stripes we might be healed. God is sometimes the strength of his people,
when he is not their song; they have spiritual supports, though they
want spiritual delights. Whether the believer traces back his comfort to
the everlasting goodness and mercy of God, or whether he looks forward
to the blessing secured to him, he will find abundant cause for joy and
praise. Every answer to our prayers is an evidence that the Lord is on
our side; and then we need not fear what man can do unto us; we should
conscientiously do our duty to all, and trust in him alone to accept and
bless us. Let us seek to live to declare the works of God, and to
encourage others to serve him and trust in him. Such were the triumphs
of the Son of David, in the assurance that the good pleasure of the Lord
should prosper in his hand.

[Psalms 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 118:19</span></span>

Those who saw Christ's day at so great a distance, saw cause to praise
God for the prospect. The prophecy, [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022), [Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023), may refer to David's
preferment; but principally to Christ. 1. His humiliation; he is the
Stone which the builders refused: they would go on in their building
without him. This proved the ruin of those who thus made light of him.
Rejecters of Christ are rejected of God. 2. His exaltation; he is the
chief Cornerstone in the foundation. He is the chief Top-stone, in whom
the building is completed, who must, in all things, have the
pre-eminence. Christ's name is Wonderful; and the redemption he wrought
out is the most amazing of all God's wondrous works. We will rejoice and
be glad in the Lord's day; not only that such a day is appointed, but in
the occasion of it, Christ's becoming the Head. Sabbath days ought to be
rejoicing days, then they are to us as the days of heaven. Let this
Saviour be my Saviour, my Ruler. Let my soul prosper and be in health,
in that peace and righteousness which his government brings. Let me have
victory over the lusts that war against my soul; and let Divine grace
subdue my heart. The duty which the Lord has made, brings light with it,
true light. The duty this privilege calls for, is here set forth; the
sacrifices we are to offer to God in gratitude for redeeming love, are
ourselves; not to be slain upon the altar, but living sacrifices, to be
bound to the altar; spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise, in which
our hearts must be engaged. The psalmist praises God, and calls upon all
about him to give thanks to God for the glad tidings of great joy to all
people, that there is a Redeemer, even Christ the Lord. In him the
covenant of grace is made sure and everlasting.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 119](psa119)

</div>
