<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa115)  [Next](psa117) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 116](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 116:0</span></span>

([Psa 116:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)) The psalmist declares
his love to the Lord.

([Psa 116:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)) His desire to be
thankful.

[Psalms 116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 116:1</span></span>

We have many reasons for loving the Lord, but are most affected by his
loving-kindness when relieved out of deep distress. When a poor sinner
is awakened to a sense of his state, and fears that he must soon sink
under the just wrath of God, then he finds trouble and sorrow. But let
all such call upon the Lord to deliver their souls, and they will find
him gracious and true to his promise. Neither ignorance nor guilt will
hinder their salvation, when they put their trust in the Lord. Let us
all speak of God as we have found him; and have we ever found him
otherwise than just and good? It is of his mercies that we are not
consumed. Let those who labour and are heavy laden come to him, that
they may find rest to their souls; and if at all drawn from their rest,
let them haste to return, remembering how bountifully the Lord has dealt
with them. We should deem ourselves bound to walk as in his presence. It
is a great mercy to be kept from being swallowed up with over-much
sorrow. It is a great mercy for God to hold us by the right hand, so
that we are not overcome and overthrown by a temptation. But when we
enter the heavenly rest, deliverance from sin and sorrow will be
complete; we shall behold the glory of the Lord, and walk in his
presence with delight we cannot now conceive.

[Psalms 116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 116:10</span></span>

When troubled, we do best to hold our peace, for we are apt to speak
unadvisedly. Yet there may be true faith where there are workings of
unbelief; but then faith will prevail; and being humbled for our
distrust of God's word, we shall experience his faithfulness to it. What
can the pardoned sinner, or what can those who have been delivered from
trouble or distress, render to the Lord for his benefits? We cannot in
any way profit him. Our best is unworthy of his acceptance; yet we ought
to devote ourselves and all we have to his service. I will take the cup
of salvation; I will offer the drink-offerings appointed by the law, in
token of thankfulness to God, and rejoice in God's goodness to me. I
will receive the cup of affliction; that cup, that bitter cup, which is
sanctified to the saints, so that to them it is a cup of salvation; it
is a means of spiritual health. The cup of consolation; I will receive
the benefits God bestows upon me, as from his hand, and taste his love
in them, as the portion not only of mine inheritance in the other world,
but of my cup in this. Let others serve what masters they will, truly I
am thy servant. Two ways men came to be servants. By birth. Lord, I was
born in thy house; I am the son of thine handmaid, and therefore thine.
It is a great mercy to be children of godly parents. By redemption.
Lord, thou hast loosed my bonds, thou hast discharged me from them,
therefore I am thy servant. The bonds thou hast loosed shall tie me
faster unto thee. Doing good is sacrifice, with which God is well
pleased; and this must accompany giving thanks to his name. Why should
we offer that to the Lord which cost us nothing? The psalmist will pay
his vows now; he will not delay the payment: publicly, not to make a
boast, but to show he is not ashamed of God's service, and to invite
others to join him. Such are true saints of God, in whose lives and
deaths he will be glorified.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 117](psa117)

</div>
