<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa104)  [Next](psa106) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 105](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 105:0</span></span>

([Psa 105:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001)) A solemn call to praise
and serve the Lord.

(v. 8-23) His gracious dealings with Israel.

(v. 24-45) Their deliverance from Egypt, and their settlement in Canaan.

[Psalms 105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 105:1</span></span>

Our devotion is here stirred up, that we may stir up ourselves to praise
God. Seek his strength; that is, his grace; the strength of his Spirit
to work in us that which is good, which we cannot do but by strength
derived from him, for which he will be sought. Seek to have his favour
to eternity, therefore continue seeking it while living in this world;
for he will not only be found, but he will reward those that diligently
seek him.

[Psalms 105:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 105:8</span></span>

Let us remember the Redeemer's marvellous works, his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth. Though true Christians are few number, strangers
and pilgrims upon earth, yet a far better inheritance than Canaan is
made sure to them by the covenant of God; and if we have the anointing
of the Holy Spirit, none can do us any harm. Afflictions are among our
mercies. They prove our faith and love, they humble our pride, they wean
us from the world, and quicken our prayers. Bread is the staff which
supports life; when that staff is broken, the body fails and sinks to
the earth. The word of God is the staff of spiritual life, the food and
support of the soul: the sorest judgment is a famine of hearing the word
of the Lord. Such a famine was sore in all lands when Christ appeared in
the flesh; whose coming, and the blessed effect of it, are shadowed
forth in the history of Joseph. At the appointed time Christ was exalted
as Mediator; all the treasures of grace and salvation are at his
disposal, perishing sinners come to him, and are relieved by him.

[Psalms 105:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 105:24</span></span>

As the believer commonly thrives best in his soul when under the cross;
so the church also flourishes most in true holiness, and increases in
number, while under persecution. Yet instruments shall be raised up for
their deliverance, and plagues may be expected by persecutors. And see
the special care God took of his people in the wilderness. All the
benefits bestowed on Israel as a nation, were shadows of spiritual
blessings with which we are blessed in Christ Jesus. Having redeemed us
with his blood, restored our souls to holiness, and set us at liberty
from Satan's bondage, he guides and guards us all the way. He satisfies
our souls with the bread of heaven, and the water of life from the Rock
of salvation, and will bring us safely to heaven. He redeems his
servants from all iniquity, and purifies them unto himself, to be a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 106](psa106)

</div>
