<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 17:0</span></span>

([Rev 17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)) One of the angels who
had the vials, explains the meaning of the former vision of the
antichristian beast that was to reign 1260 years, and then to be
destroyed.

([Rev 17:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007)) And interprets the
mystery of the woman, and the beast that had seven heads and ten horns.

[Revelation 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 17:1</span></span>

Rome clearly appears to be meant in this chapter. Pagan Rome subdued and
ruled with military power, not by art and flatteries. She left the
nations in general to their ancient usages and worship. But it is well
known that by crafty and politic management, with all kinds of deceit of
unrighteousness, papal Rome has obtained and kept her rule over kings
and nations. Here were allurements of worldly honour and riches, pomp
and pride, suited to sensual and worldly minds. Prosperity, pomp, and
splendour, feed the pride and lusts of the human heart, but are no
security against the Divine vengeance. The golden cup represents the
allurements, and delusions, by which this mystical Babylon has obtained
and kept her influence, and seduced others to join her abominations. She
is named, from her infamous practices, a mother of harlots; training
them up to idolatry and all sorts of wickedness. She filled herself with
the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus. She intoxicated herself
with it; and it was so pleasant to her, that she never was satisfied. We
cannot but wonder at the oceans of Christian blood shed by men called
Christians; yet when we consider these prophecies, these awful deeds
testify to the truth of the gospel. And let all beware of a splendid,
gainful, or fashionable religion. Let us avoid the mysteries of
iniquity, and study diligently the great mystery of godliness, that we
may learn humility and gratitude from the example of Christ. The more we
seek to resemble him, the less we shall be liable to be deceived by
antichrist.

[Revelation 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 17:7</span></span>

The beast on which the woman sat was, and is not, and yet is. It was a
seat of idolatry and persecution, and is not; not in the ancient form,
which was pagan: yet it is; it is truly the seat of idolatry and
tyranny, though of another sort and form. It would deceive into stupid
and blind submission all the inhabitants of the earth within its
influence, except the remnant of the elect. This beast was seven heads,
seven mountains, the seven hills on which Rome stands; and seven kings,
seven sorts of government. Five were gone by when this prophecy was
written; one was then in being; the other was yet to come. This beast,
directed by the papacy, makes an eighth governor, and sets up idolatry
again. It had ten horns, which are said to be ten kings who had as yet
no kingdoms; they should not rise up till the Roman empire was broken;
but should for a time be very zealous in her interest. Christ must reign
till all enemies be put under his feet. The reason of the victory is,
that he is the King of kings, and Lord of lords. He has supreme dominion
and power over all things; all the powers of earth and hell are subject
to his control. His followers are called to this warfare, are fitted for
it, and will be faithful in it.

[Revelation 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 17:15</span></span>

God so ruled the hearts of these kings, by his power over them, and by
his providence, that they did those things, without intending it, which
he purposed and foretold. They shall see their folly, and how they have
been bewitched and enslaved by the harlot, and be made instruments in
her destruction. She was that great city which reigned over the kings of
the earth, when John had this vision; and every one knows Rome to be
that city. Believers will be received to the glory of the Lord, when
wicked men will be destroyed in a most awful manner; their joining
together in sin, will be turned to hatred and rage, and they will
eagerly assist in tormenting each other. But the Lord's portion is his
people; his counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure, to his
glory, and the happiness of all his servants.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018)

</div>
