<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 12:0</span></span>

([Rev 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)) A description of the
church of Christ and of Satan, under the figures of a woman and of a
great red dragon.

([Rev 12:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)) Michael and his angels
fight against the devil and his angels, who are defeated.

([Rev 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013), [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014)) The dragon persecutes the
church.

([Rev 12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014)) His vain endeavours to
destroy her, He renews his war against her seed.

[Revelation 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 12:1</span></span>

The church, under the emblem of a woman, the mother of believers, was
seen by the apostle in vision, in heaven. She was clothed with the sun,
justified, sanctified, and shining by union with Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness. The moon was under her feet; she was superior to the
reflected and feebler light of the revelation made by Moses. Having on
her head a crown of twelve stars; the doctrine of the gospel, preached
by the twelve apostles, is a crown of glory to all true believers. As in
pain to bring forth a holy family; desirous that the conviction of
sinners might end in their conversion. A dragon is a known emblem of
Satan, and his chief agents, or those who govern for him on earth, at
that time the pagan empire of Rome, the city built upon seven hills. As
having ten horns, divided into ten kingdoms. Having seven crowns,
representing seven forms of government. As drawing with his tail a third
part of the stars in heaven, and casting them down to the earth;
persecuting and seducing the ministers and teachers. As watchful to
crush the Christian religion; but in spite of the opposition of enemies,
the church brought forth a manly issue of true and faithful professors,
in whom Christ was truly formed anew; even the mystery of Christ, that
Son of God who should rule the nations, and in whose right his members
partake the same glory. This blessed offspring was protected of God.

[Revelation 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 12:7</span></span>

The attempts of the dragon proved unsuccessful against the church, and
fatal to his own interests. The seat of this war was in heaven; in the
church of Christ, the kingdom of heaven on earth. The parties were
Christ, the great Angel of the covenant, and his faithful followers; and
Satan and his instruments. The strength of the church is in having the
Lord Jesus for the Captain of their salvation. Pagan idolatry, which was
the worship of devils, was cast out of the empire by the spreading of
Christianity. The salvation and strength of the church, are only to be
ascribed to the King and Head of the church. The conquered enemy hates
the presence of God, yet he is willing to appear there, to accuse the
people of God. Let us take heed that we give him no cause to accuse us;
and that, when we have sinned, we go before the Lord, condemn ourselves,
and commit our cause to Christ as our Advocate. The servants of God
overcame Satan by the blood of the Lamb, as the cause. By the word of
their testimony: the powerful preaching of the gospel is mighty, through
God, to pull down strong holds. By their courage and patience in
sufferings: they loved not their lives so well but they could lay them
down in Christ's cause. These were the warriors and the weapons by which
Christianity overthrew the power of pagan idolatry; and if Christians
had continued to fight with these weapons, and such as these, their
victories would have been more numerous and glorious, and the effects
more lasting. The redeemed overcame by a simple reliance on the blood of
Christ, as the only ground of their hopes. In this we must be like them.
We must not blend any thing else with this.

[Revelation 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 12:12</span></span>

The church and all her friends might well be called to praise God for
deliverance from pagan persecution, though other troubles awaited her.
The wilderness is a desolate place, and full of serpents and scorpions,
uncomfortable and destitute of provisions; yet a place of safety, as
well as where one might be alone. But being thus retired could not
protect the woman. The flood of water is explained by many to mean the
invasions of barbarians, by which the western empire was overwhelmed;
for the heathen encouraged their attacks, in the hope of destroying
Christianity. But ungodly men, for their worldly interests, protected
the church amidst these tumults, and the overthrow of the empire did not
help the cause of idolatry. Or, this may be meant of a flood of error,
by which the church of God was in danger of being overwhelmed and
carried away. The devil, defeated in his designs upon the church, turns
his rage against persons and places. Being faithful to God and Christ,
in doctrine, worship, and practice, exposes to the rage of Satan; and
will do so till the last enemy shall be destroyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013)

</div>
