<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev014)  [Next](rev016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 15:0</span></span>

([Rev 15:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)) A song of praise is sung
by the church.

([Rev 15:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005)) Seven angels with the
seven plagues; and to them one of the living creatures gives seven
golden vials full of the wrath of God.

[Revelation 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 15:1</span></span>

Seven angels appeared in heaven; prepared to finish the destruction of
antichrist. As the measure of Babylon's sins was filled up, it finds the
full measure of Divine wrath. While believers stand in this world, in
times of trouble, as upon a sea of glass mingled with fire, they may
look forward to their final deliverance, while new mercies call forth
new hymns of praise. The more we know of God's wonderful works, the more
we shall praise his greatness as the Lord God Almighty, the Creator and
Ruler of all worlds; but his title of Emmanuel, the King of saints, will
make him dear to us. Who that considers the power of God's wrath, the
value of his favour, or the glory of his holiness, would refuse to fear
and honour him alone? His praise is above heaven and earth.

[Revelation 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 15:5</span></span>

In the judgments God executes upon antichrist and his followers, he
fulfils the prophecies and promises of his word. These angels are
prepared for their work, clothed with pure and white linen, their
breasts girded with golden girdles, representing the holiness, and
righteousness, and excellence of these dealings with men. They are
ministers of Divine justice, and do every thing in a pure and holy
manner. They were armed with the wrath of God against his enemies. Even
the meanest creature, when armed with the anger of God, will be too hard
for any man in the world. The angels received the vials from one of the
four living creatures, one of the ministers of the true church, as in
answer to the prayers of the ministers and people of God. Antichrist
could not be destroyed without a great shock to all the world, and even
the people of God would be in trouble and confusion while the great work
was doing. The greatest deliverances of the church are brought about by
awful and astonishing steps of Providence; and the happy state of the
true church will not begin till obstinate enemies shall be destroyed,
and lukewarm or formal Christians are purified. Then, whatever is
against Scripture being purged away, the whole church shall be
spiritual, and the whole being brought to purity, unity, and
spirituality, shall be firmly established.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 16](rev016)

</div>
