<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev002)  [Next](rev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 3:0</span></span>

([Rev 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)) Epistles to the church at
Sardis.

([Rev 3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)) At Philadelphia.

([Rev 3:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)) And Laodicea.

[Revelation 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 3:1</span></span>

The Lord Jesus is He that hath the Holy Spirit with all his powers,
graces, and operations. Hypocrisy, and lamentable decay in religion, are
sins charged upon Sardis, by One who knew that church well, and all her
works. Outward things appeared well to men, but there was only the form
of godliness, not the power; a name to live, not a principle of life.
There was great deadness in their souls, and in their services; numbers
were wholly hypocrites, others were in a disordered and lifeless state.
Our Lord called upon them to be watchful against their enemies, and to
be active and earnest in their duties; and to endeavour, in dependence
on the grace of the Holy Spirit, to revive and strengthen the faith and
spiritual affections of those yet alive to God, though in a declining
state. Whenever we are off our watch, we lose ground. Thy works are
hollow and empty; prayers are not filled up with holy desires,
alms-deeds not filled up with true charity, sabbaths not filled up with
suitable devotion of soul to God. There are not inward affections
suitable to outward acts and expressions; when the spirit is wanting,
the form cannot long remain. In seeking a revival in our own souls, or
the souls of others, it is needful to compare what we profess with the
manner in which we go on, that we may be humbled and quickened to hold
fast that which remains. Christ enforces his counsel with a dreadful
threatening if it should be despised. Yet our blessed Lord does not
leave this sinful people without some encouragement. He makes honourable
mention of the faithful remnant in Sardis, he makes a gracious promise
to them. He that overcometh shall be clothed in white raiment; the
purity of grace shall be rewarded with the perfect purity of glory.
Christ has his book of life, a register of all who shall inherit eternal
life; the book of remembrance of all who live to God, and keep up the
life and power of godliness in evil times. Christ will bring forward
this book of life, and show the names of the faithful, before God, and
all the angels, at the great day.

[Revelation 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 3:7</span></span>

The same Lord Jesus has the key of government and authority in and over
the church. He opens a door of opportunity to his churches; he opens a
door of utterance to his ministers; he opens a door of entrance, opens
the heart. He shuts the door of heaven against the foolish, who sleep
away their day of grace; and against the workers of iniquity, how vain
and confident soever they may be. The church in Philadelphia is
commended; yet with a gentle reproof. Although Christ accepts a little
strength, yet believers must not rest satisfied in a little, but strive
to grow in grace, to be strong in faith, giving glory to God. Christ can
discover this his favour to his people, so that their enemies shall be
forced to acknowledge it. This, by the grace of Christ, will soften
their enemies, and make them desire to be admitted into communion with
his people. Christ promises preserving grace in the most trying times,
as the reward of past faithfulness; To him that hath shall be given.
Those who keep the gospel in a time of peace, shall be kept by Christ in
an hour of temptation; and the same Divine grace that has made them
fruitful in times of peace, will make them faithful in times of
persecution. Christ promises a glorious reward to the victorious
believer. He shall be a monumental pillar in the temple of God; a
monument of the free and powerful grace of God; a monument that shall
never be defaced or removed. On this pillar shall be written the new
name of Christ; by this will appear, under whom the believer fought the
good fight, and came off victorious.

[Revelation 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 3:14</span></span>

Laodicea was the last and worst of the seven churches of Asia. Here our
Lord Jesus styles himself, "The Amen;" one steady and unchangeable in
all his purposes and promises. If religion is worth anything, it is
worth every thing. Christ expects men should be in earnest. How many
professors of gospel doctrine are neither hot nor cold; except as they
are indifferent in needful matters, and hot and fiery in disputes about
things of lesser moment! A severe punishment is threatened. They would
give a false opinion of Christianity, as if it were an unholy religion;
while others would conclude it could afford no real satisfaction,
otherwise its professors would not have been heartless in it, or so
ready to seek pleasure or happiness from the world. One cause of this
indifference and inconsistency in religion is, self-conceit and
self-delusion; "Because thou sayest." What a difference between their
thoughts of themselves, and the thoughts Christ had of them! How careful
should we be not to cheat our owns souls! There are many in hell, who
once thought themselves far in the way to heaven. Let us beg of God that
we may not be left to flatter and deceive ourselves. Professors grow
proud, as they become carnal and formal. Their state was wretched in
itself. They were poor; really poor, when they said and thought they
were rich. They could not see their state, nor their way, nor their
danger, yet they thought they saw it. They had not the garment of
justification, nor sanctification: they were exposed to sin and shame;
their rags that would defile them. They were naked, without house or
harbour, for they were without God, in whom alone the soul of man can
find rest and safety. Good counsel was given by Christ to this sinful
people. Happy those who take his counsel, for all others must perish in
their sins. Christ lets them know where they might have true riches, and
how they might have them. Some things must be parted with, but nothing
valuable; and it is only to make room for receiving true riches. Part
with sin and self-confidence, that you may be filled with his hidden
treasure. They must receive from Christ the white raiment he purchased
and provided for them; his own imputed righteousness for justification,
and the garments of holiness and sanctification. Let them give
themselves up to his word and Spirit, and their eyes shall be opened to
see their way and their end. Let us examine ourselves by the rule of his
word, and pray earnestly for the teaching of his Holy Spirit, to take
away our pride, prejudices, and worldly lusts. Sinners ought to take the
rebukes of God's word and rod, as tokens of his love to their souls.
Christ stood without; knocking, by the dealings of his providence, the
warnings and teaching of his word, and the influences of his Spirit.
Christ still graciously, by his word and Spirit, comes to the door of
the hearts of sinners. Those who open to him shall enjoy his presence.
If what he finds would make but a poor feast, what he brings will supply
a rich one. He will give fresh supplies of graces and comforts. In the
conclusion is a promise to the overcoming believer. Christ himself had
temptations and conflicts; he overcame them all, and was more than a
conqueror. Those made like to Christ in his trials, shall be made like
to him in glory. All is closed with the general demand of attention. And
these counsels, while suited to the churches to which they were
addressed, are deeply interesting to all men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 4](rev004)

</div>
