<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 6:0</span></span>

([Rom 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001), [Rom
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)) Believers must die to sin, and
live to God.

([Rom 6:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)) This is urged by their
Christian baptism and union with Christ.

([Rom 6:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)) They are made alive to
God.

([Rom 6:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)) And are freed from the
dominion of sin.

([Rom 6:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)) The end of sin is
death, and of holiness everlasting life.

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

The apostle is very full in pressing the necessity of holiness. He does
not explain away the free grace of the gospel, but he shows that
connexion between justification and holiness are inseparable. Let the
thought be abhorred, of continuing in sin that grace may abound. True
believers are dead to sin, therefore they ought not to follow it. No man
can at the same time be both dead and alive. He is a fool who, desiring
to be dead unto sin, thinks he may live in it.

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

Baptism teaches the necessity of dying to sin, and being as it were
buried from all ungodly and unholy pursuits, and of rising to walk with
God in newness of life. Unholy professors may have had the outward sign
of a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, but they never
passed from the family of Satan to that of God. The corrupt nature,
called the old man, because derived from our first father Adam, is
crucified with Christ, in every true believer, by the grace derived from
the cross. It is weakened and in a dying state, though it yet struggles
for life, and even for victory. But the whole body of sin, whatever is
not according to the holy law of God, must be done away, so that the
believer may no more be the slave of sin, but live to God, and find
happiness in his service.

[Romans 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 6:11</span></span>

The strongest motives against sin, and to enforce holiness, are here
stated. Being made free from the reign of sin, alive unto God, and
having the prospect of eternal life, it becomes believers to be greatly
concerned to advance thereto. But, as unholy lusts are not quite rooted
out in this life, it must be the care of the Christian to resist their
motions, earnestly striving, that, through Divine grace, they may not
prevail in this mortal state. Let the thought that this state will soon
be at an end, encourage the true Christian, as to the motions of lusts,
which so often perplex and distress him. Let us present all our powers
to God, as weapons or tools ready for the warfare, and work of
righteousness, in his service. There is strength in the covenant of
grace for us. Sin shall not have dominion. God's promises to us are more
powerful and effectual for mortifying sin, than our promises to God. Sin
may struggle in a real believer, and create him a great deal of trouble,
but it shall not have dominion; it may vex him, but it shall not rule
over him. Shall any take occasion from this encouraging doctrine to
allow themselves in the practice of any sin? Far be such abominable
thoughts, so contrary to the perfections of God, and the design of his
gospel, so opposed to being under grace. What can be a stronger motive
against sin than the love of Christ? Shall we sin against so much
goodness, and such love?

[Romans 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 6:16</span></span>

Every man is the servant of the master to whose commands he yields
himself; whether it be the sinful dispositions of his heart, in actions
which lead to death, or the new and spiritual obedience implanted by
regeneration. The apostle rejoiced now they obeyed from the heart the
gospel, into which they were delivered as into a mould. As the same
metal becomes a new vessel, when melted and recast in another mould, so
the believer has become a new creature. And there is great difference in
the liberty of mind and spirit, so opposite to the state of slavery,
which the true Christian has in the service of his rightful Lord, whom
he is enabled to consider as his Father, and himself as his son and
heir, by the adoption of grace. The dominion of sin consists in being
willingly slaves thereto, not in being harassed by it as a hated power,
struggling for victory. Those who now are the servants of God, once were
the slaves of sin.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

The pleasure and profit of sin do not deserve to be called fruit.
Sinners are but ploughing iniquity, sowing vanity, and reaping the same.
Shame came into the world with sin, and is still the certain effect of
it. The end of sin is death. Though the way may seem pleasant and
inviting, yet it will be bitterness in the latter end. From this
condemnation the believer is set at liberty, when made free from sin. If
the fruit is unto holiness, if there is an active principle of true and
growing grace, the end will be everlasting life; a very happy end!
Though the way is up-hill, though it is narrow, thorny, and beset, yet
everlasting life at the end of it is sure. The gift of God is eternal
life. And this gift is through Jesus Christ our Lord. Christ purchased
it, prepared it, prepares us for it, preserves us to it; he is the All
in all in our salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
