<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1008)  [Next](sa1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 9:0</span></span>

([Sa1 9:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001)) Saul is brought to
Samuel.

([Sa1 9:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011)) Samuel told concerning
Saul.

([Sa1 9:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018)) Samuel's treatment of
Saul.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 9:1</span></span>

Saul readily went to seek his father's asses. His obedience to his
father was praise-worthy. His servant proposed, that since they were now
at Ramah, they should call on Samuel, and take his advice. Wherever we
are, we should use our opportunities of acquainting ourselves with those
who are wise and good. Many will consult a man of God, if he comes in
their way, that would not go a step out of their way to get wisdom. We
sensibly feel worldly losses, and bestow much pains to make them up; but
how little do we attempt, and how soon are we weary, in seeking the
salvation of our souls! If ministers could tell men how to secure their
property, or to get wealth, they would be more consulted and honoured
than they now are, though employed in teaching them how to escape
eternal misery, and to obtain eternal life. Most people would rather be
told their fortune than their duty. Samuel needed not their money, nor
would he have denied his advice, if they had not brought it; but they
gave it to him as a token of respect, and of the value they put upon his
office, and according to the general usage of those times, always to
bring a present to those in authority.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 9:11</span></span>

The very maid-servants of the city could direct to the prophet. They had
heard of the sacrifice, and could tell of the necessity for Samuel's
presence. It is no small benefit to live in religious and holy places.
And we should always be ready to help those who are seeking after God's
prophets. Though God had, in displeasure, granted Israel's request for a
king, yet he sends them a man to be captain over them, to save them out
of the hand of the Philistines. He does it, listening graciously to
their cry.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 9:18</span></span>

Samuel, that good prophet, was so far from envying Saul, or bearing him
any ill-will, that he was the first and most forward to do him honour.
Both that evening and early the next morning, Samuel communed with Saul
upon the flat roof of the house. We may suppose Samuel now convinced
Saul that he was the person God had fixed upon for the government, and
of his own willingness to resign. How different are the purposes of the
Lord for us, from our intentions for ourselves! Perhaps Saul was the
only one who ever went out to seek asses, and literally found a kingdom;
but many have set out and moved their dwellings to seek riches and
pleasures, who have been guided to places where they found salvation for
their souls. Thus they have met with those who addressed them as if
aware of the secrets of their lives and hearts, and have been led
seriously to regard the word of the Lord. If this has been our case,
though our worldly plans have not prospered, let us not care for that;
the Lord has given us, or has prepared us for, what is far better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](sa1010)

</div>
