<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1027)  [Next](sa1029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 28:0</span></span>

([Sa1 28:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001)) Achish puts confidence
in David, Saul's fear.

([Sa1 28:7-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)) Saul consults a witch
at Endor.

([Sa1 28:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020)) Saul's terror.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 28:1</span></span>

David could not refuse Achish without danger. If he promised assistance,
and then stood neuter, or went over to the Israelites, he would behave
with ingratitude and treachery. If he fought against Israel, he would
sin greatly. It seemed impossible that he should get out of this
difficulty with a clear conscience; but his evasive answer, intended to
gain time, was not consistent with the character of an Israelite indeed.
Troubles are terrors to the children of disobedience. In his distress,
Saul inquired of the Lord. He did not seek in faith, but with a double,
unstable mind. Saul had put the law in force against those that had
familiar spirits, [Exo 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018). Many
seem zealous against, sin, when they are any way hurt by it, who have no
concern for the glory of God, nor any dislike of sin as sin. Many seem
enemies to sin in others, while they indulge it in themselves. Saul will
drive the devil out of his kingdom, yet harbours him in his heart by
envy and malice. How foolish to consult those whom, according to God's
law, he had endeavoured to root out!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 28:7</span></span>

When we go from the plain path of duty, every thing draws us further
aside, and increases our perplexity and temptation. Saul desires the
woman to bring one from the dead, with whom he wished to speak; this was
expressly forbidden, [Deu 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011). All
real or pretended witchcraft or conjuration, is a malicious or an
ignorant attempt to gain knowledge or help from some creature, when it
cannot be had from the Lord in the path of duty. While Samuel was
living, we never read of Saul's going to advise with him in any
difficulties; it had been well for him if he had. But now he is dead,
"Bring me up Samuel." Many who despise and persecute God's saints and
ministers when living, would be glad to have them again, when they are
gone. The whole shows that it was no human fraud or trick. Though the
woman could not cause Samuel's being sent, yet Saul's inquiry might be
the occasion of it. The woman's surprise and terror proved that it was
an unusual and unexpected appearance. Saul had despised Samuel's solemn
warnings in his lifetime, yet now that he hoped, as in defiance of God,
to obtain some counsel and encouragement from him, might not God permit
the soul of his departed prophet to appear to Saul, to confirm his
former sentence, and denounce his doom? The expression, "Thou and thy
sons shall be with me," means no more than that they shall be in the
eternal world. There appears much solemnity in God's permitting the soul
of a departed prophet to come as a witness from heaven, to confirm the
word he had spoken on earth.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 28:20</span></span>

Those that expect any good counsel or comfort, otherwise than from God,
and in the way of his institutions, will be as wretchedly disappointed
as Saul. Though terrified even to despair, he was not humbled. He
confessed not his sins, offered no sacrifices, and presented no
supplications. He does not seem to have cared about his sons or his
people, or to have attempted any escape; but in sullen despair he rushed
upon his doom. God sets up a few such beacons, to warn men not to stifle
convictions, or despise his word. But while one repenting thought
remains, let no sinner suppose himself in this case. Let him humble
himself before God, determined to live and die beseeching his favour,
and he will succeed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](sa1029)

</div>
