<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2022)  [Next](sa2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 23:0</span></span>

([Sa2 23:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)) David's last words.

(v. 8-39) David's mighty men.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 23:1</span></span>

These words of David are very worthy of regard. Let those who have had
long experience of God's goodness, and the pleasantness of heavenly
wisdom, when they come to finish their course, bear their testimony to
the truth of the promise. David avows his Divine inspiration, that the
Spirit of God spake by him. He, and other holy men, spake and wrote as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. In many things he had his own neglect
and wrong conduct to blame. But David comforted himself that the Lord
had made with him an everlasting covenant. By this he principally
intended the covenant of mercy and peace, which the Lord made with him
as a sinner, who believed in the promised Saviour, who embraced the
promised blessing, who yielded up himself to the Lord, to be his
redeemed servant. Believers shall for ever enjoy covenant blessings; and
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shall be for ever glorified in
their salvation. Thus pardon, righteousness, grace, and eternal life,
are secured as the gift of God through Jesus Christ. There is an
infinite fulness of grace and all blessings treasured up in Christ, for
those who seek his salvation. This covenant was all David's salvation,
he so well knew the holy law of God and the extent of his own
sinfulness, that he perceived what was needful for his own case in this
salvation. It was therefore all his desire. In comparison, all earthly
objects lost their attractions; he was willing to give them up, or to
die and leave them, that he might enjoy full happiness, [Psa
73:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024). Still the power of evil, and
the weakness of his faith, hope, and love, were his grief and burden.
Doubtless he would have allowed that his own slackness and want of care
were the cause; but the hope that he should soon be made perfect in
glory, encouraged him in his dying moments.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 23:8</span></span>

David once earnestly longed for the water at the well of Bethlehem. It
seems to be an instance of weakness. He was thirsty; with the water of
that well he had often refreshed himself when a youth, and it was
without due thought that he desired it. Were his valiant men so forward
to expose themselves, upon the least hint of their prince's mind, and so
eager to please him, and shall not we long to approve ourselves to our
Lord Jesus, by ready compliance with his will, as shown us by his word,
Spirit, and providence? But David poured out the water as a
drink-offering to the Lord. Thus he would cross his own foolish fancy,
and punish himself for indulging it, and show that he had sober thoughts
to correct his rash ones, and knew how to deny himself. Did David look
upon that water as very precious which was got at the hazard of these
men's blood, and shall not we much more value those benefits for
purchasing which our blessed Saviour shed his blood? Let all beware of
neglecting so great salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa2024)

</div>
