<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2005)  [Next](sa2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 6:0</span></span>

([Sa2 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)) The ark removed from
Kirjath-jearim.

([Sa2 6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)) Uzzah smitten for
touching the ark, Obed-edom blessed.

([Sa2 6:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012)) David brings the ark to
Zion.

([Sa2 6:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020)) Michal's ill conduct.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 6:1</span></span>

God is present with the souls of his people, when they want the outward
tokens of his presence; but now David is settled in the throne, the
honour of the ark begins to revive. Let us learn hence, to think and to
speak highly of God; and to think and speak honourably of holy
ordinances, which are to us as the ark was unto Israel, the tokens of
God's presence, [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). Christ is
our Ark; in and by him God manifests his favour, and accepts our prayers
and praises. The ark especially typified Christ and his mediation, in
which the name of Jehovah and all his glories are displayed. The priests
should have carried the ark upon their shoulders. Philistines may carry
the ark in a cart without suffering for it; but if Israelites do so, it
is at their peril, because this was not what God appointed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 6:6</span></span>

Uzzah was struck dead for touching the ark. God saw presumption and
irreverence in Uzzah's heart. Familiarity, even with that which is most
awful, is apt to breed contempt. If it were so great a crime for one to
lay hold on the ark of the covenant who had no right to do so, what is
it for those to lay claim to the privileges of the covenant that come
not up to the terms of it? Obed-edom opened his doors without fear,
knowing the ark was a savour of death unto death to those only who
treated it wrong. The same hand that punished Uzzah's proud presumption,
rewarded Obed-edom's humble boldness. Let none think the worse of the
gospel for the judgments on those that reject it, but consider the
blessings it brings to all who receive it. Let masters of families be
encouraged to keep up religion in their families. It is good to live in
a family that entertains the ark, for all about it will fare the better.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 6:12</span></span>

It became evident, that happy was the man who had the ark near him.
Christ is indeed a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence, to those
that are disobedient; but to those that believe, he is a Corner-stone,
elect, precious, [Pe1 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006). Let us be
religious. Is the ark a blessing to others' houses? We may have it, and
the blessing of it, without fetching it away from our neighbours. David,
at first setting out, offered sacrifices to God. We are likely to speed
in our enterprises, when we begin with God, and give diligence to seek
peace with him. And we are so unworthy, and our services are so defiled,
that all our joy in God must be connected with repentance and faith in
the Redeemer's atoning blood. David attended with high expressions of
joy. We ought to serve God with our whole body and soul, and with every
endowment and power we possess. On this occasion David laid aside his
royal robes, and put on a plain linen dress. David prayed with and for
the people, and as a prophet, solemnly blessed them in the name of the
Lord.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 6:20</span></span>

David returned to bless his household, to pray with them, and for them,
and to offer up family thanksgiving for this national mercy. It is
angels' work to worship God, surely that cannot lower the greatest of
men. But even the palaces of princes are not free from family troubles.
Exercises of religion appear mean in the eyes of those who have little
or no religion themselves. If we can approve ourselves to God in what we
do in religion, and do it as before the Lord, we need not heed reproach.
Piety will have its praise: let us not be indifferent in it, nor afraid
or ashamed to own it. David was contented to justify himself, and he did
not further reprove or blame Michal's insolence; but God punished her.
Those that honour God, he will honour; but those that despise him, and
his servants and service, shall be lightly esteemed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 7](sa2007)

</div>
