<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol004)  [Next](sol006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 5:0</span></span>

([Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)) Christ's answer.

([Sol 5:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)) The disappointments of
the church from her own folly.

([Sol 5:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009)) The excellences of
Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 5:1</span></span>

See how ready Christ is to accept the invitations of his people. What
little good there is in us would be lost, if he did not preserve it to
himself. He also invites his beloved people to eat and drink abundantly.
The ordinances in which they honour him, are means of grace.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 5:2</span></span>

Churches and believers, by carelessness and security, provoke Christ to
withdraw. We ought to notice our spiritual slumbers and distempers.
Christ knocks to awaken us, knocks by his word and Spirit, knocks by
afflictions and by our consciences; thus, [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). When we are unmindful of Christ,
still he thinks of us. Christ's love to us should engage ours to him,
even in the most self-denying instances; and we only can be gainers by
it. Careless souls put slights on Jesus Christ. Another could not be
sent to open the door. Christ calls to us, but we have no mind, or
pretend we have no strength, or we have no time, and think we may be
excused. Making excuses is making light of Christ. Those put contempt
upon Christ, who cannot find in their hearts to bear a cold blast, or to
leave a warm bed for him. See the powerful influences of Divine grace.
He put in his hand to unbolt the door, as one weary of waiting. This
betokens a work of the Spirit upon the soul. The believer's rising above
self-indulgence, seeking by prayer for the consolations of Christ, and
to remove every hinderance to communion with him; these actings of the
soul are represented by the hands dropping sweet-smelling myrrh upon the
handles of the locks. But the Beloved was gone! By absenting himself,
Christ will teach his people to value his gracious visits more highly.
Observe, the soul still calls Christ her Beloved. Every desertion is not
despair. Lord, I believe, though I must say, Lord, help my unbelief. His
words melted me, yet, wretch that I was, I made excuses. The smothering
and stifling of convictions will be very bitter to think of, when God
opens our eyes. The soul went in pursuit of him; not only prayed, but
used means, sought him in the ways wherein he used to be found. The
watchmen wounded me. Some refer it to those who misapply the word to
awakened consciences. The charge to the daughters of Jerusalem, seems to
mean the distressed believer's desire of the prayers of the feeblest
Christian. Awakened souls are more sensible of Christ's withdrawings
than of any other trouble.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 5:9</span></span>

Even those who have little acquaintance with Christ, cannot but see
amiable beauty in others who bear his image. There are hopes of those
who begin to inquire concerning Christ and his perfections. Christians,
who are well acquainted with Christ themselves, should do all they can
to make others know something of him. Divine glory makes him truly
lovely in the eyes of all who are enlightened to discern spiritual
things. He is white in the spotless innocence of his life, ruddy in the
bleeding sufferings he went through at his death. This description of
the person of the Beloved, would form, in the figurative language of
those times, a portrait of beauty of person and of grace of manners; but
the aptness of some of the allusions may not appear to us. He shall come
to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all that believe.
May his love constrain us to live to his glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](sol006)

</div>
