<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol005)  [Next](sol007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 6:0</span></span>

([Sol 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)) Inquiry where Christ must
be sought.

([Sol 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002), [Sol
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003)) Where Christ may be found.

([Sol 6:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004)) Christ's commendations
of the church.

([Sol 6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)) The work of grace in
the believer.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 6:1</span></span>

Those made acquainted with the excellences of Christ, and the comfort of
an interest in him, desire to know where they may meet him. Those who
would find Christ, must seek him early and diligently.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 6:2</span></span>

Christ's church is a garden, enclosed, and separated from the world; he
takes care of it, delights in it, and visits it. Those who would find
Christ, must attend him in his ordinances, the word, sacraments, and
prayer. When Christ comes to his church, it is to entertain his friends.
And to take believers to himself: he picks the lilies one by one; and at
the great day he will send forth his angels to gather all his lilies,
that he may be for ever admired in them. The death of a believer is not
more than the owner of a garden plucking a favourite flower; and He will
preserve it from withering, yea, cause it to flourish for ever, with
increasing beauty. If our own hearts can witness for us that we are
Christ's, question not his being ours, for the covenant never breaks on
his side. It is the comfort of the church, that he feeds among the
lilies, that he takes delight in his people.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 6:4</span></span>

All the real excellence and holiness on earth centre in the church.
Christ goes forth subduing his enemies, while his followers gain
victories over the world, the flesh, and the devil. He shows the
tenderness of a Redeemer, the delight he takes in his redeemed people,
and the workings of his own grace in them. True believers alone can
possess the beauty of holiness. And when their real character is known,
it will be commended. Both the church and believers, at their first
conversion, look forth as the morning, their light being small, but
increasing. As to their sanctification, they are fair as the moon,
deriving all their light, grace, and holiness from Christ; and as to
justification, clear as the sun, clothed with Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, and fighting the good fight of faith, under the banners
of Christ, against all spiritual enemies.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 6:11</span></span>

In retirement and in meditation the Christian character is formed and
perfected. But not in the retirement of the idle, the self-indulgent, or
the trifler. When the Christian is released from the discharge of his
duties in life, the world has no attractions for him. His prayer is,
that all things belonging to the Spirit may live and grow within him,
and around him. Such are the interesting cares and employments of him
whom the world wrongly deems unhappy, and lost to his true interests. In
humility and self-abasement, the humble Christian would turn away from
the sight of all; but the Lord delights to honour him. Chiefly, however,
may the reference be to the ministering angels who shall be sent for the
soul of the Christian. Their approach may startle, but the departing
soul shall find the Lord its strength and its portion for ever. The
church is called the Shulamite: the word signifies perfection and peace;
not in herself, but in Christ, in whom she is complete, through his
righteousness; and has peace, which he made for her through his blood,
and gives unto her by his Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](sol007)

</div>
