<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol002)  [Next](sol004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 3:0</span></span>

([Sol 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)) The trials of the church
by the withdrawing of Christ.

([Sol 3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006)) The excellences of the
church, The care of Christ for her.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 3:1</span></span>

It was hard to the Old Testament church to find Christ in the ceremonial
law; the watchmen of that church gave little assistance to those who
sought after him. The night is a time of coldness, darkness, and
drowsiness, and of dim apprehensions concerning spiritual things. At
first, when uneasy, some feeble efforts are made to obtain the comfort
of communion with Christ. This proves in vain; the believer is then
roused to increased diligence. The streets and broad-ways seem to imply
the means of grace in which the Lord is to be sought. Application is
made to those who watch for men's souls. Immediate satisfaction is not
found. We must not rest in any means, but by faith apply directly to
Christ. The holding of Christ, and not letting him go, denotes earnest
cleaving to him. What prevails is a humble, ardent suing by prayer, with
a lively exercise of faith on his promises. So long as the faith of
believers keeps hold of Christ, he will not be offended at their earnest
asking, yea, he is well pleased with it. The believer desires to make
others acquainted with his Saviour. Wherever we find Christ, we must
take him home with us to our houses, especially to our hearts; and we
should call upon ourselves and each other, to beware of grieving our
holy Comforter, and provoking the departure of the Beloved.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 3:6</span></span>

A wilderness is an emblem of the world; the believer comes out of it
when he is delivered from the love of its sinful pleasures and pursuits,
and refuses to comply with its customs and fashions, to seek happiness
in communion with the Saviour. A poor soul shall come up, at last, under
the conduct of the Comforter; like a cloud of incense ascending from the
altar, or the smoke of the burnt-offerings. This signifies pious and
devout affections, and the mounting of the soul heaven-ward. The
believer is filled with the graces of God's Spirit; his devotions now
are very lively. These graces and comforts are from the heavenly Canaan.
He, who is the Peace of his people, the King of the heavenly Zion, has
provided for the safe conveyance of his redeemed through the wilderness
of this world. The bed, or palanquin, was contrived for rest and easy
conveyance, but its beauty and magnificence showed the quality of its
owner. The church is well guarded; more are with her than are against
her: believers, when they repose in Christ, and with him, though they
have their fears in the night, are yet safe. The chariot here denotes
the covenant of redemption, the way of our salvation. This is that work
of Christ, which makes him loved and admired in the eyes of believers.
It is framed and contrived, both for the glory of Christ, and for the
comfort of believers; it is well ordered in all things and sure. The
blood of the covenant, that rich purple, is the cover of this chariot,
by which believers are sheltered from the wind and storms of Divine
wrath, and the troubles of this world; but the midst of it is that love
of Christ which passes knowledge, this is for believers to repose upon.
Christ, in his gospel, manifests himself. Take special notice of his
crown. Applying this to Christ, it speaks the honour put upon him, and
his power and dominion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](sol004)

</div>
