<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1004)  [Next](th2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 5:0</span></span>

([Th1 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)) The apostle exhorts to
be always ready for the coming of Christ to judgment, which will be with
suddenness and surprise.

([Th1 5:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012)) He directs to several
particular duties.

([Th1 5:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)) And concludes with
prayer, greetings, and a blessing.

[1 Thessalonians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 5:1</span></span>

It is needless or useless to ask about the particular time of Christ's
coming. Christ did not reveal this to the apostles. There are times and
seasons for us to work in, and these are our duty and interest to know
and observe; but as to the time when we must give up our account, we
know it not, nor is it needful that we should. The coming of Christ will
be a great surprise to men. Our Lord himself said so. As the hour of
death is the same to each person that the judgment will be to mankind in
general, so the same remarks answer for both. Christ's coming will be
terrible to the ungodly. Their destruction will overtake them while they
dream of happiness, and please themselves with vain amusements. There
will be no means to escape the terror or the punishment of that day.
This day will be a happy day to the righteous. They are not in darkness;
they are the children of the light. It is the happy condition of all
true Christians. But how many are speaking peace and safety to
themselves, over whose heads utter destruction is hovering! Let us
endeavour to awaken ourselves and each other, and guard against our
spiritual enemies.

[1 Thessalonians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 5:6</span></span>

Most of mankind do not consider the things of another world at all,
because they are asleep; or they do not consider them aright, because
they sleep and dream. Our moderation as to all earthly things should be
known to all men. Shall Christians, who have the light of the blessed
gospel shining in their faces, be careless about their souls, and
unmindful of another world? We need the spiritual armour, or the three
Christian graces, faith, love, and hope. Faith; if we believe that the
eye of God is always upon us, that there is another world to prepare
for, we shall see reason to watch and be sober. True and fervent love to
God, and the things of God, will keep us watchful and sober. If we have
hope of salvation, let us take heed of any thing that would shake our
trust in the Lord. We have ground on which to build unshaken hope, when
we consider, that salvation is by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for
us, to atone for our sins and to ransom our souls. We should join in
prayer and praise one with another. We should set a good example one
before another, and this is the best means to answer the end of society.
Thus we shall learn how to live to Him, with whom we hope to live for
ever.

[1 Thessalonians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 5:12</span></span>

The ministers of the gospel are described by the work of their office,
which is to serve and honour the Lord. It is their duty not only to give
good counsel, but also to warn the flock of dangers, and reprove for
whatever may be amiss. The people should honour and love their
ministers, because their business is the welfare of men's souls. And the
people should be at peace among themselves, doing all they can to guard
against any differences. But love of peace must not make us wink at sin.
The fearful and sorrowful spirits, should be encouraged, and a kind word
may do much good. We must bear and forbear. We must be long-suffering,
and keep down anger, and this to all men. Whatever man do to us, we must
do good to others.

[1 Thessalonians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th1 5:16</span></span>

We are to rejoice in creature-comforts, as if we rejoiced not, and must
not expect to live many years, and rejoice in them all; but if we do
rejoice in God, we may do that evermore. A truly religious life is a
life of constant joy. And we should rejoice more, if we prayed more.
Prayer will help forward all lawful business, and every good work. If we
pray without ceasing, we shall not want matter for thanksgiving in every
thing. We shall see cause to give thanks for sparing and preventing, for
common and uncommon, past and present, temporal and spiritual mercies.
Not only for prosperous and pleasing, but also for afflicting
providences, for chastisements and corrections; for God designs all for
our good, though we at present see not how they tend to it. Quench not
the Spirit. Christians are said to be baptized with the Holy Ghost and
with fire. He worketh as fire, by enlightening, enlivening, and
purifying the souls of men. As fire is put out by taking away fuel, and
as it is quenched by pouring water, or putting a great deal of earth
upon it; so we must be careful not to quench the Holy Spirit, by
indulging carnal lusts and affections, minding only earthly things.
Believers often hinder their growth in grace, by not giving themselves
up to the spiritual affections raised in their hearts by the Holy
Spirit. By prophesyings, here understand the preaching of the word, the
interpreting and applying the Scriptures. We must not despise preaching,
though it is plain, and we are told no more than what we knew before. We
must search the Scriptures. And proving all things must be to hold fast
that which is good. We should abstain from sin, and whatever looks like
sin, leads to it, and borders upon it. He who is not shy of the
appearances of sin, who shuns not the occasions of it, and who avoids
not the temptations and approaches to it, will not long keep from doing
sin.

[1 Thessalonians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">th1 5:23</span></span>

The apostle prays that they might be sanctified more perfectly, for the
best are sanctified but in part while in this world; therefore we should
pray for, and press toward, complete holiness. And as we must fall, if
God did not carry on his good work in the soul, we should pray to God to
perfect his work, till we are presented faultless before the throne of
his glory. We should pray for one another; and brethren should thus
express brotherly love. This epistle was to be read to all the brethren.
Not only are the common people allowed to read the Scriptures, but it is
their duty, and what they should be persuaded to do. The word of God
should not be kept in an unknown tongue, but transplanted, that as all
men are concerned to know the Scriptures, so they all may be able to
read them. The Scriptures should be read in all public congregations,
for the benefit of the unlearned especially. We need no more to make us
happy, than to know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is an
ever-flowing and an over-flowing fountain of grace to supply all our
wants.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Introduction](th2000)

</div>
