<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2000)  [Next](th2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

([Th2 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)) The apostle blesses God
for the growing state of the love and patience of the Thessalonians.

([Th2 1:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)) And encourages them to
persevere under all their sufferings for Christ, considering his coming
at the great day of account.

[2 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 1:1</span></span>

Where there is the truth of grace, there will be an increase of it. The
path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and more
unto the perfect day. And where there is the increase of grace, God must
have all the glory. Where faith grows, love will abound, for faith works
by love. It shows faith and patience, such as may be proposed as a
pattern for others, when trials from God, and persecutions from men,
quicken the exercise of those graces; for the patience and faith of
which the apostle gloried, bore them up, and enabled them to endure all
their tribulations.

[2 Thessalonians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 1:5</span></span>

Religion, if worth anything, is worth every thing; and those have no
religion, or none worth having, or know not how to value it, cannot find
their hearts to suffer for it. We cannot by all our sufferings, any more
than by our services, merit heaven; but by our patience under
sufferings, we are prepared for the promised joy. Nothing more strongly
marks a man for eternal ruin, than a spirit of persecution and enmity to
the name and people of God. God will trouble those that trouble his
people. And there is a rest for the people of God; a rest from sin and
sorrow. The certainty of future recompence is proved by the
righteousness of God. The thoughts of this should be terrible to wicked
men, and support the righteous. Faith, looking to the great day, is
enabled partly to understand the book of providence, which appears
confused to unbelievers. The Lord Jesus will in that day appear from
heaven. He will come in the glory and power of the upper world. His
light will be piercing, and his power consuming, to all who in that day
shall be found as chaff. This appearance will be terrible to those that
know not God, especially to those who rebel against revelation, and obey
not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the great crime of
multitudes, the gospel is revealed, and they will not believe it; or if
they pretend to believe, they will not obey it. Believing the truths of
the gospel, is in order to our obeying the precepts of the gospel.
Though sinners may be long spared, they will be punished at last. They
did sin's work, and must receive sin's wages. Here God punishes sinners
by creatures as instruments; but then, it will be destruction from the
Almighty; and who knows the power of his anger? It will be a joyful day
to some, to the saints, to those who believe and obey the gospel. In
that bright and blessed day, Christ Jesus will be glorified and admired
by his saints. And Christ will be glorified and admired in them. His
grace and power will be shown, when it shall appear what he has
purchased for, and wrought in, and bestowed upon those who believe in
him. Lord, if the glory put upon thy saints shall be thus admired, how
much more shalt thou be admired, as the Bestower of that glory! The
glory of thy justice in the damnation of the wicked will be admired, but
not as the glory of thy mercy in the salvation of believers. How will
this strike the adoring angels with holy admiration, and transport thy
admiring saints with eternal rapture! The meanest believer shall enjoy
more than the most enlarged heart can imagine while we are here; Christ
will be admired in all those that believe, the meanest believer not
excepted.

[2 Thessalonians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 1:11</span></span>

Believing thoughts and expectations of the second coming of Christ
should lead us to pray to God more, for ourselves and others. If there
is any good in us, it is owing to the good pleasure of his goodness, and
therefore it is called grace. There are many purposes of grace and
good-will in God toward his people, and the apostle prays that God would
complete in them the work of faith with power. This is to their doing
every other good work. The power of God not only begins, but carries on
the work of faith. And this is the great end and design of the grace of
our God and Lord Jesus Christ, which is made known to us, and wrought in
us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th2002)

</div>
