<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](tit000)  [Next](tit002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

([Tit 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)) The apostle salutes
Titus.

([Tit 1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)) The qualifications of a
faithful pastor.

([Tit 1:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)) The evil temper and
practices of false teachers.

[Titus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 1:1</span></span>

All are the servants of God who are not slaves of sin and Satan. All
gospel truth is according to godliness, teaching the fear of God. The
intent of the gospel is to raise up hope as well as faith; to take off
the mind and heart from the world, and to raise them to heaven and the
things above. How excellent then is the gospel, which was the matter of
Divine promise so early, and what thanks are due for our privileges!
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and whoso is
appointed and called, must preach the word. Grace is the free favour of
God, and acceptance with him. Mercy, the fruits of the favour, in the
pardon of sin, and freedom from all miseries both here and hereafter.
And peace is the effect and fruit of mercy. Peace with God through
Christ who is our Peace, and with the creatures and ourselves. Grace is
the fountain of all blessings. Mercy, and peace, and all good, spring
out of this.

[Titus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">tit 1:5</span></span>

The character and qualification of pastors, here called elders and
bishops, agree with what the apostle wrote to Timothy. Being such
bishops and overseers of the flock, to be examples to them, and God's
stewards to take care of the affairs of his household, there is great
reason that they should be blameless. What they are not to be, is
plainly shown, as well as what they are to be, as servants of Christ,
and able ministers of the letter and practice of the gospel. And here
are described the spirit and practice becoming such as should be
examples of good works.

[Titus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">tit 1:10</span></span>

False teachers are described. Faithful ministers must oppose such in
good time, that their folly being made manifest, they may go no further
They had a base end in what they did; serving a worldly interest under
pretence of religion: for the love of money is the root of all evil.
Such should be resisted, and put to shame, by sound doctrine from the
Scriptures. Shameful actions, the reproach of heathens, should be far
from Christians; falsehood and lying, envious craft and cruelty, brutal
and sensual practices, and idleness and sloth, are sins condemned even
by the light of nature. But Christian meekness is as far from cowardly
passing over sin and error, as from anger and impatience. And though
there may be national differences of character, yet the heart of man in
every age and place is deceitful and desperately wicked. But the
sharpest reproofs must aim at the good of the reproved; and soundness in
the faith is most desirable and necessary. To those who are defiled and
unbelieving, nothing is pure; they abuse, and turn things lawful and
good into sin. Many profess to know God, yet in their lives deny and
reject him. See the miserable state of hypocrites, such as have a form
of godliness, but are without the power; yet let us not be so ready to
fix this charge on others, as careful that it does not apply to
ourselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 2](tit002)

</div>
