<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac007)  [Next](zac009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 8:0</span></span>

([Zac 8:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001)) The restoration of
Jerusalem.

([Zac 8:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009)) The people encouraged by
promises of God's favour, and exhorted to holiness.

([Zac 8:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#018)) The Jews in the latter
days.

[Zechariah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 8:1</span></span>

The sins of Zion were her worst enemies. God will take away her sins,
and then no other enemies shall hurt her. Those who profess religion
must adorn their profession by godliness and honesty. When become a city
of truth and a mountain of holiness, Jerusalem is peaceable and
prosperous. [Zac 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004), [Zac
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#005), beautifully describe a state of
great outward peace, attended with plenty, temperance, and contentment.
The scattered Israelites shall be brought together from all parts. God
will never leave nor forsake them in a way of mercy, for this he has
promised them; and they shall never leave nor forsake him in a way of
duty, as they have promised him. These promises were partly fulfilled in
the Jewish church, betwixt the captivity and the time of Christ's
coming; and they had fuller accomplishment in the gospel church; but the
full import must be as to the future times of the Christian church, or
the future restoration of the Jews. With men this is impossible, but
with God all things are possible; so far are God's thoughts and ways
above ours. In the present low state of vital godliness, we can hardly
conceive that so complete a change can be made; but a change thus
extensive and glorious, can be brought to pass by the almighty power of
the new-creating Spirit, in less time than he was pleased to employ in
creating the world. Let the hands of all who labour in the cause of the
gospel be strong, serving the Lord in true holiness, assured that their
labour shall not be in vain.

[Zechariah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 8:9</span></span>

Those only who lay their hands to the plough of duty, shall have them
strengthened with the promises of mercy: those who avoid their fathers'
faults have the curse turned into a blessing. Those who believed the
promises, were to show their faith by their works, and to wait the
fulfilment. When God is displeased, he can cause trade to decay, and set
every man against his neighbour; but when he returns in mercy, all is
happy and prosperous. Surely believers in Christ must not trifle with
the exhortation to put away lying, and to speak every man peace with his
neighbour, to hate what the Lord hates, and to love that wherein he
delights.

[Zechariah 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 8:18</span></span>

When God comes towards us in ways of mercy, we must meet him with joy
and thankfulness. Therefore be faithful and honest in all your dealings;
and let it be a pleasure to you to be so, though thereby you come short
of the gains others get dishonestly; and, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men. Let the truths of God rule in your heads, and
let the peace of God rule in your hearts. Thus the ancient servants of
God drew the notice of heathen neighbours, whose prejudices were
softened. A great increase to the church shall be made. Hitherto the
Jews had been prone to learn the idolatries of other nations: what more
unlikely than that they should teach religion to their conquerors, and
to all the principal nations of the earth! Yet this is expressly
foretold, and it came to pass. Hitherto the prophecy has been
wonderfully fulfilled, and no doubt future events will explain it
further. It is good to be with those who have God with them; if we take
God for our God, we must take his people for our people, and be willing
to take our lot with them. But let not any one think that mere zeal,
either for Jews or Gentiles, will stand in the place of personal
religion. Let us be living epistles of Christ, known and read of all
men, so that others may wish to go with us, and to have their portion
with us in the realms of bliss.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 9](zac009)

</div>
