<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac010)  [Next](zac012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 11:0</span></span>

([Zac 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)) Destruction to come upon
the Jews.

([Zac 11:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)) The Lord's dealing with
the Jews.

([Zac 11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)) The emblem and curse
of a foolish shepherd.

[Zechariah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 11:1</span></span>

In figurative expressions, that destruction of Jerusalem, and of the
Jewish church and nation, is foretold, which our Lord Jesus, when the
time was at hand, prophesied plainly and expressly. How can the fir
trees stand, if the cedars fall? The falls of the wise and good into
sin, and the falls of the rich and great into trouble, are loud alarms
to those every way their inferiors. It is sad with a people, when those
who should be as shepherds to them, are as young lions. The pride of
Jordan was the thickets on the banks; and when the river overflowed the
banks, the lions came up from them roaring. Thus the doom of Jerusalem
may alarm other churches.

[Zechariah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 11:4</span></span>

Christ came into this world for judgment to the Jewish church and
nation, which were wretchedly corrupt and degenerate. Those have their
minds wofully blinded, who do ill, and justify themselves in it; but God
will not hold those guiltless who hold themselves so. How can we go to
God to beg a blessing on unlawful methods of getting wealth, or to
return thanks for success in them? There was a general decay of religion
among them, and they regarded it not. The Good Shepherd would feed his
flock, but his attention would chiefly be directed to the poor. As an
emblem, the prophet seems to have taken two staves; Beauty, denoted the
privileges of the Jewish nation, in their national covenant; the other
he called Bands, denoting the harmony which hitherto united them as the
flock of God. But they chose to cleave to false teachers. The carnal
mind and the friendship of the world are enmity to God; and God hates
all the workers of iniquity: it is easy to foresee what this will end
in. The prophet demanded wages, or a reward, and received thirty pieces
of silver. By Divine direction he cast it to the potter, as in disdain
for the smallness of the sum. This shadowed forth the bargain of Judas
to betray Christ, and the final method of applying it. Nothing ruins a
people so certainly, as weakening the brotherhood among them. This
follows the dissolving of the covenant between God and them: when sin
abounds, love waxes cold, and civil contests follow. No wonder if those
fall out among themselves, who have provoked God to fall out with them.
Wilful contempt of Christ is the great cause of men's ruin. And if
professors rightly valued Christ, they would not contend about little
matters.

[Zechariah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 11:15</span></span>

God, having showed the misery of this people in their being justly left
by the Good Shepherd, shows their further misery in being abused by
foolish shepherds. The description suits the character Christ gives of
the scribes and Pharisees. They never do any thing to support the weak,
or comfort the feeble-minded; but seek their own ease, while they are
barbarous to the flock. The idol shepherd has the garb and appearance of
a shepherd, receives submission, and is supported at much expense; but
he leaves the flock to perish through neglect, or leads them to ruin by
his example. This suits many in different churches and nations, but the
warning had an awful fulfilment in the Jewish teachers. And while such
deceive others to their ruin, they will themselves have the deepest
condemnation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 12](zac012)

</div>
