[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m08004.md) 
[Next](m08006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**5**

Vaishampayana said, "Hearing these words, O monarch, Ambika's son
Dhritarashtra, with heart agitated by grief, addressed his driver
Sanjaya, saying, 'Though the evil policy, O sire, of my son of little
foresight, Vikartana's son hath been slain! This intelligence is cutting
the very core of my heart! I am desirous of crossing this sea of grief!
Remove my doubts, therefore, by telling me who are still alive and who
are dead amongst the Kurus and the Pandavas!'

"Sanjaya said, 'Endued with great prowess and invincible in battle,
Bhishma the son of Shantanu, O king, having slain large numbers of
Srinjayas and Pancalas, hath been slain after ten days. The mighty and
invincible bowman Drona of the golden car, having slaughtered the
Pancala divisions in battle, hath been slain. Having slaughtered the
half of what remained after the carnage by Bhishma and the illustrious
Drona, Vikartana's son Karna hath been slain. Endued with great
strength, O monarch, prince Vivingsati, having slain hundreds of Anarta
warriors in battle, hath been slain. Thy heroic son Vikarna, deprived of
steeds and weapons, stood, facing the foe, remembering the duties of
Kshatriyas. Remembering the many foul wrongs inflicted upon him by
Duryodhana, and bearing in mind his own vow, Bhimasena hath slain him.
Possessed of great might, Vinda and Anuvinda, the two princes of Avanti,
after achieving the most difficult feats, have gone to Yama's abode.
That hero who had under his sway ten kingdoms, having Sindhu for their
chief, him who was ever obedient to thee, Jayadratha of mighty energy, O
king, Arjuna hath slain after vanquishing eleven *akshauhinis* of troops
with his keen arrows. Endued with great activity and incapable of being
easily defeated in battle, the son of Duryodhana, ever obedient to his
sire's commands, hath been slain by the son of Subhadra. The brave son
of Duhshasana, possessed of mighty arms and fierce in battle, hath been
despatched to Yama's abode by Draupadi's son exerting himself with great
prowess! The ruler of the Kiratas and other dwellers of the lowlands on
the seacoast, the much respected and dear friend of the chief of the
celestials himself, the virtuous king Bhagadatta, who was ever devoted
to Kshatriya duties, hath been despatched to Yama's abode by Dhananjaya
exerting himself great with prowess. The kinsman of the Kauravas, the
son of Somadatta, the brave and celebrated Bhurishrava, O king, hath
been slain by Satyaki in battle. The Amvashtha king Srutayus, that
foremost of Kshatriyas, who used to career in battle most fearlessly,
hath been slain by Arjuna. Thy son Duhshasana, accomplished in arms and
invincible in battle, and who was always wrathful, hath, O monarch, been
slain by Bhimasena. Sudakshina, O king, who had many thousands of
wonderful elephants, hath been slain in battle by Arjuna. The ruler of
the Kosolas, having slain many hundreds of foes, hath himself been
despatched to Yama's abode by Subhadra's son exerting himself with
prowess. Having fought with many thousands of foes and with the mighty
car-warrior Bhimasena himself, thy son Citrasena hath been slain by
Bhimasena. The brave younger brother of the ruler of the Madras, that
enhancer of the fears of foes, that handsome warrior armed with sword
and shield, hath been slain by Subhadra's son. He who was equal to Karna
himself in battle, Karna's son Vrishasena, accomplished in arms, of
mighty energy and steady prowess, hath, in the very sight of Karna, been
despatched to Yama's abode by Dhananjaya who put forth his prowess
remembering the slaughter of his own son Abhimanyu and bearing in mind
the vow he had made. That lord of Earth, Srutayus, who always displayed
a deep-rooted antipathy towards the Pandavas, hath been slain by Partha
who reminded him of that antipathy before taking his life. Shalya's son
of great prowess, O sire, Rukmaratha, hath, O king, been slain in battle
by Sahadeva although the former happened to be the latter's brother,
having been the son of the latter's maternal uncle. The old king
Bhagiratha, and Vrihatkshatra the ruler of the Kaikeyas both endued with
great prowess and might and energy, have been slain. Bhagadatta's son, O
king who was possessed of great wisdom and great strength, hath been
slain by Nakula who always careers in battle with the activity of the
hawk. Thy grandsire Bahlika, possessed of great might and prowess, hath,
with all his followers, been slain by Bhimasena. The mighty Jayatsena
the son of Jarasandha, the prince of the Magadhas, O king, hath been
slain in battle by the high-souled son of Subhadra. Thy son Durmukha, O
king, as also thy other son Dussaha, that mighty car-warrior, both of
whom were regarded as heroes, have been slain by Bhimasena with his
mace. Durmarshana and Durvisaha and the mighty car-warrior Durjaya,
having achieved the most difficult feats, have gone to Yama's abode. The
two brothers Kalinga and Vrishaka, who were invincible in battle, having
achieved very difficult feats have gone to Yama's abode. Thy counsellor
Vrishavarman of the Suta caste, endued with great energy, hath been
despatched to Yama's abode by Bhimasena exerting himself with prowess.
So also king Paurava who was endued with the might of 10,000 elephants,
hath, with all his followers, been slain by Pandu's son Arjuna. The
Vasatis, O king, numbering 2,000, effectual smiters of all, as also the
Surasenas endued with prowess, have all been slain in battle. The
Abhishahas, clad in mail, capable of smiting effectually, and fierce in
battle, also the Sivis, those foremost of car-warriors, with the
Kalingas, have all been slain. Those other heroes also, (the Narayana
Gopas) who live and grew in Gokula, who were exceedingly wrathful in
battle, and who never retreated from the field have been slain by
Savyasaci. Many thousands of Srenis, as also the *samsaptakas*,
approaching Arjuna, have all repaired to the abode of Yama. Thy two
brothers-in-law, viz., the princes Vrishaka and Achala, who were endued
with great prowess, have for thy sake been slain by Savyasaci. King
Shalva of mighty arms and fierce deeds, who was a great bowman both in
name and feats, hath been slain by Bhimasena. Oghavat, O king, and
Vrishanta, fighting together in battle and exerting themselves with
great vigour for the sake of their ally, have both repaired to Yama's
abode. So also that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Kshemadhurti, O
monarch, hath been slain in battle by Bhimasena with his mace. So also
that great bowman, viz., the mighty king Jalasandha, after causing an
immense carnage, hath been slain by Satyaki in battle. That prince of
Rakshasas, viz., Alayudha, unto whose vehicle were yoked asses (of
monstrous shape) hath been despatched to Yama's abode by Ghatotkaca
exerting himself with great prowess. Radha's son of the Suta caste, and
those mighty car-warriors who were his brothers, and the Kaikeyas, the
Malavas, the Madrakas the Dravidas of fierce prowess, the Yaudheyas, the
Lalittyas, the Kshudrakas, the Usinaras, the Tundikeras, the
Savitriputras, the Easterners, the Northerners, the Westerners, and the
Southerners, O sire, have all been slain by Savyasaci. Large bands of
foot-soldiers, myriads upon myriads of steeds, large number of
car-warriors, and many huge elephants, have been slain. Many heroes
also, with standards and weapons, and with armour and attire and
ornaments, and endued with perseverance and possessed of high birth and
good conduct, have been slain in battle by Partha who is never fatigued
with exertion. Others, endued with immeasurable might, and desirous of
slaying their foes, (have met with a similar fate). These and many other
kings, numbering thousands, with their followers, have, O monarch, been
slain in battle. That which thou askest me I am answering now. Even thus
did the destruction take place when Arjuna and Karna fought. Even as
Mahendra slew Vritra, and Rama slew Ravana; even as Krishna slew Naraka
or Mura in battle; even as the mighty Rama of Bhrigu's race slew the
heroic Kartavirya, invincible in battle, with all his kinsmen and
friends, after fighting a terrible battle celebrated through the three
worlds; even as Skanda slew (the Asura) Mahisha, and Rudra slew (the
Asura) Andhaka, even so hath Arjuna, O king, in single combat, slain,
with all his kinsmen, that foremost of smiters, viz., Karna, who was
invincible in battle and upon whom the Dhartarashtras had placed their
hopes of victory, and who was the great cause of the hostility with the
Pandavas! Pandu's son hath now accomplished that which at one time thou
couldst not believe him capable of accomplishing, although, O monarch,
well-meaning friends failed not to apprise thee of it. That calamity,
fraught with great destruction, hath now come! Thou, O king wishing them
well, hast heaped those evils on the heads of thy covetous sons! The
fruit of those evils is now manifesting itself!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](m08006.md)
