[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m08005) 
[Next](m08007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**6**

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Thou hast, O son, mentioned the names of those of
my side that have been slain in battle by the Pandavas. Tell me now, O
Sanjaya, the names of those amongst the Pandavas that have been slain by
the people of my side!'

"Sanjaya said, 'The Kuntis possessed of great prowess in battle, endued
with great energy and great might, have been slain in fight by Bhishma,
with all their kinsmen and advisers. The Narayanas, the Valabhadras, and
hundreds of other heroes, all devoted (to the Pandavas) have been slain
in battle by the heroic Bhishma. Satyajit, who was equal to the
diadem-decked Arjuna himself in battle as regards energy and might, hath
been slain in battle by Drona of sure aim. Many mighty bowmen among the
Pancalas, all of whom were skilled in battle, encountering Drona, have
repaired to Yama's abode. So the two kings Virata and Drupada, both
venerable in years, who exerted themselves with great prowess for their
ally, have, with their sons, been slain in battle by Drona. That
invincible hero, viz., Abhimanyu, who, though a child in years, was
still equal in battle to Arjuna or Keshava or Baladeva, O lord, that,
warrior who was highly accomplished in battle, after making an immense
slaughter of the foe, was at last encompassed by six foremost of
car-warriors and slain by them. Unable to resist Arjuna himself, they
thus slew Arjuna's son! Deprived of his car, that hero, viz., the son of
Subhadra, still stayed in battle, remembering the duties of a Kshatriya.
At last, O king, Duhshasana's son slew him on the field. The slayer of
the Patachchatras, viz., the handsome son of Amvashtha, surrounded by a
large force, had put forth all his prowess for the sake of his allies.
Having made a great slaughter among the foe, he was encountered by
Duryodhana's son, the brave Lakshmana, in battle and despatched to
Yama's abode. The mighty bowman Vrihanta, accomplished in arms and
invincible in battle, hath been despatched to Yama's abode by
Duhshasana, exerting himself with great prowess. The two kings Manimat
and Dandadhara, both of whom were invincible in battle and had put forth
their prowess for their allies, have been slain by Drona. Ansumat the
ruler of the Bhojas, that mighty car-warrior at the head of his own
forces, hath been despatched to Yama's abode by Drona exerting himself
with great prowess. Citrasena, the ruler of the sea-coast, with his son,
O Bharata, hath been forcibly despatched by Samudrasena to Yama's abode.
Another ruler of a maritime country, viz., Nila, and Vyaghradatta of
great energy, have both, O king, been despatched to Yama's abode by
Ashvatthama. Citrayudha and Citrayodhin, after making a great slaughter,
have both been slain in battle by Vikarna exerting himself with great
prowess and displaying diverse manoeuvres of his car. The chief of the
Kaikeyas, who was equal to Vrikodara himself in battle and surrounded by
Kaikeya warriors, has been slain by Kaikeya, the brother by the brother.
Janamejaya of the hilly country, endued with great prowess and
accomplished in encounters with the mace, hath, O king, been slain by
thy son Durmukha. Those two foremost of men, viz., the brothers
Rochamana, like two brilliant planets, have together been despatched to
heaven by Drona with his shafts. Many other kings, O monarch, endued
with great prowess, have fought (for the Pandavas) Having achieved the
most difficult feats, all of them have gone to Yama's abode. Purujit and
Kuntibhoja, the two maternal uncles of Savyasaci, have been despatched
by Drona with shafts to such regions as are attained by death in battle.
Abhibhu the Kasis, at the head of many of his followers, hath been
obliged by Vasudana's son to lay down his life in battle. Yudhamanyu of
immeasurable prowess, and Uttamauja of great energy, after slaying
hundreds of heroic warriors, have themselves been slain by our men. The
Pancala prince Mitravarman, O Bharata, those two foremost of bowmen,
have been despatched to Yama's abode by Drona. Shikhandi's son
Kshatradeva, that foremost of warriors, possessed of great bravery,
hath, O king, been slain by thy grandson Lakshmana, O sire! The two
heroes Sucitra and Citravarman, who were sire and son and endued with
great might, and who careered fearlessly in battle, have been slain by
Drona. Vardhakshemi, O monarch, who was like the ocean at full tide,
having had his weapons exhausted in battle, hath at last obtained
undisturbed peace. That foremost of Sutas, viz., Senavindu, having
consumed many foes in battle, hath, at last, O king been slain by
Bahlika. Dhrishtaketu, O monarch, that foremost of car-warriors among
the Cedis, after accomplishing the most difficult feats, hath repaired
to the abode of Yama. Similarly, the heroic Satyadhriti, endued with
great prowess, having made a great slaughter in battle for the sake of
the Pandavas, has been despatched to Yama's abode. That lord of Earth,
viz., Suketu, the son of Shishupala, having slain many foes, hath at
last been slain by Drona in battle. Virata's son Sankha, as also Uttara
of great strength, having accomplished the most difficult feats, have
repaired to Yama's abode. Similarly, Satyadhriti of the Matsyas, and
Madiraswa of great energy, and Suryadatta possessed of great prowess,
have all been slain by Drona with his shafts. Srenimat also, O monarch,
having fought with great prowess and accomplished the most difficult
feats, hath repaired to Yama's abode. Similarly, the chief of the
Magadhas, that slayer of hostile heroes, endued with great energy and
acquainted with the highest weapons, sleepeth on the field of battle,
slain by Bhishma. Vasudana also, having made an immense carnage in
battle, has been despatched to Yama's abode by Bharadwaja's son exerting
himself with great prowess. These and many other mighty car-warriors of
the Pandavas have been slain by Drona exerting himself with great
energy. I have now told them all that thou hadst asked me.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](m08007)
