[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22014)  [Next](cc22016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>Chapter 12

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** The word of the LORD also came unto
me, saying,

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me dicendo,

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst
of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not; they have
ears to hear, and hear not: for they *are* a rebellious house.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, in medio domus rebellis
tu habitas, oculi illis ad videndum, et non vident: aures illis ad
audiendum, et non audiunt: quia domus rebellis ipsi.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span><span id="xvi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>Because God was about to give a command to
his servant, he wished to inspire him with fortitude of mind, lest, when
he saw that he was consuming his labor in vain, he should withdraw from
his course. For we know how severe is that temptation to God’s servants
when they speak to the deaf, and not only is their doctrine rejected but
even refused with ignominy. They think, therefore, that nothing is
better than silence, because where their word is so despised it only
exposes the name of God to the reproaches of the impious. Now then we
understand for what purpose God admonishes his Prophet about the
contumacy of the nation. The Prophet had tried enough, and more than
enough, how unmanageable the Israelites were, but God confirms by his
judgment what the Prophet had discovered sufficiently in practice. Then
we must observe another reason, for God not only commanded his Prophet
what to say, but he added an outward symbol, as we shall see. But the
Prophet might object, that it would be ridiculous to take a staff, and
scrip, and hat, as a traveler about to commence a journey. Nor is it
doubtful that the Israelites derided through perverseness what he was
doing, as a boyish amusement.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>Lest, therefore, the Prophet should think
what he was commanded to do absurd, God instructs him, and gives him the
reason of his plan. He says, therefore, *the house of Israel is
rebellious,* and then he expresses the greatness of their contumacy,
namely, *that they are deaf, though endued with ears: that they are
blind, and yet do not want eyes* God here shows that the Israelites
could not defend their error, as if they had sinned without
consideration; but he assigns their neither hearing nor seeing to their
obstinacy. And this must be diligently remarked, because hypocrites,
when convicted, catch as much as possible at this excuse, that they fell
through error or ignorance. But God on the contrary here pronounces that
the Israelites were blind and deaf, and shows that their blindness was
voluntary. When, therefore, unbelievers pretend that they have not been
illuminated by the Lord, it may be conceded to them that they are blind
and deaf: but we must often proceed beyond this, since their own
obstinacy is the fountain of their blindness and deafness: and God
blinds them, because they will not admit the light offered them, but
stop their ears. In God’s judgments, indeed, the causes do not always
appear, for we sometimes see a whole nation Minded without any reason
apparent to us; but as far as the ten tribes are concerned, there can be
no excuse for their error, since they were brought up from childhood in
God’s law, so that their pride and contempt caused God to reject them.
Hence they were so stupified that they neither saw with their eyes nor
heard with their ears. And this the Prophet expresses significantly,
*they hear not,* says he, *since they are a rebellious house;* he does
not say, because their senses do not penetrate to the secrets of God,
are not sufficiently acute, are not endued with such great prudence; but
*because they are a rebellious house,* that is, because they have
stupified themselves. Hence it happens that they neither hear nor see.
It follows —

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Therefore, thou son of man, prepare
thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou
shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be
they will consider, though they *be* a rebellious house.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et tu fili hominis, fac  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) tibi vasa transmigrationis: et
transmigra interdiu in oculis ipsorum: migrabis autem a loco tuo ad
locum alium in oculis ipsorum, si forte videant, quia domus rebellis
strut.

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>Now God instructs his Prophet in what he
wishes him to do: he orders him to take vessels for journeying, that is,
he orders him to prepare for a long journey, even for exile: for exile
is the subject here. But he who is compelled to leave home to go into a
foreign land, collects whatever he can carry with him, namely, his
clothes, shoes, hat, scrip, and staff, and other things of that kind, if
he have even a little money. Therefore the Prophet is advised to gird
himself for his journey, by which he represents the character of those
who were just about to be dragged into exile. For this reason he is
ordered *to prepare for himself vessels for traveling* The Latins call
garments as well as other goods “vessels:*”* whence proverbially to
collect goods is to remove baggage in a military phrase, or to take away
one’s stuff. But he orders this *to be done in the day-time,* that the
Israelites may see what is done.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>Then the Prophet is ordered *to remove from
one place to another* As I have said, this might appear puerile. Cicero
describes those legal fictions,  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)
how those who went to law about a field when called upon to plead, had,
so to speak, an imaginary way of going to see it; for since it was too
troublesome to the judge to mount his horse and ride over various
fields, they retained an ancient and customary ceremony: the plaintiff
said, the land which you say is yours, I claim for myself and say is
mine, and if you wish to dispute with me legally, I summon you to the
spot: the defendant replied, as you summon me there, I in return answer
your summons. The judge then arose and moved from his place, and so an
imaginary action took place. Cicero derides that by-play, and says it is
unworthy of the gravity of a court of law. But such was the action of
the Prophet; he took his hat, cloak, staff, and shoes, and other things,
and changed his place as if he were moving. But he only went a short
distance. But God previously had said, that he was dealing with a
perverse nation, and so had need of such assistances. And we must remark
the particle, *if by chance they should see, because they are a
rebellious house* For here God as it were suspends the event of his
teaching, when he says, *if perhaps they should hear* And the reason is
added, because the hardness of the people was so great, that they could
scarcely be turned to obedience by any discourses or signs. Meanwhile
let us learn from this place, that we must still go on, although success
does not answer to our labor, when we spend our strength for God. And
this instruction is peculiarly necessary, because when God imposes on us
any duty, we dispute with ourselves as to its result, and thus all
energy flags, because we are seldom willing to put forth a finger unless
we perceive a prosperous issue. Because, therefore, we are always too
attentive to the fruit of our labor, hence this passage should be
diligently regarded, when God sends his Prophet and yet adds, *if by
chance they should listen.* Whatever may be the event, we must obey God;
if our labor should not profit, yet God wishes us to obey him. It
follows —

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#004)<span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Then shalt thou bring forth thy
stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt go
forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et effer vasa tanquam vasa
captivitatis interdiu in oculis ipsorum: et tu egredieris vespere in
oculis ipsorum secundum egressus captivitatis.

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>The other verses must now be added —

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#005)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**5.** Dig thou through the wall in their
sight, and carry out thereby.

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span>**5.** In oculis ipsorum perfodies tibi
parietem, et educes per ipsum.

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span>**6.** In their sight shalt thou bear *it*
upon *thy* shoulders, *and* carry *it* forth in the twilight: thou shalt
cover thy face, that thou see not the ground: for I have set thee *for*
a sign unto the house of Israel.

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**6.** In oculis ipsorum super humerum
gestabis, in tenebris egredieris; faciem tuam occultabis et non aspicies
terram, quia portentum constitui to domui Israel.

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>Ezekiel is verbose in this narration. But in
the beginning of the book we said, that because the teacher was sent to
men very slow and stupid, he therefore used a rough style. We added
also, that he had acquired it partly from the custom of the region in
which he dwelt. For the people declined by degrees from the polish of
their language, and hence it happens that the Prophet’s diction is not
quite pure, but is intermixed with something foreign. As to the subject
itself there is no ambiguity, since God repeats *that he should dig
through a wall, and bring out his vessels by himself before their eyes*
Here follows another part of the vision, namely, that there should be no
free egress but that the Jews would desire to depart by stealth. First,
therefore, it is shown to the Prophet, that the Jews who when secure at
Jerusalem boasted that all was well with them, should be exiles; then,
that it would not be in their power to go forth when they wished, unless
perhaps they stealthily *escaped* the hands of the enemy through their
hiding-place, as thieves escape by digging through a wall. Then the
application will follow, but yet it was worth while to state what God
intended by this vision. Afterwards everything is embraced. *In their
sight,* says he, *thou shalt bear upon thy shoulder,* that is, thou
shalt be prepared and girt for a journey *as a traveler, and this shall
be done in the day-time: but in darkness,* says he, *thou shalt bring
them forth: after thy vessels have been prepared, wait for the evening:
in the darkness afterwards thou shalt go forth.* Here he shows what I
have already touched upon, when necessity expelled the Jews from their
country, that their departure would not be free, because they would be
well off if’ they could snatch themselves away from the sight of their
enemies in hiding-places and the darkness of the night.

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>He adds, *thou shalt hide thy face,* and the
clause, *neither shalt thou look upon the earth,* means the same thing.
Anxiety and trembling is marked by this phrase, as when he says, *thou
shalt hide thy face,* it signifies that the Jews should be so perplexed
that they should fear every event which happened. For those who fear
everything veil their faces, as is well known. But this trembling is
better expressed when he says, *thou shaft not look upon the earth.* For
those who are in haste do not dare to bend down their eyes the least in
either one direction or another, but are carried along to the place to
which they are going, and press forward with their eyes, because they
cannot hasten with their feet as quickly as they desire. Hence they
seize their way, as it were, with their eyes. This is the reason why God
says, *thou shalt not look upon the earth, because I have set thee,*
says he, *for a sign to the house of Israel.* Here God meets the
petulance of those who otherwise would laugh at what the Prophet was
doing: what do you mean by that fictitious emigration? why do you not
rest at home? why do you here frighten us with an empty spectacle? God,
therefore, that the Jews should not obstinately despise what he shows
them, adds, *that the Prophet was a sign or a wonder to the house of
Israel* The word wonder is here taken in its genuine sense, though
sometimes it has an unfavorable meaning. We say that anything portentous
is disagreeable: but a *“*portent*”* properly designates any sign of the
future. When therefore men predict what is hidden, it is called a
portent. And this is the meaning of Isaiah, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p9.1"></span>[Isa 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span
id="xvi.iv-p9.1"></span>,) where he says, Behold me, and the children
whom God has given me, for signs and wonders. He puts <span
id="xvi.iv-p9.2"></span>אתות, *athoth, “signs,”* in the first place,
then <span id="xvi.iv-p9.3"></span>מופתים, *mophthim,* “portents.” Here
the Prophet speaks in the singular: *I have given thee for a wonder.*
But since Isaiah treats of the rest of the faithful, he then uses signs
and portents; since Isaiah seems to imply something more, namely, that
the people were so stupid that they so feared and abhorred God’s
servants, as if they had met, with a prodigy. Here, therefore, the
depravity of the people is to be marked, because when they saw any pious
and sincere worshipper of God they turned away their eyes as from a
formidable prodigy. But now the Prophet speaks simply, that *he had been
placed for a prodigy to the house of Israel:* because in truth this
action was a presage of that future captivity which the Jews did not
fear for themselves, and which was also incredible to the Israelites;
whence that penitence and weariness of which I have spoken. But I do not
object if any think that the Prophet speaks of a portent, because the
Israelites were struck with astonishment; but the former sense is far
more apposite. In this way then God distinguishes the action of the
Prophet from all empty spectacles, and so vindicates his servant from
all opprobrium. Meanwhile he signifies that although the Prophet was
despised, yet that he would be true, and at the same time the avenger of
contempt. It follows —

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**7.** And I did so as I was commanded: I
brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and in the even I
digged through the wall with mine hand; I brought *it* forth in the
twilight, *and* I bare *it* upon *my* shoulder in their sight.

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span>**7.** Atque ita feci quemadmodum jussus
fueram, vasa mea eduxi tanquam vasa captivitatis interdiu: et vespere
perfodi in parletem  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) manu; in
tenebris eduxi, super humerum extuli  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) in oculis ipsorum.

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span><span id="xvi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>Here the Prophet relates that he had executed
what God had commanded: nor did it escape him that this action would be
exposed to many jeers and reproaches. But he esteemed nothing of equal
moment with pleasing God: hence we must remark the Prophet’s alacrity in
executing God’s commands. For since to ingenuous natures nothing is more
distasteful than *reproach,* he might *reject* the burden imposed upon
him, because it provoked the laughter of all men. But because God was
otherwise pleased he did as he was ordered. He says, therefore, *that he
carried away his vessels, as it were vessels of captivity,* or of
migration, and that in the day-time: as if he said that he had prepared
whatever was necessary for the journey, as if he saw that a long march,
even exile was before him. This then was the reason why he prepared his
goods in the day-time. Now it follows, *at evening he dug through the
wall* This belongs to the second clause, that the Israelites might
understand that all egress was blocked up to the Jews, so that no safety
remained but in concealed flight. He says also, *by the hand,* whence it
appears to be done suddenly and tumultuously. He says, *that he went out
in darkness, and carried things on his shoulder* — *namely,* that he may
confirm what we have so often said, that the Jews had no hope of safety
except under cover of the night: because they were besieged on every
side, and could not move on one side or the other, lest the enemy should
seize them. This is the reason why the Prophet says, *that he went out
in darkness through the wall which had been dug through*

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou so wishest
us to live in this world, that we may travel onwards till thou gatherest
us into thy heavenly rest, that we may truly contemplate that eternal
inheritance, and apply to it all our endeavors: and next, that we may so
travel in this world that we may not wander nor stray from the way; but
being always intent on the mark which thou settest before us, grant us
to proceed on our way, until we finish our course, and enjoy that glory
which thine only-begotten Son has prepared for us through his own blood.
— Amen.

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-second

<span id="xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p2"></span>**8.** And in the morning came the word of
the LORD unto me, saying,

<span id="xvi.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me mane,
dicendo,

<span id="xvi.viii-p4"></span>**9.** Son of man, hath not the house of
Israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?

<span id="xvi.viii-p5"></span>**9.** Fili hominis, an non dixerunt tibi,
domus Israel, domus rebellis,  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
Quid tu facis?

<span id="xvi.viii-p7"></span>**10.** Say thou unto them, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; This burden *concerneth* the prince in Jerusalem, and all the
house of Israel that *are* among them.

<span id="xvi.viii-p8"></span>**10.** Dic illis, sic dicit Dominator
Iehova, Principis onus hoc  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) in
Ierusalem, et totius domus Israel quae in medio ipsorum.

<span id="xvi.viii-p10"></span>**11.** Say, I *am* your sign: like as I
have done, so shall it be done unto them: they shall remove, *and* go
into captivity.

<span id="xvi.viii-p11"></span>**11.** Dic els, Ego portentum vestrum
sicuti feci ita fiet illis, in transmigrationem, in caprivitatem ibunt.

<span id="xvi.viii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xvi.viii-p13"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p14"></span>We gather from these words of the
Prophet, that he was himself derided when he began to migrate: then that
he dug through the wall by night secretly, and thus carried away his
baggage. For those who think that the Israelites enquired about this, as
if it were unknown to them, do not sufficiently consider the Prophet’s
words. For the repetition of the epithet *rebellious house* is not in
vain; for if this question had proceeded from mere folly, God would not
have called them rebellious. This epithet, then, refers to the present
passage, and thus we may determine that the Israelites asked the Prophet
deridingly, what does this mean? For he seemed to them to be trifling,
and thus they jeered at him; for we know the audacity of the nation in
despising their Prophets. It is not, then, to be wondered at, when they
obtained a plausible ground for it, if they commented rather freely upon
what the Prophet was doing. We said yesterday ‘that this seemed a
childish spectacle. Hence the Israelites seemed, not without reason, to
reject what the Prophet was doing as a thing of nought. But God does not
suffer his servants to be reviled in this way. He now signified to the
Prophet that his calling ought to be deservedly held sacred. Since
therefore Ezekiel bore certain marks of the prophetic office, although
at first sight his conduct could not appear serious, yet the people
ought to have enquired modestly. For whatever we know to flow from God
should be reverently received without controversy. But if there is any
obscurity we may wonder and enquire into it; but as I have said,
docility and modesty ought always to precede. But what did the
Israelites do? they enquired, indeed, the meaning of the Prophet’s
conduct, but only to reject it with ridicule. For this reason God is
angry, and announces himself a severe avenger of that audacity, because
they persecuted the sacred Prophet. Hence this must be read emphatically
— *what doest thou?* as if they said that the Prophet was foolish, and
carried and prepared his goods, and dug through the wall, in vain, since
all these things were of no moment. But the answer, when it shows that
God is greatly offended with such trifling, sufficiently demonstrates
that they did not ask the question through ignorance, or want of
thought, but through mere wantonness.

<span id="xvi.viii-p15"></span>He now says, *this prophecy relates to
the prince, and the whole house of Israel which is in the midst of
them.* Without doubt he understands the king, as we shall soon see: nor
does he speak of any king indefinitely, but points out Zedekiah, as will
be immediately evident from circumstances. He says, therefore, *this
burden,* or this sorrowful prophecy, *looks towards the prince, and to
the house of Israel,* which dwell at Jerusalem. But it is probable that
some had fled that they might not fall into the hands of the enemy,
since Jerusalem was a safe receptacle for them. The captives thought
themselves bad managers, because they had not followed those leaders,
since Jerusalem was a safe refuge for them, and hence the greater sorrow
at their captivity. Hence God pronounces that the Israelites were
comprehended with their king in this prophecy. It is indeed true that
this was a common name to all the posterity of Abraham; for the twelve
tribes sprung from the patriarch Jacob, but it was then becoming
customary for the ten tribes to retain the name of Israel, and for that
of Judah to have their own proper and peculiar name. Afterwards he
confirms his teaching, *that he was as a sign to them.* We explained
this expression yesterday, showing how the Prophet was placed before
them as a sign, so that God represented what was as yet unknown to them;
for signs divinely sent are called portents, when they foretell what no
one would expect to happen. God, indeed, often shows what he is going’
to do by many, yet ordinary signs; but an extraordinary one, which
cannot be considered natural, is called a portent. So therefore the
Prophet is ordered to say to the Israelites *that he was to them for a
wonder,* namely, to reprove their obstinacy, which, as we have said, was
the cause of their impious contempt. For it was no part of their
religion for a Prophet to deride them, so that they should suppose him
to be trifling with them, as if frightening children about nothing. God,
therefore, that the Israelites might at length be roused up at his own
time, pronounces his servant to be a wonder to them. And we gather from
the reason which is added, what the name portent meant in yesterday’s
lecture. For he says, *as I have done, so shall it be done to you;* that
is, what you now think to be child’s play, shall be seriously fulfilled
in yourselves. For the Prophet seemed to act a part, like a player, and
on this account was derided. He now declares that it should not be
fabulous, since the Israelites, who were left in Judea among the Jews,
and the king himself, should not act a part; for God would compel them
to collect their baggage, and to take flight by stealth in the darkness
of the night, which he follows up through the whole verse. *Into
banishment and exile,* says he, *shall they go.* When therefore the
Prophet was commanded to collect and prepare his goods, he was a sign of
the exile of which he now speaks. But the explanation of the second part
is added.

<span id="xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012)<span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p2"></span>**12.** And the prince that *is* among them
shall bear upon *his* shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth: they
shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his
face, that he see not the ground with *his* eyes.

<span id="xvi.ix-p3"></span>**12.** Et princeps qui in medio ipsorum est
super humerum portabit in tenebris, et ingredietur in pariete quem
effoderint ad educendum  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) in
ipso: faciem suam occultabit, ne *(ut non)* aspiciat oculo terram.

<span id="xvi.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ix-p6"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p7"></span>We have said that two things were shown,
both the people’s exile and their clandestine flight: the Prophet now
speaks again about this trembling. He says therefore, that not only the
vulgar and the dregs of the people would be so anxious that they would
endeavor to escape secretly and carry their own baggage; but *the prince
himself,* that is, their king would be subject to such ignominy: *the
prince himself,* says he, *shall carry on his shoulder.* Many followed
him, as we have seen, and at length he was seized with a great company,
as the Prophet will shortly subjoin, and being’ caught in the desert of
Jericho, he was dragged by the enemy before their king: but here mention
is made of the king alone, because it was almost incredible that the
enemy could not be reconciled. For surrender often appeases even the
most hostile enemies; it often preserves kings, although an extended
carnage may take place; and we know that kings are often preserved on
account of their dignity, after they have been led in triumph. What
therefore the Prophet pronounces concerning king Zedekiah does not imply
any escape of the multitude from similar punishment: but because the
king himself, together with his subjects in general, would be compelled
to escape by stealth, and would be sure to fall into the hands of the
enemy.

<span id="xvi.ix-p8"></span>Next, *the prince who is in the midst of
them* Here the words, *the midst of them,* are taken in a different
sense from that in which the Israelites were lately said to be in the
midst of the people who inhabited Jerusalem, because they had been mixed
with the Jews from the time when they had dwelt within their
territories. But he says *their prince was in the midst* in another
sense, because in truth the eyes of all were turned towards him, as if
when a standard is erected, it is beheld by all, and retains the whole
multitude in their ranks, so also *the king was in the midst,* that the
people might not disperse, for a miserable dispersion follows when the
head is taken away. But the intention of the Holy Spirit must be
observed. For the Jews, as we have formerly seen, were hardened in their
wickedness by the false pretense that God would always maintain his
dwelling among them. For it had been said of the throne of David, that
it should stand as long as the sun and moon should shine in the heavens.
(<span id="xvi.ix-p8.1"></span>[Ps.
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="xvi.ix-p8.1"></span>.)
And hence Jeremiah’s lamentable complaint: the Christ, or anointed of
God, in whose breath our life consisted. (<span
id="xvi.ix-p8.2"></span>[La 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span
id="xvi.ix-p8.2"></span>.) The Prophet does not speak there after the
usual mode, and obtrusively remind God of his promise, as hypocrites do,
but he has respect to God’s counsel. For David, since he was a type of
Christ, was truly the soul of the people, even among the Gentiles, as he
is there reckoned to be. For they not only looked to their king for
safety while included within the city walls, but although dispersed
among the nations, they still hoped to be safe under their monarch’s
shadow. But their confidence was perverse, since they had impiously
departed from the true worship of God. Hence the Prophet, to deprive
them of that vain source of pride and boasting, says, *now their king
was in the midst of them:* but it would not always be so, for God would
drive him out, and even compel him to fly into secret hiding-places.

<span id="xvi.ix-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *he shall hide his face,
that he shall not see the ground with his eyes* This also was
accomplished, the sacred history narrates. For Zedekiah escaped through
the gardens by subterraneous passages: he thought the enemy would be
ignorant of his flight, but he was seized. (<span
id="xvi.ix-p9.1"></span>[2 Kings 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005)<span id="xvi.ix-p9.1"></span>; and
<span id="xvi.ix-p9.2"></span>[Jer.
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005)<span id="xvi.ix-p9.2"></span>.) We
see, then, the meaning of this concealment of his face or countenance,
namely, because Zedekiah distrusted any he might meet. But this was very
bitter, and also base and disgraceful, for a king so to conceal himself,
and not to dare to look upon the ground with his eyes. And now something
far more disastrous follows.

<span id="xvi.x"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p1"></span><span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)<span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p2"></span>**13.** My net also will I spread upon him,
and he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon, *to*
the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die
there.

<span id="xvi.x-p3"></span>**13.** Et extendam rete meum super ipsum, et
capietur in plagis meis,  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) et
educam eum *inquit* Babylonem in terrain Chaldaeae, et ipsam non
videbit, et illic morietur.

<span id="xvi.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.x-p6"></span><span id="xvi.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p7"></span>That was no slight slaughter, when Zedekiah
at length, in his desperation, thought of flight, and thus descended
into hidden trenches, as if seeking life in the tomb: thus was he
reduced to extremities. But the Prophet now adds, that it would be
useless, *because notwithstanding this he should be taken by his
enemies* Besides, what God executed by means of the Chaldeans he
properly transfers to himself. The Chaldeans laid their snares when
advised of the king’s flight: they knew its direction, and hence they
apprehended him. So God announces himself as the author: I, says he,
*will stretch out my net.* This we know, that the Chaldeans did not
leave their own country of their own accord, nor carry on the war in
their own strength, nor take the king by their own counsel; but the
whole affair was under the government of heaven. Men lent their aid, and
seemed to carry’ on the work by their own labor; but unless God had
provided for the event, all their endeavors had proved fruitless. Hence,
as God had stirred up the Chaldeans to exact punishment from the king
and the people, so he raised their minds to confidence, then he
strengthened them to persist in the siege of the city, and afterwards
opened their eyes, and sent persons to disclose the plans of the king,
so that he might be seized in a cave, as it really happened. The whole
of this was done by the secret providence of God. So diligently ought we
to observe those places in which God shows that what seems to be the
work of men is really his own. Even likeness does not want its weight;
for we seem always to have some refuge in perplexity, and on whatever
side we look around, some hope deceives us. But God announces that he
has *nets spread,* by which we are surrounded on every side: hence when
we seem to have a way of escape, God has hidden nets in which he
encloses us. So that this place compares God to a hunter, and ourselves
to wild beasts; for when a huntsman follows wild beasts, they seek for a
way of escape and rush out there, but they are caught in nets: so also
when we endeavor to elude God’s hands, we are entrapped and held by him:
because when we wish to withdraw ourselves from his providence, we
deserve that blindness which leads us to rush on our own destruction.

<span id="xvi.x-p8"></span>Hence *I will spread my net for him, and he
shall be taken in my snares, I will lead him away,* says he, *to
Babylon* The Prophet shows by degrees how formidably God’s vengeance
should alight on Zedekiah and the whole people. It was already most
miserable to be taken by the enemy and subjected to their lust and
cruelty. If he had been slain, this would have been accomplished in a
single moment, but God wished him to be drawn into exile; meanwhile he
says that he should die at Babylon, without seeing the city, both of
which were accomplished. Zedekiah then wasted away in exile, for he lay
even to his death in filth and defilement. And although he was buried,
as we saw in Jeremiah, yet this condition was most sorrowful — to fear
through one’s whole lifetime some fresh wrath of an enemy. Then he was
barbarously and inhumanly treated: his eyes were put out on the journey;
and here it is said, *he shall not see Babylon,* and yet he shall arrive
there *and die* there. Afterwards he saw his sons strangled in his
sight: then his eyes were dug out — a spectacle more grievous than
death. Now we may reflect on the kind of life a man must spend in exile,
in prison, and in chains — since he was bound with chains, as the sacred
narrative informs us — there to consume away by a slow death in a foul
prison and in total darkness; yet all this happened to Zedekiah. We see
then how God thunders against the Israelites, who thought themselves
hardly treated in exile, since they might have remained safe at
Jerusalem.

<span id="xvi.xi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014)<span id="xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p2"></span>**14.** And I will scatter toward every wind
all that *are* about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw
out the sword after them.

<span id="xvi.xi-p3"></span>**14.** Et omnes qui in circuitu ejus sunt
in auxilium ejus, et omnes alas ejus  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) dispergam ad omnem, *vel ad
quemlibet,* ventura et gladium evaginabo post ipsos.

<span id="xvi.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xi-p6"></span><span id="xvi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p7"></span>He confirms the verse above, and says, that
although Zedekiah had many soldiers as a garrison, and accustomed the
people to bear arms, yet all this would not profit him, since God would
disperse all the guards in whom he trusted. He says then, *that he would
scatter to every wind all who were around Zedekiah* For unbelievers were
deceived when they saw the king surrounded by auxiliaries, and the
people of the city trained to warfare: and since Zedekiah was so armed
for the defense of the city, they thought it could never be taken by the
Chaldeans. God, therefore, here first of all teaches that the war was
carried on under his auspices, and then that there was no doubt of his
taking the city. He does not speak of the Chaldeans, lest unbelievers
should institute a comparison — “it is true indeed that the Chaldeans
are besieging the city with a strong and numerous army, but the city is
impregnable, and besides it is defended with great spirit, and the king
has forces sufficiently strong for his defense.” Lest this opinion
should foolishly deceive the disbelievers, God comes into the field and
turns their attention away from the Chaldeans. For this reason he
ascribes to himself the conduct of the enemy: hence we gather that
profane nations are in God’s hands, since he not only governs them by
the spirit of regeneration, but compels even the impious, who desire to
abolish his authority, to obey his commands. God does not draw his sword
from heaven, nor do angels openly appear with drawn swords; the
Chaldeans do that; but as it is said in Isaiah, (<span
id="xvi.xi-p7.1"></span>[Isa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015)<span id="xvi.xi-p7.1"></span>,)
Shall the ax boast itself against its owner? Since thus the vigor of the
Chaldeans was nothing in itself, God armed them and then afforded them
the success which he wished. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015)<span id="xvi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p2"></span>**15.** And they shall know that I *am* the
LORD, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in
the countries.

<span id="xvi.xii-p3"></span>**15.** Et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah,
postquam expulero ipsos inter *gentes,*  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) et dispersero ipsos per terrag.  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254)

<span id="xvi.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xii-p7"></span><span id="xvi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p8"></span>Here God insults both Jews and Israelites
who had united themselves. He says that he would so display his power
that they should be compelled to acknowledge him, but to their own
destruction. Experimental knowledge is sometimes attributed to the
faithful; because when we are too slow, God shows us his power by sure
proofs. But what is here said ought to be restricted to the reprobate
and abandoned, who do not acknowledge God except in death. Yet Zedekiah
was not entirely without the fear of God: he reverenced Jeremiah, and
the seed of piety was not altogether extinct in his mind. As regards the
people, inasmuch as they offered the daily sacrifice, they certainly
cherished some opinion of God’s favor, and also of his power. But
because they despised the Prophets, they were altogether unsubdued, and
made a laughing-stock of their threats, and for this cause they are said
not to acknowledge God. And we must diligently notice this. For the
impious do not think themselves so stupid as to refuse to God his just
honor; but yet when God calls them they turn their backs: when he sets
before them his message, even for their own advantage, they are not only
deaf and stop their ears, but they are even riotous, and deride all his
threats like idle stories. But it is certain that no knowledge of God
can flourish when such contempt of his doctrine prevails. For this
reason he says now, at *length the Jews shall know,* because this
contempt hindered them from ascribing praise to God for his power; for
they had been terrified by even his nod. Jeremiah had assiduously
instructed them in God’s word, but they were so hardened that they
treated it as a thing of nought. The threat then is most grievous: as if
God had said, When I smite you with my hand, you shall feel me to be
God. Let us learn then to acknowledge God betimes by faith, because this
is the fitting opportunity for salutary knowledge. Let us not abuse his
patience while he rages against us with a stretched out hand, and
pursues us fiercely. Sometimes, indeed, he chastises his own people for
their good, but when it comes to pass that there is no hope of
repentance to the reprobate, then he reduces them to nothing. Now it
follows —

<span id="xvi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#016)<span id="xvi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p2"></span>**16.** But I will leave a few men of them
from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may
declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and
they shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p3"></span>**16.** Et residuos faciam ex illis
homines numeri  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) a gladio, a
fame, a peste, ut enarrent cunctas abominationes suas in gentibus, ad
quas venient; et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xiii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p7"></span>Some think that God here speaks of the
faithful, whom he had determined to preserve in the very midst of death.
And certainly there is some mitigation of his former vengeance. But it
is not in harmony with the rest to understand the faithful here, for he
is speaking of the people in general. But as we have already seen that
the slaughter of the city was such that God scattered the remnant to the
four winds, and this the Prophet confirms. We must hold, then, first of
all, that this promise was not directed peculiarly to the elect or to
God’s Church, but rather that God is showing that exile will not be the
end of woes to the captives, although they will not be directly cut to
pieces. Their condition, indeed, might seem preferable, but God
pronounces that he would be inexorable towards them. Although all should
not perish by the sword, or famine, or pestilence, and some remnant
should be left, that will happen, says he, not because I am going to be
reconciled to them, but that I may spread their crimes among the
Gentiles. For when he says, *that they may narrate,* he does not mean
that they would be witnesses to their own sins, as the pious are
accustomed, as we shall see elsewhere, to extol the mercy of God, and
candidly to confess their faults before men. He does not mean that kind
of confession which is a sign of repentance, but rather a real speech.
 <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) For that exile uttered with a
loud voice, that those men were abandoned whom God treated with such
hostility. He had chosen the people, was the guardian of the city, and
would have *been* their perpetual preserver, if their perverseness had
not prevented it. Hence their being destitute of his aid, their being
deprived of all their goods, their being treated tyrannically by their
enemies, this made their extreme wickedness clearly appear. *They
narrated,* then, not by words but by their actual position, their own
sins to the Gentiles.

<span id="xvi.xiii-p9"></span>Now, therefore, we understand the
intention of God: although some remained alive and unconcerned by either
the sword, or famine, or pestilence, yet they were cursed, since their
expulsion to a distance served no other purpose than that of spreading
their disgrace and rendering them detestable, so flint the profane
Gentiles acknowledged that they deserved vengeance for their wickedness.
Therefore *they shall narrate among the Gentiles all their abominations,
and they shall know that I am Jehovah.* Again he repeats that sentiment,
that they should know too late what they had despised: since God had
acted towards them as a father, and they had not acknowledged his favor;
and at length they should be compelled to feel him as their judge, even
to their eternal destruction.

<span id="xvi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xvi.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou declarest
to us by so many proofs the formidable nature of thine anger, especially
against the obstinate and rebellious, who reject thy word familiarly
spoken to them: Grant, I say, that we may embrace what is proposed to us
in thy name with the humility and reverence becoming’ to thy children,
so that we may repent of our sins, and obtain their pardon, until at
length we are freed from all corruptions of the flesh, and become
partakers of that eternal and celestial glory which thy only-begotten
Son has purchased for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="xvi.xv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty third

<span id="xvi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p2"></span>**17.** Moreover the word of the LORD came
to me, saying,

<span id="xvi.xvi-p3"></span>**17.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me
dicendo,

<span id="xvi.xvi-p4"></span>**18.** Son of man, eat thy bread with
quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness;

<span id="xvi.xvi-p5"></span>**18.** Fili hominis, panem tuam in tremore
comede, et aquas tuas in tumultu et dolore  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) bibe;

<span id="xvi.xvi-p7"></span>**19.** And say unto the people of the
land, Thus saith the Lord GOD of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, *and* of
the land of Israel; They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and
drink their water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from
all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell
therein.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p8"></span>**19.** Et dices ad populum terrae, Sic
dicit Dominator Iehovah habitatoribus  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) Hierosolymae super terrain Israel,
Panem snare in anxietate  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259)
comedent, et aquas suds in desolatione bibent, ut vastetur  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) terra a sua plenitudine, propter
violentiam omnium qui habitant in ea.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p12"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xvi-p13"></span><span id="xvi.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p14"></span>The Prophet is now ordered to represent
the famine which awaited the Jews in both the siege and exile. But this
prophecy ought to be especially referred to the time of the siege; for
the Jews were in continual fear, and thought that by means of their
garrison they would be impregnable. But as the Lord had often removed
this trust from them, so he does now: hence therefore that miserable
anxiety and fear, so that they never ate their bread but in fear, nor
drank their water but in confusion. For a besieged city always fears for
itself, and then the enemy so harasses them that fatigue at length
compels the besieged to surrender. And it is probable, since the army of
the Chaldees could often attempt to take the city with ease and without
any great loss, that the Jews would daily be subject to fresh terrors,
so that they could neither eat bread nor drink water except in anxiety
and confusion. But because simple and unadorned teaching would not have
been effective among the ten tribes and the Jews, hence an outward
symbol is added. The Prophet therefore is the image of the besieged
people, and hence he is ordered *to eat his bread with trembling,* that
the spectacle might the more affect these slow and slothful men. By and
bye the application follows, *thou shalt say to the people of the land*
I do not doubt that he here means the ten tribes: hence the land
signifies Chaldea, and those regions through which the exiles were
dispersed. As we have before seen, it was to their advantage to hear
this, because they thought that the Jews remaining at home were treated
well, and themselves miserably. Hence not only their complaint but even
their outcry against God and his servants, especially Jeremiah. This
then is the reason why the Prophet is obliged to utter his discourse to
the captives.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p15"></span>But afterwards it follows, *Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah to the inhabitants of Jerusalem concerning the land of
Israel,* that is, those remaining in the land of Israel. We here see
that the land of Israel is distinguished from the other land, of which
mention was lately made. Those who dwelt at Jerusalem remained quiet in
their own inheritance; and hence their condition was esteemed better,
because nothing is more sad than exile and captivity. But God pronounces
them more miserable than the captives, who had already been relieved
from the principal part of their miseries. *They shall eat,* says he,
*their bread in pain,* or torture, *and shall drink their water in
desolation:* he does not repeat the same words which he had formerly
used, but shortly shows that the Jews boasted in vain that they were
still in safety: because very soon the enemy will press upon them, so
that they should not be able to eat a mouthful of bread in peace. *That
the land may be reduced,* says he, *from plenty to devastation:* some
translate, after its plenty, which is forced and far-fetched; for the
Prophet means that the land would be desert and empty through
exhaustion: for plenty, as we well know, means an abundance of all
things. Judea was then reduced from plenty to want, when the enemies
plundered whatever it contained, and so the region was despoiled of its
wealth. The reason follows, *through the violence of those who dwell in
it.* Some explain this erroneously of the Chaldees, because they lost
the whole land through their rapacity. For the Prophet rather advises
that this vengeance of God was just, because in truth all the Jews were
given up to violence, cruelty, and rapacity. <span
id="xvi.xvi-p15.1"></span>חמס*, chemes,* signifies all kinds of injury,
but usually means violence and rapine. Hence we understand the Prophet’s
intention, namely, that the Jews suffered this slaughter deservedly,
because the just reward of their wickedness was measured out to them.
And thus Ezekiel represses all complaints, in which they too freely
indulged, as if God was treating them too roughly and hardly. Therefore
he shortly teaches them that he would not spare them any longer. It
follows —

<span id="xvi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020)<span id="xvi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p2"></span>**20.** And the cities that are inhabited
shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know
that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p3"></span>**20.** Et urbes habitatae redigentur in
solitudinem, et terra vasta erit,  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xvii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p7"></span>He pursues the same sentiment. He had
threatened destruction to Jerusalem and its citizens: he now adds the
other cities of Judah which were still inhabited. Lastly, he speaks of
the whole land, as if he said that no single corner should suppose
itself free from slaughter, since God’s vengeance should attack it as
well as the cruelty of enemies through all regions. Jerusalem was the
head of the whole nation; Ezekiel predicts its siege, and after that it
became easy to overthrow and spoil other cities, so that the whole
region was rendered subject to the lust of the enemies. He afterwards
adds what we have noticed previously, *ye shall know that I am Jehovah*
They had heard this instruction from the Prophets, they ought to have
been imbued with it from their earliest childhood, for God had borne
witness by many proofs that he was the true God. For his power had
become sufficiently known and understood by the frequent succors by
which that wretched people had been snatched from even immediate death.
But as their impiety had stupified them, so that they carelessly
despised not only the Prophet’s teaching, but the very judgments of God,
when he openly punished them, this knowledge is not mentioned without
reason. When therefore God puts forth his hand for the last time to
chastise them, he says that his power should be so manifest among them,
that it should no longer escape them; but yet they were so hardened in
their depravity that they almost entirely forgot God. For a contrast is
always to be observed between that *knowledge* which springs from
performance and that arising from utterance; for those who had closed
their ears when God invites them to himself as servants, must be
compelled to feel him to be God when he is silent and is executing his
vengeance upon them. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)<span
id="xvi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p2"></span>**21.** And the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying,

<span id="xvi.xviii-p3"></span>**21.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me
dicendo,

<span id="xvi.xviii-p4"></span>**22.** Son of man, what *is* that
proverb *that* ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are
prolonged, and every vision faileth?

<span id="xvi.xviii-p5"></span>**22.** Fill hominis, quodnam proverbium
hoc vobis in terra Israel dicendo, prorogati sunt dies,  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) et evanuit omnis prophetia?

<span id="xvi.xviii-p7"></span>**23.** Tell them therefore, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more
use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand,
and the effect of every vision.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p8"></span>**23.** Propterea dices illis, sic dicit
Dominator Iehovah, Quiescere  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)
faciam proverbium hoc, et non pro-verbiabunt amplius in Israel: quin
potius loquere ad e*os,* Appropinquarunt dies, et sermo omnis visionis.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xviii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p12"></span>Here God inveighs against that gross
ridicule which prevailed everywhere among the Jews. For when the
Prophets had been threatening them so long, this their earnestness was
so far from leading them to repentance, that they became more obstinate
and callous. Since they persisted in this obstinacy, and boasted in
their *escape, and* through *confidence* in their freedom from
punishment, re-belied more and more against God, the Prophet is ordered
to repress this their boasting. It was monstrous indeed for a people who
had imbibed from childhood the teaching of the law and the Prophets,
thus to break forth against God as if he had spoken falsely by his
Prophets. For this was their boasting: *Oh! the days are prolonged:
therefore every vision has passed away and failed* From this delay they
argued that they had no cause for fear, since whatever Jeremiah and the
rest had predicted had passed away. We perceive then how unbelievers
turn the patience of God into material for obduracy and stupidity. God
spares them, gives them leisure, and invites them to repentance; but
what do they do? They count the days and years, and when they see that
God does not immediately, execute the judgment which he had uttered by
his servants, they laugh at it, and esteem the Prophet’s words as idle
fables. Such, then, was the impiety against which the Prophet inveighs,
saying, *what is this?* The question implies detestation, for God here
wonders at the sloth, nay fury of the people, because it dared thus to
vomit forth its blasphemies with open mouth:’ for what remains when God
is supposed to be false both in his promises and his threatenings? In
this way all religion is abolished. Nor is it surprising that God
detests so monstrous a thing, while he asks how it can happen that the
Israelites break forth into such madness: *what,* says he, *is the
meaning of this your proverb?* He seems to include his servant among the
others, because he was one of the people: hence he participates in that
which did not belong to him personally. Moreover, this passage must be
diligently noticed, when the impious conclude that they have no occasion
to fear, because their days are protracted.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p13"></span>This is, as I have said, a sign of
extreme folly, but it is not surprising if they imagine God to be false
to his word and his threats to be in vain, because his hand does not
instantly appear, since they treat his teaching without the slightest
respect. Since, therefore, unbelievers are never afraid unless terrified
by the power of God, and are never in the slightest degree moved, it is
not surprising that they think it entirely illusory, when they see him
at rest while his words still resound in men’s ears. Hence the language
of the Apostle should come to mind, that Noah built the ark by faith,
because he feared the hidden judgment of God of which he had been
admonished, as if the whole deluge was before his eyes, in which he saw
the whole world immersed. (<span id="xvi.xviii-p13.1"></span>[Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.xviii-p13.1"></span>.) Although, therefore, God conceals his
hand for the time, let us learn so to fear the whole of his instructions
that delay may not lead us into such sloth as this.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p14"></span>Now he adds, *Thou shalt tell them,
therefore, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will make this proverb cease
from the land of Israel* Here God shows that his anger was more and more
inflamed by their contempt. And the impious, by pretending that he is
not true to his word, produce the effect of hastening the accomplishment
of those judgments which otherwise God was prepared to suspend. Lastly,
the impious stimulate God to exercise his vengeance, while they infer
that they have escaped through delay, and that the vision was so
fleeting and evanescent that they provoke him purposely to a contest.
For the confirmation of this sentiment follows directly, *that verily
the days were approaching.* Since time gave the Jews confidence in
escape from punishment, God announces that the end was at hand, that
they may feel themselves to have been too long blinded while they abused
his continued forbearance. *The days* then *approached:* also *the word
of every vision:* “the word” is here taken for the “effect.” We know
that <span id="xvi.xviii-p14.1"></span>דבר*, deber,* is often taken for
“thing,” “business,” “result;” but in this place the Prophet takes the
word for the effect of the vision, as if he had said, that whatever the
Prophets had spoken should be firm and stable. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xix"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024)<span id="xvi.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p2"></span>**24.** For there shall be no more any vain
vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.

<span id="xvi.xix-p3"></span>**24.** Quia non erit amplius omnis visio
 <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) mendacii,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) et divinatio blandientis in medio
domus Israel.

<span id="xvi.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xix-p7"></span><span id="xvi.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p8"></span>Here God deprives the Jews of another
source of confidence; for they flattered themselves, and had their own
agitators, that is false Prophets, who puffed them up with flatteries:
hence when they heard prophecies of sadness they despised them, and
afterwards hardened themselves as if the Prophets had frightened them
needlessly. Every one was too much inclined to this besotted confidence,
but, as I have said, enticements were added, by which the flatterers
deceived them. For the false Prophets said, that God would not be so
severe, and that those predictions about the destruction of the city and
temple were at variance with many promises. We see then that the
Prophets were despised by the voluntary contumacy of the people, and
also by the perverse acts of the false Prophets. Afterwards God
asserted, *that the days approached:* now he adds, *that there should be
no more vision of vanity,* not that the false Prophets were altogether
removed, but because their mouth was stopped, since the event had proved
their wickedness. Since then the people were made ashamed by slaughter,
in this sense and for this reason it is said, that *prophecies of vanity
must be taken away:* afterwards, *divination of flattery from the midst
of the house of Israel* For in ease and shade they promised themselves a
prosperous delivery from their miseries. For when the people were
dragged out of the city into exile, some were slain, others spoiled of
their fortunes and treated ignominiously, then the character of those
Prophets appeared who had nursed the perverse confidence of the people
by their vain enticements. Now we understand the Prophet’s genuine
sense. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xx"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)<span id="xvi.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p2"></span>**25.** For I am the LORD: I will speak, and
the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall be no more
prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word,
and will perform it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="xvi.xx-p3"></span>**25.** Quia ego Iehovah Ioquar: quod loquar
verbum, faciam;  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) non protrahetur
amplius, quia in diebus vestris domus exasperans,  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) quod loquar verbum, faciam illud,
dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="xvi.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xx-p7"></span><span id="xvi.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p8"></span>He confirms the last verse. there is some
obscurity in the context of the words, but as to the general sense, the
Prophet wishes to teach simply that what even God had spoken should be
shortly accomplished, since God wishes to assert his own fidelity by the
execution of the vengeance which he had threatened by his servants. The
Prophet here means, that it is not right to separate God’s word from its
effect, because God who speaks is not divided against himself. Whenever
he opens his mouth, he stretches out his hand to fulfill his words. Now
we understand the Prophet’s meaning; and hence we may collect the
usefulness of this teaching. For, because God’s word seems cold to us
and to be dissipated into air, we must always consider his hand.
Whenever the Prophets speak, let God come before our eyes, and let him
come not merely with bare words, but armed with his power, as if his
hand was in some way included in his word. This is the meaning of the
whole verse, *I Jehovah will utter a word, and whatever I shall utter
that will I do: it shall be no lower delayed,* but, as I have often
said, it shall return, *nay in your days, O rebellious house, I will do
what I have spoken by my servants.* Here he expresses what might yet
appear doubtful. For since a thousand years are with God as one day, the
time might be thought near, even if the city had not been taken and
destroyed with the temple for thirty years. But now God, after the
manner of men, defines the time to be near, because those who were then
alive should see the accomplishment of the prophecies which they had
despised. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
12:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026)<span
id="xvi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p2"></span>**26.** Again the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="xvi.xxi-p3"></span>**26.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me,
dicendo,

<span id="xvi.xxi-p4"></span>**27.** Son of man, behold, *they of* the
house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth *is* for many days *to
come*, and he prophesieth of the times *that are* far off.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p5"></span>**27.** Fill hominis, ecce domus Israel
dicunt,  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) visio quam hic vidit,
ad dies multos extenditur, et in tempora longinqua ipse prophetat.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p7"></span>**28.** Therefore say unto them, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but
the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p8"></span>**28.** Propterea dices ad cos, Sic dicit
Dominator Iehovah, non prorogabitur amplius; omnes sermones quos locutus
fuero, sermonem etiam faciam,  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)
dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xxi-p11"></span><span id="xvi.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p12"></span>Here indeed such detestable blasphemy as
we lately heard is not condemned in the Jews: but oblique ridicule, the
tendency of which was first of all to weaken all confidence in Prophecy,
and then to get rid of all heavenly doctrine. Those who are now
condemned by the Prophet did not dare to bluster against God with
swollen cheeks, but when others concluded the Prophecies to be vain and
frivolous, because the time was put off, they said — it may happen that
God will accomplish what he has denounced against us by his servant:
meanwhile let us feast securely as we shall be dead before these things
can happen. We see, therefore, that there were two classes of men: some
who utterly rejected God’s Prophets, and wantonly derided their threats:
this gross impiety has been already exposed. But others neither openly
nor distinctly pronounced God to be a liar, but put far away from them
the performance of the prophetic announcement. We see that the former
were so abandoned, that they all but openly derided God, so as to turn
away all fear from their own feelings since God prorogued the time. For
Jeremiah had spent his strength in vain for many years in daily
summoning them by a loud trumpet to God’s tribunal, and in setting the
Chaldeans before their eyes. Since he effected nothing, Ezekiel is
chosen, and after he has inveighed against a fouler impudence in
despising God, he now attacks the hypocrite who had not yet proceeded so
far as to vilify God by the use of words. But as I have just remarked,
the gliding down from this security to open contempt of God is easy.
Those then who feign themselves quiet and without danger, since God
patiently delays his judgments, at length determine him to be content
with his own ease, and not to regard human affairs. Let us then be on
our guard against the snares of Satan; and not only abhor the foul
blasphemy of which the Prophet speaks, but as soon as God threatens us,
let us prevent his judgment, and not promise ourselves a long period of
escape, which may render us so stupid as to deprive us of all fear.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p13"></span>*The house of Israel* then *said, he
prophesies for many days.* They did not openly assert that Ezekiel was
speaking rashly and arrogating to himself the prophetic name, but they
said that *he prophesied for many days and a long period.* Now he adds*,
thou shalt say unto them, it shall not be any lower put off* Some thus
interpret these words — all my discourses shall not be put off. They
prefer a change of number, and resolve it thus — each of my words shall
not be put. off. But the other view seems to suit the context better:
*it shall not be put off any lower, for the words which I utter I will
execute* Here again he confirms what we formerly saw: that God would not
*speak* in vain, since he is not divided in opinion. It belongs to men
to lie, and to utter vainly what they cannot perform, and to change
their; nothing of the kind ought to be imagined of God, for his hand is
always in union with his speech.  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)

<span id="xvi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p2"></span>Grant us, Almighty God, since thou sparest
us in some degree, and meanwhile dost admonish us by no obscure signs of
thine anger, to be wise in time, lest sloth seize upon our minds and
dispositions, and deprive us of sound judgment: Grant also that we may
be attentive to thy words, and to all proofs of thy coming vengeance,
and may we so strive to be reconciled to thee, that for the future being
born again of thy Spirit, we may henceforth glorify thy name through
Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc22015.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> That is, “they are.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc22015.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span> Or, “prepare.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc22015.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span> <span id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>*Orat. pro
Murcena,* sect. 12, page 129; and Edit. Lond. 1819, tom. 2, page 760. It
is needless to quote the passage, as Calvin’s allusion to it is
sufficienfiy copious, and the reader will readily perceive how our own
obsolete law forms are open to the same objection, and illustrate the
text in a similar way.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc22015.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xvi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span> Verbally, “but I dug through a wall for
myself.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc22015.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xvi.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span> Or, “I carried forth.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc22015.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xvi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p6"></span> Or, as we have elsewhere said,
“exasperating,” or “bitter.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc22015.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xvi.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p9"></span> “This sorrowful prophecy.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc22015.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xvi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p4"></span> Or, “for carrying out.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc22015.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xvi.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p4"></span> “In nets,” some translate “a drag-net,” but
erroneously, and this has given rise to mistake, because some have
thought the similie derived from fishes, while it is clear that the same
thing is indicated by different words: he shall be taken therefore in my
net. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc22015.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xvi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p4"></span> That is, “all his garrison.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc22015.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xvi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p4"></span> Or, “dissipate,” or, “scatter abroad;”
<span id="xvi.xii-p4.1"></span>בהפיצי, *behephitzi,* signifies violent
expulsion. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc22015.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xvi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p5"></span> That is, “through different regions.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc22015.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xvi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p4"></span> That is, “few men.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc22015.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xvi.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.xiii-p8.1"></span>*Realis*
*sermo.”* — *Calvin.* “<span id="xvi.xiii-p8.2"></span>Une parole par
effect, c’est a dire, reelle.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc22015.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p6"></span> Either “torture,” or, “anxiety.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc22015.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p9"></span> Or, “inhabitants.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc22015.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p10"></span> Either “torture,” or, “pain,” for he
repeats the same word. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc22015.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p11"></span> Or, “be made desolate.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc22015.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xvi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p4"></span> Or, “desert.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc22015.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xvi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p6"></span> Or, “protracted.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc22015.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xvi.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p9"></span> Or, “cease.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc22015.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xvi.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p4"></span> That is, “any vision.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc22015.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xvi.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p5"></span> Or, “vanity.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc22015.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xvi.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p4"></span> “The copula is not redundant.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc22015.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xvi.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p5"></span> Or, “rebellious.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc22015.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xvi.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p6"></span> “Saying. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc22015.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xvi.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p9"></span> Or, “I will fulfill.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc22015.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xvi.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p14"></span> The reader may profitably peruse the
comment of CEcolampadius on this chapter. He spiritualizes it more than
Calvin, and treats it allegorically, thus giving it a personal and
practical bearing on ourselves. He says, “<span
id="xvi.xxi-p14.1"></span>Unica et perpetua allegoria est, propter
contemptum verbi Dei instare captivitatem conscientiarum, et
alienationem a Jerusalem, a vero Dei cultu, qui est iu spiritu et
veritate; unde servilia opera peccatorum in sabbatismo Christi
vetantur.” His explanations are always sound, and his practical
reflections very instructive.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p15"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Ezekiel 1-12](cc22016)
