[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22012)  [Next](cc22014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then I looked, and, behold, in the
firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there appeared over
them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a
throne.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et aspexi, et ecce super expansionem
quae erat super caput cherubim tanquam lapis sapphiri, sicut aspectus
similitudinis solii quod videbatur super cos.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span><span id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>Here the Prophet relates another vision which
has a great likeness to the first which he related to us in the first
chapter, but it has another object, as we shall soon see. Since we
discussed the chief members of the vision in the first chapter, I shall
now therefore be shorter. I shall only glance at what I formerly said,
and at the same time point out any difference. But before we descend to
that, God’s design in this vision must be understood. God wished to bear
witness to the Jews that he had nothing further in common with them,
because he intended to leave the temple, and then to consume the whole
city with burning. But lest this threat should be unheeded by the Jews,
God’s majesty was placed before them so fearfully that it might strike
even the obstinate with fear. Now I come to the words. He says, *that he
saw again over the heads of the cherubim a throne, whose color was like
sapphire* Instead of living creatures he now puts cherubim, and there is
no doubt that those living creatures of which he formerly spoke were
cherubim. But because the vision occurs in the temple, God begins
familiarly to explain to his servant what was previously too obscure.
For he had seen the four living creatures near the river Chebar, namely,
in a profane country. When therefore the Jews and Israelites were absent
as exiles far from the temple, it is no wonder that God did not appear
so clearly to his Prophet as he now does when brought into the temple.
For although the Prophet has not changed his place, yet he does not seem
to have been transferred to Jerusalem in vain, and to behold what was
done in the temple. This is the reason why he now calls those cherubim
which he had before called simply living creatures. But we have
explained why four cherubim were seen, while only two were in the
sanctuary, namely, because the Jews were almost buried in gross
ignorance. They had long ago departed from the pursuit of sincere piety,
and the light of celestial doctrine had been almost extinct among them.
Since, therefore, the ignorance of the people was so gross, something
rude must be put before them, or otherwise they could not understand
what they ought to learn.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>Now it is by no means doubtful that God
obliquely wishes to reprove that base ignorance, because it was not his
fault that they did not perceive in the law and the temple whatever was
useful to be known for their salvation. *When,* therefore, God changes
this legal form, there is no doubt he shows how degenerate the people
was, just as if he had transfigured himself. But we must also remember
what I then said, that four cherubim were offered to the Prophet that
God might show that he embraced the whole world under his own dominion.
We saw a little while ago, that the Jews, While they thought themselves
already without God’s care*,* being thoroughly callous, were so blind
that they supposed at the same time that God exercised no care over the
world. In vain, therefore, in their perverse imaginations they shut up
God in heaven; he shows that he rules the whole universe, and that
nothing moves except by his secret power. Since then four cherubim are
put instead of two, it is just as if God showed that he reigned
throughout the four quarters of the globe, and that his power is
extended in all directions, and hence that it was the height of impiety
for the Jews to imagine that he had deserted the earth Thirdly, we must
remark what has also been said before, that the cherubim had four heads,
that God might show that angelic motions flourish in all creatures. But
I shall repeat this last comment in its proper place. I now only touch
it shortly.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>We must now see why the Prophet says, *there
was a throne whose color was like sapphire,* and *the throne itself was
above the four cherubim:* because in truth God has his angels at hand to
obey him: hence they are placed under his feet, that we may know that
they are not independent, but are so subject to God that they always
depend upon his nod, and are borne wherever he commands them. This is
the reason *why they were placed under the expanse where God’s throne
was* As far as the expanse is concerned, it is the noun which Moses uses
in relating the creation of the world. (<span
id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>[Gen. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008)<span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>.) The
Greeks translated it by <span id="xiv.i-p8.2"></span>στερεωμα but badly:
the Latins imitated them when they used the expression “firmament:*”*
but it is taken for the heavens, and for the whole space between us and
heaven, and yet it is above the world. God shows his throne above the
expanse of heaven, not without himself, lest the Prophet should conceive
anything earthly. For we know how inclined men’s minds are to their own
fictions. But when God is mentioned, we cannot *conceive* anything
aright unless we raise all our senses above the whole world. God,
therefore, to raise up the mind of his Prophet, and to show himself at
hand that the Prophet may reverently attend to the oracles, and then
that he may regard the heavenly glory of God with becoming humility,
interposed the expansion between his throne and the earth. It follows —

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** And he spake unto the man clothed
with linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, *even* under the cherub,
and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between the cherubims, and
scatter *them* over the city. And he went in in my sight.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et dixit ad virum, qui indutus erat
vestibus lineis, dixit, Vade  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209)
intra in medium rotarum  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) sub
cherub, et imple volas tuas carbonibus ignis  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) e medio cherubim, et sparge contra
urbem. Et ingressus est in oculis meis.  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212)

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>Now the end of the vision is related, which
I just touched upon, since God determined utterly to destroy the city;
but this is described by a visible and external symbol. God therefore is
said *to have commanded the wan who was clad in linen garments to fill
his hands with coals, and to scatter them, on the city,* namely, that he
might cause a general burning. Here, indeed, God’s name is not
expressed, but shortly afterwards the Prophet more clearly relates what
he here touches so briefly and so obscurely. It is evident that the
person seated on the throne is here spoken of, and we may collect from
the context, that this command cannot be referred to any but to God. But
we must observe, that the angel commanded to mark the elect now assumes
a new character. And hence we collect that the angels were so the
ministers of God’s favor toward the faithful, that at the same time,
whenever they were commanded, they executed his vengeance; as a steward
placed over a large family, not only sustains the office of providing
for the family, in supplying it with food and clothing, but in
chastising those who conduct themselves sinfully and wickedly. Such,
therefore, is the duty of God’s angels. When God wishes to brand sinners
with double shame, he often delivers them up to the devil as his
executioner, and when we are delivered into the devil’s hand, this is a
sign of extreme vengeance. But God by his angels often exercises
judgment against the reprobate, as examples *everywhere* occur; but that
is peculiarly remarkable, when the angel slew so many thousands in the
army of Sennacherib, that he raised the siege by which the Assyrians
oppressed Jerusalem. (<span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.ii-p10.2"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xiv.ii-p10.2"></span>.)
The same thing is now delivered by the Prophet. We saw the angel clad in
the linen garments become the protector of the faithful, to preserve
them from all injury. But now he is sent to scatter coals through the
whole city, to consume the stones and the wood, as well as the men.

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>These things seem to be contrary to each
other, but we show that there is nothing absurd in it, if God imposes a
double character on his angels. *He said, therefore, to the man who was
clothed, enter within the wheel under the cherub* Here there is a change
of number, because the singular number cherub is put for cherubim. But I
remarked before that this is usual, and God proposed nothing else than
to mark the place where the fiery coals were taken which burnt up the
city. The altar was never without fire; for it was not lawful to use any
kind of fire, since in this way the sacrifices were contaminated. (<span
id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Lev. 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013)<span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>.)
But that perpetual fire, which God wished to burn upon the altar,
regarded reconciliation to himself; for sins were expiated by
sacrifices, and therefore the fire on the altar was as it were the
people’s life. But now God signifies that he had a hidden fire within
the wheels, which were near the cherubim, or the four animals. But we
have said, and it will be necessary to repeat it again, that *by wheels*
all agitations are represented which are discerned under heaven, or
revolutions, as they are usually called. But he saw *wheels under the
angels,* because when the wind rises, when the sky is covered with
clouds and mists, when the rain descends, and the air is disturbed by
lightnings, we think, when all these things happen, that such motions
and agitations take place naturally. But before this God wished to teach
us that great agitations are not blind, but are directed by secret
instinct, and *hence* the notion or inspiration of the angels, always
exists. Now, therefore, when God orders his angel *to take fire from the
midst of the wheel which was under the cherub,* this only means that God
has various means of destroying the city. Now the wheels, as we saw
before, were carried in different directions, so that they flew
throughout the city. Since, therefore, the fire was in the midst of the
wheels, while the angels transferred the wheels by their own secret
motion, hence we gather that the burning of the city was in the hand of
God, and at the same time in the temple. For the Prophet does not now
see the wheels near the river Chebar, but in the temple itself; and
there is a tacit contrast, as I have reminded you, between the fire by
whose incense God was reconciled, and whence also the sacrifices had
their odor sweet and pleasing to God, and between this fire, which
should be destructive to the whole people. But he says, *the angel had
entered,* that we may know, as I have said before, as soon as God has
pronounced what he wishes to be done, that the execution of it is at
hand. Lastly, the Prophet here commends to us the effect of his command,
when he says, *that the angel entered immediately,* as God had
commanded. It follows —

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#003)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Now the cherubims stood on the right
side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner
court.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et cherubim stabant ad extra domus
cum veniret vir:  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) et nubes
replevit atrium interius.

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>Here the Prophet relates where the cherubim
were when the men entered, which looks only to the certainty of the
prophecy. For we are not here to seek any cunning speculations why they
were on the right hand. It is only intended to show that the way was
open to the angel to approach directly to God, and that the cherubim
were disposed there to render their assistance; for there ought to be an
agreement between the angel who took the fire which he scattered through
the whole city, and the cherubim who carried all the angels. Here the
Prophet shows this agreement, because the cherubim were turned to the
right hand when he entered, so that God was at hand; then also the
cherubim were at. hand, and thus the wheels bore along the fire.

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>Now we understand the intention of what we
read. *The interior court was filled with a cloud:* doubtless this
signifies, that God by all means confirmed the vision, that no suspicion
should creep in that the Prophet was deluded with an empty spectra
(<span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>[Exod.
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>[Nu
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>.)
This therefore is the reason why God not only appeared on his heavenly
throne, but also filled the temple with a cloud; although, as I have
said before, this cloud was a symbol of God’s alienation, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p8.3"></span>[1 Kings
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.4"></span>,)
and we know that the sanctuary was filled with a cloud, although God
then wished to testify his paternal favor: but in this place and
elsewhere, as in <span id="xiv.iii-p8.5"></span>[Psalm
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#000)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.5"></span>, and
in other places, a cloud seems to signify the averted face of God, as if
the temple was full of darkness. And this afterwards is better
confirmed; for he says —

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Then the glory of the LORD went up
front the cherub, *and stood* over the threshold of the house; and the
house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the
brightness of the LORD’S glory.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et elevata fuit gloria Ie-hovae
desuper cherub  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) ad limen domus;
 <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) et impleta fuit domus nube: et
atrium impletum fuit fulgore gloriae Iehovae.

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span>In this verse the Prophet confirms what he
lately touched upon, viz., that the temple was filled with blackness,
because God had transferred his glory away. He says then, *that the
brightness of God’s glory appeared above the threshold* But the glory of
God resided in the sanctuary and in the very ark of the covenant; but
now, when it advances to the threshold, it is just as if he should
extinguish the splendor of his glory by which the temple was adorned,
and transfer it elsewhere. But he says, *that the glory of Jehovah was
elevated from its place:* these words signify change of place: God is
everywhere said to dwell between the cherubim, and he wished to *be*
called upon there; but now his glory is said to be removed elsewhere.
Hence, therefore, it appears, that the temple was deprived of God’s
presence, and was in some sense stripped of its furniture; for without
God what remained? Hence that darkness which was formerly mentioned, and
is again repeated. The glory of Jehovah then was withdrawn: from whence?
from its own place and station, where it dwelt between the cherubim, and
came to the threshold of the temple: then he says, all was changed. For
the temple in which God’s glory formerly shone forth became full of
darkness; but the threshold of the house, which was as it were profane,
was full of splendor: not that God dwelt at the threshold, for this
vision has another meaning, viz., that God after leaving his temple
appeared without it; for by the threshold he signifies a place
conspicuous to all. Now therefore we understand the design of the Holy
Spirit when he says, *the glory of Jehovah was elevated from that seat,*
which he had chosen as a *residence* for himself between the cherubim,
*and was conspicuous above the threshold:* whence it happened that the
temple itself grew dark, but God’s brightness was conspicuous in the
court itself. It follows —

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#005)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**5.** And the sound of the cherubims’ wings
was heard *even* to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God
when he speaketh.

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et vox alarum cherubim audita fuit
usque ad exterius atrium, sicuti vox Dei omnipotentis cum loquitur.

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span><span id="xiv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span>In this verse also the Prophet confirms the
vision, because God always gave signs of his presence. But it seems also
to have another object, since the cherubim by the sound of their wings
point out a remarkable change, both unusual and incomprehensible. For he
says, *there was a noise which shook the place, just as if God was
speaking.* When therefore we hear God’s voice, the Prophet means to say,
it is just as if God thundered from heaven and made the whole world
tremble; for no concussion can be more severe than that sound of the
cherubims’ wings. From this a certain wonderful change must be
perceptible, since God so filled his Prophet with terror, that he should
be a messenger and witness of it to all others.

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou now placest
before our eyes proofs of thine anger, that we may not perversely
provoke thy wrath, like thine ancient people; but rather, may we so
profit by this teaching as to grow wise in time, and strive to be
reconciled to thee, and to cast away all our depraved desires, until at
length we shall be gathered unto that blessed rest which thine
only-begotten Son has procured for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty sixth.

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006)<span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And it came to pass, *that* when he
had commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between
the wheels, from between the cherubims; then he went in, and stood
beside the wheels.

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et factum est cum praecepisset viro
qui indutus erat lineis, dicendo, Sume ignem e medio rotae, e medio
cherubim; profectus est, et stetit e regione rotae.

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span>**7.** And *one* cherub stretched forth
his hand from between the cherubims unto the fire that *was* between the
cherubims, and took *thereof*, and put *it* into the hands of *him that
was* clothed with linen: who took *it*, and went out.

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span>**7.** Et extendit cherub manure suam e
medio cherubim ad ignem qui erat in medio cherubim: et recepit, et dedit
in volas  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) ejus qui indutus erat
lineis: et accepit, et egressus est.

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span>Here the Prophet teaches the end of the
vision. The Jews thought that they should always be safe and secure
under God’s *presence;* they thought that the sacred fire on the altar
availed for the expiation of all wickedness. But God showed that he so
resided in the temple that he clothed himself with wrath against them,
and that the cherubim were keepers of his arms by which they were at
length to be destroyed. We see, therefore, that this false and perverse
glowing by which the Jews were intoxicated was cut from under them,
since they thought that God was in some way bound to themselves
exclusively. Hence the angel is ordered to take fire and to sprinkle it
about the city, that it may be destroyed by the burning. But this was
necessary, because the Jews*,* while they for a long time obstinately
abused the forbearance of God, could not be induced to repent by any
fear of his wrath. For this reason this vision was shown to the Prophet.
Then he says that fire was given, but whence was it taken? *it was,*
says he, *in the midst of the cherubim.* When David prays to God, he
makes mention of the cherubim, (<span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>,)
by which a more familiar access is laid open, and deservedly so; because
God, when inviting the faithful to himself, as if he stretched forth his
hands to them, had angels at hand who brought him in contact with men.
Now the Prophet teaches, that God’s presence was of no use to the Jews,
because he was in arms for their destruction; and the cherubim, who were
formerly ministers of his grace, were now at hand to execute his
vengeance*,* since they extend fire from hand to hand for the
conflagration of the whole city. For he says, *that he was come who was
clad in linen garments, and stood near the wheels,* by which words he
signifies, that angels were thoroughly prepared to obey God’s commands
in every particular. In men there is great delay and even languor; but
the Prophet assures us, that angels were ready for the performance of
their duty. As soon as God shows them what he wishes to be done, they
have their hands extended, and thus they are prepared to execute his
will. For this reason he says, *that they stood near the wheels* It
follows —

<span id="xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#008)<span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p2"></span>**8.** And there appeared in the cherubims
the form of a man’s hand under their wings.

<span id="xiv.ix-p3"></span>**8.** Et visa est ipsis cherubim similitudo
manus hominis sub alis

<span id="xiv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ix-p5"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p6"></span>I will now pass rapidly over what I
explained more copiously in the first chapter, lest I should burden you
with vain repetition. I said *that hands appeared under the wings,* that
the Prophet might understand the great vigor of angels for action: but
in the meantime it marked the agreement of their agitation with the
obedience which they offer to God. For doubtless wings in angels
represent direction, by which God testifies that the angels have no
proper or independent, motion, but are governed by his secret instinct:
for wings signify something terrestrial and human. And it is clear that
when wings were given to angels, by this symbol God’s secret government
was pointed out, (<span id="xiv.ix-p6.1"></span>[Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="xiv.ix-p6.1"></span>,)
for they are not only called principalities, but powers. Since,
therefore, God governs angels by his own will, he therefore wishes them
to be represented in the sanctuary as winged. (<span
id="xiv.ix-p6.2"></span>[Ex 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020)<span
id="xiv.ix-p6.2"></span>, and <span id="xiv.ix-p6.3"></span>[Ex
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#009)<span id="xiv.ix-p6.3"></span>.)
Now, because there is no action without hands, the Prophet says that
*human hands appeared under the wings:* as if he had said, that this
alacrity was not without its effect, because it was joined with
operation, for we know that all functions are designated by this word in
Scripture. It is then as if he said, that the angels were winged, since
they were animated by the secret virtue of God, and had no motion in
themselves; then that they were apt and fit for exercising the functions
committed to them, because they were endued with hands. But he says that
*those hands lay hid under their wings,* because angels do not take up
anything rashly, as men take up a matter vigorously, but without choice.
He says, then, that *their hands were covered by the wings,* because
angels undertake nothing rashly nor without consideration, but every
operation of theirs depends on that secret government of God of which I
have spoken. It follows —

<span id="xiv.x"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p1"></span><span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#009)<span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p2"></span>**9.** And when I looked, behold the four
wheels by the cherubims, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by
another cherub: and the appearance of the wheels *was* as the colour of
a beryl stone.

<span id="xiv.x-p3"></span>**9.** Et aspexi, et ecce quatuor rotae e
regione cherubim, rota una e regione cherub unius, altera rota e regione
alterius cherub: et aspectus rotarum tanquam similitudo lapidis Tharsis.

<span id="xiv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.x-p5"></span><span id="xiv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as in the first chapter,
says that wheels were added to each living creature. I have previously
explained what the wheels mean. I will now only allude to them;
concerning the living creatures I shall by and bye treat more fully. But
the wheels are images of all the changes which are discerned in the
world. No more suitable figure can be chosen; for nothing is stationary
in the world, but revolutions, as we commonly call them, are continually
happening. Since, therefore, they are so changeable, nay even tumultuous
at times, profane men cannot understand how the world is governed by the
fixed counsel of God; but they fabricate for themselves a blind fortune:
hence God in concession to our weakness has represented to us, under the
form of wheels, all changes of things, all accidents, as they are
called, and all events; as if he were to say, that all things in the
world are revolving and changing, not only that all elements are
agitated upwards and downwards, but human events especially. Meanwhile
he has corrected the error, while he has conceded something to the
rudeness of men. For we see manifold conversions which appear to us
under the form of a wheel: but meanwhile we indulge in too much license,
when we imagine a blind fortune. Hence the Prophet *saw wheels near the
cherubim;* that is, he saw those changes by which men’s minds are
disturbed, as if all things happened rashly in the world. But he saw
that the wheels did not revolve by their own force, but are annexed to
the angels, since all events depend on a first cause, namely, on that
secret ordinance and inspiration of God, by which the angels are moved,
and whence also they have their vigor. In this explanation nothing is
forced, because it is not doubtful that the living creatures, as we
shall soon see, signify angela Let us go on then to the context —

<span id="xiv.xi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#010)<span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p2"></span>**10.** And *as for* their appearances, they
four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

<span id="xiv.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Et aspectus eorum similitudo una,
 <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) ipsis quatuor, quemadmodum si
rota esset in medio rotae.

<span id="xiv.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xi-p6"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p7"></span>We have also explained this part. He says
*that all had the same aspect,* not because God always governs events in
an equable manner, for experience opposes this. But he means that the
appearance was the same, because the variety which causes darkness to
our eyes, does not remove the perpetual and well-arranged tenor of the
works of God. Hence *there is one appearance to the four wheels,*
because all God’s works agree among themselves; and although their
wonderful variety draws our eyes this way and that, yet he knows how to
direct to his own purposes things which appear so dissipated. There is
again a kind of concession, when he says, *that wheel was in the midst
of wheel* For we see things so mutually involved, that no distinction
occurs to us when we consider God’s works by our own carnal sense. If we
wish, therefore, to judge concerning God’s works, *wheel will be in the
midst of wheel;* that is, there will be wonderful perplexity, and this
will hold us so bound together, that our minds cannot extricate
themselves. This, therefore, is the concession, that. *wheel was in the
midst of wheel;* but the common error is corrected directly afterwards,
when the Prophet adds that *the wheels were full of eyes* It follows
then —

<span id="xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#011)<span
id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p2"></span>**11.** When they went, they went upon
their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither
the head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went.

<span id="xiv.xii-p3"></span>**11.** Cum profisiscerentur, ad quatuor
latera pergebant, non revertebantur in eundo  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) quia ad locum ad quem respiciebat
caput post illud ambulabant, non revertebantur eundo.

<span id="xiv.xii-p5"></span>**12.** And their whole body, and their
backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, *were* full of
eyes round about, *even* the wheels that they four had.

<span id="xiv.xii-p6"></span>**12.** Et tota caro ipsorum, et dorsa
ipsorum, et manus ipsorum, et alae ipsorum, denique rotae ipsae plenae
erant oculis in circuitu ipsis quatuor rotis.

<span id="xiv.xii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p9"></span>Now, as I have remarked, after the Prophet
has granted that there are certain events of things as it were twisted
and bending, and that God acts through windings, he then shows that God
does nothing rashly: and that the events which we think tumultuous and
confused have a certain direction, and that too the best. For this
reason he says, first that the *wheels had set out, they did not return,
since each followed its own head* Interpreters do not agree on these
words. For as to the turning of the head, some translate it *“*the
first,” and thus mean that in whatever way the first cherub goes, the
others follow him. But I rather think that the wheels are compared with
the cherubs themselves, and the singular noun head is here put for
heads: for we before saw that wheels were annexed to each cherub,
Therefore each wheel has its own head, that is, has a living creature by
which it is ruled. Hence the sense of the Prophet is, that the ‘wheels
turned on this side or on that, by any outward or sudden impulse, but
were governed by the cherubim themselves, which will explain this
portion more clearly.

<span id="xiv.xii-p10"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p11"></span>He adds, *that the wheels were full of
eyes.* Hence we gather, that although by the events of things God may
seem to sport and to have various erratic circuits, yet all things are
governed by his inestimable wisdom: for this reason *the wheels are said
to be full of eyes* The Prophet uses the word *flesh* inappropriately
for the very body of the wheels. But we know that the language which he
used in exile was not very elegant, and hence it is by no means
wonderful if it is rather rough and savors of asperity. Yet the sense is
not doubtful, since *the whole body of the wheels in their back and
their hands* was all full of eyes: he next adds, *the wheels
themselves,* not to mark anything different, but afterwards when he
speaks of the flesh, the back and the hands, he names the wheels simply:
as if he had said that they were full of eyes in every part. Now we see
how things contrary in appearance may be best reconciled. For the events
of things are as unstable as if any one kept turning’ a wheel: then they
become complicated, as if wheel was within wheel: but in the meantime
God so tempers all things among themselves which seem to us confused,
that it may appear that he perceives best what is necessary to be done,
and that the events of things are full of eyes. But whence does this
arise? This clearness depends on the angelic inspiration, for the wheels
are not turned in different directions of their own accord, but each
follows its own leader and head. It is also said*, in appearance like
the stone Tharsis, (beryl.)* Jerome thought the Cilician sea was
intended, and so translated it sky-colored: but because we know that
this name beryl occurs among the precious stones, I therefore retain the
simple sense. Now it follows —

<span id="xiv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013)<span id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** As for the wheels, it was cried
unto them in my hearing, O wheel.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Ad rotas ipsas clamavit, rota in
auribus reels.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p6"></span>By this verse the Prophet better confirms
what I have said, that the events of things are full of eyes, since they
depend on the secret commands of God. Because therefore nothing happens
unless by God’s command, hence it happens in the multiform changes of
things that there is an equable tenor with reference to God. He says
therefore that *God cried,* or the angel, O *wheel.* We know that wheels
are properly without sense: but here the Prophet signifies that God’s
voice is heard by all creatures, so that not even the slightest motion
happens without that secret instinct. When the air is serene and calm,
we do not think that God’s voice reigns there, but we imagine some
natural cause: so also when the sky is clouded, when it rains, when
storms rise, when other changes happen, in some way or other we exclude
God from these actions. But the Prophet, on the contrary, says, *that he
heard the voice of God when he cried O wheel*  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) But God did not exclaim by way of
derision, but wished to testify that there was a certain hidden
inclination by which all creatures obey his command To this end
therefore God exclaims, O wheel, that we should not think that events
are rashly moved, or that any agitation arises without control, or that
the elements are so gross that they do not obey God, since his voice
gives efficacy and vigor to all.

<span id="xiv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#014)<span id="xiv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiv-p2"></span>**14.** And every one had four faces: the
first face *was* the face of a cherub, and the second face *was* the
face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face
of an eagle.

<span id="xiv.xiv-p3"></span>**14.** Et quatuor facies uni, singulis
animalibus, facies unius facies cherub, et facies secundi facies
hominis, et tertii facies leonis, et quarti facies aquilae.

<span id="xiv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiv-p6"></span>Now Ezekiel descends to the animals
themselves, which he now pronounces to be cherubim, yet under another
form than that in the sanctuary. We said in the first chapter why he saw
four cherubim since only two surrounded the ark of the covenant. This
variation may seem absurd, for God was accustomed to accommodate his
visions to the forms of the law, that he might hold the people in the
simplicity of the law. But the reason which I brought forward in the
first chapter is by no means to be rejected, because in truth so great
was the grossness and rudeness of the people, that it was necessary to
bend aside from the first and genuine institution. God had been content
with two cherubim, and in that number doubtless he represented all
angels; but he was surrounded on the right hand and on the left that he
might show the people that he could never be wanting in power to bring
them help. Now the Jews were so stupified that they shut up God in
heaven, because scarcely any recognition of his providence then
remained, as we have already seen. Since, therefore, the Jews thus
excluded God from the government of the world, he was obliged to use a
new form, different from that of the law, that they might really
perceive that God’s government extended over the four quarters of the
world. And there is no doubt that by the four living creatures God
reminded them that nothing took place in the world without his control.
But when the world is described, its four quarters or regions are put.

<span id="xiv.xiv-p7"></span>Now, therefore, we understand why the
Prophet saw not two cherubim only but four: the same reason for
difference in the form of the cherubim is also added. For the cherubim
were like winged boys: but the Prophet says, that each of the living
creatures was furnished with four heads. This was doubtless an
assistance towards rousing’ the people from their torpor, because the
Jews could not otherwise understand the meaning and the force of the
angelic inspiration by which God governs the whole world: hence after
four living creatures had been presented before the Prophet, four heads
were also given to each living creature, namely, *the head of an ox, of
a man, of a lion, and of an eagle* We said in the first chapter, that by
these heads all living creatures were represented to us: for although
trees, and the sea, and rivers, and herbs, and the air, and stars, and
sun, are parts of the universe, yet in living beings there is some
nearer approach to God, and some clearer display of his energy: for
there is motion in a man, in an ox, in an eagle, and in a lion. These
animals *comprehend* within themselves all parts of the universe by that
figure of speech by which a part represents the whole. Meanwhile since
angels are living creatures we must observe in what sense God attributes
to angels themselves the head of a lion, an eagle, and a man: for this
seems but little in accordance with their nature. But he could not
better express the inseparable connection which exists in the motion of
angels and all creatures. We have said, that angels are not called the
powers  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) of God in vain: now when
a lion either roars or exercises its strength, it seems to move by its
own strength, so also it may be said of other animals. But God here
says, that the living creatures are in some sense parts of the angels
though not of the same substance, for this is not to be understood of
similarity of nature but. of effect. We are to understand, therefore,
that while men move about and discharge their duties, they apply
themselves in different directions to the objects of their pursuit, and
so also do wild beasts; yet there are angelic motions underneath, so
that neither men nor animals move themselves, but their whole vigor
depends on a secret inspiration.

<span id="xiv.xiv-p9"></span>A difficult question remains, namely, why
Ezekiel says here that the first head was that of a cherub, while in the
first chapter he said it was that of an ox. (<span
id="xiv.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Eze
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#010)<span id="xiv.xiv-p9.1"></span>.)
Some escape the difficulty by saying that it appeared at a distance like
an ox, but a nearer inspection showed it to be a cherub, But this is too
forced, so that I have no doubt that there is some difference in the
vision; nor does what he afterwards adds, that this was the living
creature which he saw at the river Chebar, oppose this; for he calls
anything which is like another, and has the same object, the same thing.
Paul says their fathers in the desert ate the same spiritual food, and
drank the same spiritual drink. (<span id="xiv.xiv-p9.2"></span>[1 Cor.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="xiv.xiv-p9.2"></span>.)
But we know how different was the symbol manna, and the water flowing
from the rock, from the sacred Supper which Christ left for us; but as I
have already said, since there is an affinity between the sacred
symbols, they are to be referred to the same scope. Thus Paul says, the
same drink and the same food, and Ezekiel says, *it was the same living
creature.* Meanwhile, there is nothing out of place in our saying that
the vision is slightly changed, For when God opened himself at first,
the Prophet was on profane ground, now the vision is added more in the
form of the sanctuary, because he was seized by the Spirit, that he
might see the abominations by which the Jews had stained the temple, as
already stated. When therefore the face of an ox was presented to the
Prophet, near the river Chebar, that he might now understand that they
were angels, or living’ cherubs, and that the four heads may not
distract him, the face of a cherub is presented to him; so that, being
admonished by this sign, he may determine that each living creature is
nothing else than an angel or cherub, although it differs from the
received form, of which God had proposed to Moses an example on the
mount.

<span id="xiv.xiv-p10"></span>We now understand why God turned aside
from the course prescribed in his law, when he offered this vision to
his Prophet; because, in truth, the people had so degenerated from all
sense of piety, that they could not be taught by the simple plan or rule
of the law, but had need of gross remembrancers. This is one
explanation. Then again four living creatures are employed, that God may
signify that his energy is diffused through the whole universe. Then,
again, four heads are assigned to each living creature, that we may know
that no part of the world is free from his providence, and from that
secret inspiration which is *efficacious* through angels. Then as to the
last clause, where the face of an ox appeared to the Prophet before, now
he beholds that of a cherub, that he may understand that these living
creatures are nothing else than angels; but the reason why God endues
his angels with a new form, is because the slothfulness of the people
was so great, that they did not recognize what they ought to have been
familiar with, for it was not God’s fault that they had not imbibed the
doctrine of piety from their earliest childhood. Now it follows —

<span id="xiv.xv"></span>

<span id="xiv.xv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#015)<span id="xiv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xv-p2"></span>**15.** And the cherubims were lifted up.
This *is* the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar.

<span id="xiv.xv-p3"></span>**15.** Et ascenderunt cherubim: ipsum est
animal quod videram in fluvio Chebar.

<span id="xiv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xv-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xv-p6"></span>We shall afterwards explain in the proper
place why he says *the cherubim ascended.* The first and principal scope
of this vision was that God would no longer dwell in the temple, because
he had determined to depart thence on account of the impious and wicked
profanations by which the temple had been contaminated. Now for this
reason he says, *the cherubim ascended;* but he adds, *that was the
living creature, which he had seen near the river Chebar* He adds this
for clearing up the vision, because if it had been offered only once,
the Jews might doubt its tendency, and its obscurity would take away
their taste for it, and render the prophetic teaching quite insipid. But
since the vision is repeated, God confirms and sanctions what otherwise
had not been sufficiently stamped upon the hearts of the people; for
experience also teaches us this, that we increase in faith and make
further progress according as God speaks with us again and again. For
even if we seem to ourselves to follow up what we have learnt from the
Scriptures, yet if the same sentence is repeated, we become still more
familiar with it. Then again, if we read the same sentiment in two or
three Prophets, God brings forward more witnesses, that so the truth may
be better established; since we know our great propensity to doubt, we
are always fluctuating, and although the word of God has in it
sufficient energy to confirm us, we are still unsettled, unless our
minds are propped up by various supports. God therefore wished to place
the same thing twice before the eyes of his Prophet, that the former
vision might make more impression not only on the Prophet himself, but
also upon all the Jews. For we said that although there was some
difference, yet there is no discordance in the Prophet’s saying that the
living creature was one and the same.

<span id="xiv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#016)<span id="xiv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xvi-p2"></span>**16.** And when the cherubims went, the
wheels went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to
mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside
them.

<span id="xiv.xvi-p3"></span>**16.** Et cum proficiscebantur cherubim
proficiscebantur rotae e regione ipsorum:  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) et cum attollerent cherubim alas suas
in sublime e terra, non revertebantur rotae, etiam ipsae e regione
ipsorum.

<span id="xiv.xvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xvi-p6"></span><span id="xiv.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xvi-p7"></span>The Prophet here confirms what he had said
before, namely, that there was no intrinsic motion in the wheels, but
that they were drawn by a secret instinct wherever the cherubim moved
themselves. Hence we gather that the events of things are not
accidental, nor excited in various directions by *any* blind impulse,
but directed by the hidden energy of God, and that too by means of
angels. First he says, *when the cherubim set out, the wheels set out at
the same time:* then *when the cherubim raised their wings upwards, the
wheels followed the same course, and did not return;* that is, were not
drawn aside from that agreement of which he had spoken before; but how
the wheels were not reversed, we shall explain more clearly to-morrow.

<span id="xiv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xiv.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are the work
and fashioning of thy hands, that we may know that we exist and move in
thee alone, so that we may submit ourselves to thee, and not only may we
be ruled by thy hidden providence, but may it so appear that we are
obedient and submissive to thee, as becometh sons, that we may desire to
glorify thy name in the world, until we arrive at the fruition of that
blessed inheritance which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ
our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xiv.xviii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty seventh.

<span id="xiv.xviii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the
sentence of the Prophet when he says, *that the wheels were raised
together with the living creatures* But we have shortly taught that
whatever we behold in creation so depends on angelic motion and
inspiration, that there is an inseparable connection between them. Now
the Prophet adds, that *the wheels were not reversed,* by which phrase
he expresses their continual tenor. For it cannot happen that any
agreement should appear for a time without a sudden change occurring.
But the Prophet says that the wheels were so raised with the living
creatures that they never departed from them. Now we understand his
intention. He had previously asserted the same thing of the living
creatures, and there was a kind of contradiction to be solved which
might otherwise occasion a scruple, for he said that the living
creatures were reversed and yet not reversed, but we can reconcile these
two things, because the living *creatures* never deviated from their
prescribed course and from a definite and settled space; meanwhile they
were reversed, because they ran like lightning and hastened quickly from
one action to another. Meanwhile the Prophet wished to teach, that in
God’s works nothing is abrupt, nothing cut off, nothing mutilated, but
angels so direct all actions and all events of things, that whatever God
determines arrives at its own end. But this does not prevent God from
operating variously, and after at one goal from beginning a new course.
Now it follows —

<span id="xiv.xix"></span>

<span id="xiv.xix-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#017)<span id="xiv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xix-p2"></span>**17.** When they stood, *these* stood; and
when they were lifted up, *these* lifted up themselves *also:* for the
spirit of the living creature *was* in them.

<span id="xiv.xix-p3"></span>**17.** Et cum starent animilia stabant
etiam: et cum elevaren-tur elevebant se: quia spiritus animalis in
ipsis.

<span id="xiv.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xix-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xix-p6"></span>As he just said that the wheels were
obedient to the movement of the living creatures, so he now says that
they ceased with them. But in this place it seems as if some incongruity
might arise: for it is not correct to say that angels ever rest. We know
that their quickness and promptness in executing God’s commands is
celebrated. (<span id="xiv.xix-p6.1"></span>[Ps.
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021)<span id="xiv.xix-p6.1"></span>.)
Then since angels are the powers of God, it follows that they never
cease from their office of working. For God never can rest; he sustains
the world by his energy, he governs everything however minute, so that
not even a sparrow falls to the ground without his decree. (<span
id="xiv.xix-p6.2"></span>[Mt
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="xiv.xix-p6.2"></span>.)
And there is that known and celebrated sentence of Christ, My Father and
I work hitherto. (<span id="xiv.xix-p6.3"></span>[Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="xiv.xix-p6.3"></span>.)
Since, therefore, God never rests from his works, how then can that
resting be explained of which the Prophet says, *when the angels stood,
the wheels also stood?* I reply: it must be taken in a human sense; for
although God works continually by means of angels, yet he seems
sometimes to rest between. For he does not govern his works in any
equable manner, as for instance, the heavens are sometimes calm, and at
others agitated, so that a great variety appears in *God’s* works, from
which we may imagine that he is sometimes in vehement motion, and at
others at perfect repose. This, therefore, is the cessation of which the
Prophet now speaks when he says, *the living creatures* stood, and at
the *same time the wheels with them* Experience also confirms this; for
God sometimes seems to mingle heaven and earth, and rouses us by
unaccustomed work, while at others the course of his works seems to flow
like a placid river. So that it is not absurd to say that *the wheels
stood with the living creatures,* and *proceeded and were elevated with
them* He adds, *the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels,* I
explained this point, in the first chapter, but here it may be shortly
explained, that the spirit is here taken for secret vigor or instinct.
The wheels are not properly animated, because we said that the events of
things are represented to us by this word, and whatever seems to happen
in the world; but their incomprehensible vigor and agitation proceeds
from God’s command, so that all creatures are animated by angelic
motion: not that there is a conversion of the angel into an ox or a man,
but because God exerts and diffuses his energy in a secret manner, so
that no creature is content with his own peculiar vigor, but is animated
by angels themselves. Now it follows —

<span id="xiv.xx"></span>

<span id="xiv.xx-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018)<span id="xiv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xx-p2"></span>**18.** Then the glory of the LORD departed
from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubims.

<span id="xiv.xx-p3"></span>**18.** Et egressa est gloria Iehovae e
limine domus, et stetit super cherubim:

<span id="xiv.xx-p4"></span>**19.** And the cherubims lifted up their
wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out,
the wheels also *were* beside them, and *every one* stood at the door of
the east gate of the LORD’S house; and the glory of the God of Israel
*was* over them above.

<span id="xiv.xx-p5"></span>**19.** Et sustulerunt cherubim alas suas,
et ascenderunt e terra in oculis reels: cum egrederentnr rotae etiam
coram ipsis: et stetit super limen portae Iehovae orientalis: et gloria
Dei Israel super ipsa sursum.

<span id="xiv.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xx-p7"></span><span id="xiv.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xx-p8"></span>Here the Prophet teaches us what is the
principal point in the vision, namely, that God had deserted the temple:
for we, know with what confidence the Jews boasted that they should be
safe continually under the protection of God. In consequence of the
promise, that God’s temple should be the place of his rest wherein he
would dwell, (<span id="xiv.xx-p8.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xiv.xx-p8.1"></span>,)
they did not think it possible that God would ever leave them: so they
sinned without restraint; and while they drove him far away from them by
their crimes, yet they wished to have him in some way bound to them.
This folly is derided by Isaiah — Heaven is my seat, and earth is my
foot. stool: what house therefore will ye build for me? (<span
id="xiv.xx-p8.2"></span>[Isa 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span
id="xiv.xx-p8.2"></span>.) God had commanded his temple to be built, and
wished to have his earthly dwelling, place there: but he says that his
wish had been rendered nugatory: and how? why when he promised that he
would dwell in the temple, he wished his name to be purely and
reverently invoked there.

<span id="xiv.xx-p9"></span>But the Jews had polluted the temple in
every way. Hence they thought that God was shut up there in vain:
because his liberality did not tend to his partaking of the captivity of
the Jews, but to his having them in obedience to himself. Therefore
Isaiah deservedly says, that the temple became unfit for the use of God
when it was profaned. So also we see in Jeremiah: Do not trust in lying
words, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of
Jehovah. (<span id="xiv.xx-p9.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="xiv.xx-p9.1"></span>.)
That repetition is used because they were so elated by their obstinacy.
The Jews resisted the Prophets, and as often as any threat was uttered
against them, they immediately fled to that asylum, the temple of the
Lord.

<span id="xiv.xx-p10"></span>For this reason therefore the Prophet now
relates, *that the glory of God had deserted the sanctuary:* for
otherwise what we have seen would have been out of place: he was sent to
scatter burning through the whole city: in this way the temple would
have been burnt, and God would have been consumed by peculiar fire: here
I speak after the common form, because when the ark of the covenant is
called the God of hosts, (<span id="xiv.xx-p10.1"></span>[2Sa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002)<span id="xiv.xx-p10.1"></span>,)
how could it happen that the fire should destroy the ark, together with
all parts of the temple? But God himself meets them and shows them that
the temple was deprived of its glory when it was destroyed by the enemy.
Afterwards the temple was overthrown And in the Psalms its lamentable
ruin is described, how cruelly and proudly, and with what barbarous
mockery the enemy insulted it, (<span id="xiv.xx-p10.2"></span>[Psalm
74](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#000)<span id="xiv.xx-p10.2"></span>, and
<span id="xiv.xx-p10.3"></span>[Psalm
79](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#000)<span id="xiv.xx-p10.3"></span>:)
this was very disgraceful, and disturbed their weak minds. Hence it was
necessary to persuade the faithful that God no longer dwelt in the
temple, but that it remained only an empty spectacle, because he had
taken away his glory since the place was corrupted by so many
defilements. Now therefore we understand the design of the Prophet, when
he says *that the glory of Jehovah had departed from the threshold of
the house, and stood above the cherubim* But he had already said that
the cherubim had raised their wings, which he again confirms. Whence it
follows, that God with his angels, when the temple was left, deserted
the Jews, so that for the future they would boast themselves in vain to
be safe under his protection. Therefore he says *that the cherubim
raised their wings, and ascended from the earth before his eyes* Nor is
this clause superfluous, since it was difficult to persuade the Jews of
what he said about his deserting them. There was a celebrated oracle,
“here will I dwell, since I have chosen it.” (<span
id="xiv.xx-p10.4"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="xiv.xx-p10.4"></span>.) When they grasped at that, they thought that
the sun would sooner fall from heaven than God would leave that temple.

<span id="xiv.xx-p11"></span>But the Prophet says *that he saw it
clearly,* that no doubt might remain. If any one should here ask, how
that promise which I have mentioned agrees with that departure which the
Prophet here relates? the answer is easy, if we only understand that God
does not always work by human means, nor yet according to our carnal
perception. God often seems to act so abruptly that his beginning is
without an end: in fine, God seems sometimes to sport and to draw back
his hand, so that the event does not answer to the joyful beginnings.
Since therefore, according to our carnal senses, God’s works appear to
be frustrated, it is necessary to use such language: otherwise we should
never understand how God departed from the sanctuary, when he had chosen
it in perpetuity. But he so departed, that the place still remained
sacred, and the temple stood before God though it had been overthrown in
the eyes of men. The visible appearance of the temple was taken away,
but meanwhile, since the temple was founded on the promise of God, it
stood among its ruins, as I have said. For this reason Daniel, although
solitude and devastation ought to avert his eyes and senses from Judea,
prayed in that direction, as if the temple had remained entire. And why
so? He looked at the promise. (<span id="xiv.xx-p11.1"></span>[Da
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)<span id="xiv.xx-p11.1"></span>.)
And for this reason the Prophet said, after the return from the
captivity, that the glory of the second temple surpassed that of the
first, as the Prophet Haggai says. (<span id="xiv.xx-p11.2"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="xiv.xx-p11.2"></span>.)
And we know with what copiousness and magnificence Isaiah discourses
concerning the splendor of the second temple and its inestimable glory.
(<span id="xiv.xx-p11.3"></span>[Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007)<span id="xiv.xx-p11.3"></span>.)
We shall see also a similar doctrine at the end of this book. Since
therefore the temple stood before God, because it was founded on his
promise, this temporary desertion could not abolish what I have said
concerning God’s perpetual station.

<span id="xiv.xx-p12"></span>same thing also must be said concerning the
kingdom: that kingdom ought to stand while the sun and moon shone in
heaven, (<span id="xiv.xx-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span id="xiv.xx-p12.1"></span>,)
this is true: and yet there was a sad interruption during many years.
For we know what a serious disgrace the last king suffered: then had all
dignity fallen to ruin, so that nothing could be seen but the horrible
vengeance of God. And yet that promise always had its own effect; as
long as the sun and moon shall stand, they shall be my faithful
witnesses of the perpetuity of the kingdom. Now then we understand in
what sense God left his temple, and yet did not in anywise break his
promise. But he says, *the glory of the God of Israel stood at the
eastern gate, but above it, so that it was raised up from the earth.*
The meaning of that speech was, that the Jews might know that God was no
longer to be sought in that dwelling of wood and stone, because he had
not only left his seat, but had ascended upwards, that they should have
no more intercourse with him. Now it follows —

<span id="xiv.xxi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020)<span id="xiv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxi-p2"></span>**20.** This *is* the living creature that
I saw under the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that
they *were* the cherubims.

<span id="xiv.xxi-p3"></span>**20.** Ipsum est animal quod vide-ram
subtus Deum Israel in fluvio Chebar: et cognovi quod cherubim esscut.

<span id="xiv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxi-p6"></span>He repeats what we have seen before,
namely, that one vision was offered twice, because God wished to mark
distinctly what otherwise had been doubtful. The Prophet indeed was
sufficiently persuaded that God had appeared to him, but the
confirmation of it was not in vain, because he would have to sustain
great conflicts. Meanwhile it must be observed, that the vision was
confirmed a second time, not for the private advantage of a single
person, but that this drawing attention to it might profit the whole
people, or at any rate render those without excuse who so despised the
favor of God, so manifest and so clearly laid open to them. He says,
therefore, *this was the living creature which he had seen under the God
of Israel* In the first chapter he related that there was a throne in
the open firmament of heaven, where he sat who was like a man in
external form, and yet was not a man. There we saw that the true and
only God was alluded to, and yet that this description could not apply
to the Father, but necessarily belonged to the Son. These two things
then are to be borne in mind: and the Prophet here takes away all doubt
when he names *the God of Israel like a man,* which could not apply to
the person of the Father. That likeness then ought, to be agreed upon
among the pious. Controversy, therefore, on this point ought not be
engaged in; for Sabellius, who took away the distinction of persons, was
sufficiently refuted by his own extravagance. Since, therefore, the
Father never put on the form or likeness of man, and it is nowhere read
in the Scriptures that. he is compared to a man, we must explain this of
Christ. And now Ezekiel bears witness *that he is the God of Israel.* We
see, therefore, how foolishly the triflers of our day babble who desire
to disturb the Churches by making Christ a sort of deity transfused from
the substance of the Father. They confess, indeed, that he is God, but
this confession is a mere pretense,  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) since they say that the God of Israel
means God the Father, and that the title cannot apply to either the Son
or the Spirit. The Spirit, therefore, is mistaken when he says by the
Prophet’s mouth*, the God of Israel appeared in human form* This place,
therefore, is remarkable for refuting that delusion by which foolish men
fatigue themselves and others: while they allow Christ to be God, yet
they deprive him of his true deity, because they say that it is derived
from the Father.

<span id="xiv.xxi-p8"></span>He says also, *that he knew them to be
cherubim* Now although he knew that God had appeared to him before, yet
he had no certain knowledge concerning the living creatures, for with
regard to them he remained in suspense; but now after God has familiarly
explained to him the vision in the temple, he says, *that he was taught
that they were cherubim* So what we said yesterday is confirmed, that
the face of the ox was changed into that of a cherub, so that the
Prophet understood that angels were pointed out under the form of
cherubim, even those which surrounded the ark of the covenant. Let us
proceed —

<span id="xiv.xxii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#021)<span id="xiv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p2"></span>**21.** Every one had four faces apiece,
and every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man *was*
under their wings.

<span id="xiv.xxii-p3"></span>**21.** Quatuor quatuor:  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) facies uni, et quatuor alae uni: et
similitudo manuum hominis sub alis ipsorum.

<span id="xiv.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xxii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p7"></span>The Prophet appears to dwell on points by
no means doubtful: he has already spoken of the four heads, then why
does he repeat it? Because he was dealing with a dull and perverse
people: they were also slow in receiving the Prophet’s doctrine: and
they added this vice worse than all the rest, namely, a constant and
open endeavor to detract from the authority of all the Prophets. For
this reason the Prophet says, that there were *four heads and four wings
to each living creature,* lest the Jews should scoffingly deride it as
an empty specter and delusion of the Prophet, because he thought he saw
what had no existence. For this reason he inculcates more frequently
what. was sufficiently clear by itself had the Jews been docile and
obedient. It follows —

<span id="xiv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#022)<span id="xiv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p2"></span>**22.** And the likeness of their faces
*was* the same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their
appearances and themselves: they went every one straight forward.

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p3"></span>**22.** Et similitude facierum ipsis,
facies quam videram super fluvium Chebar, aspectus eorum et ipsa  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) quisque  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) ad  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) faciem suam proficiscebatur.

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p9"></span>He pursues the same sentiment, that
nothing was obscure or perplexed in this vision, since all things were
mutually suitable. For the remembrance of the vision which he had
received remained in the Prophet’s mind: but now when he is hurried into
the temple, he recognizes the same God and the same forms as those to
which he had been accustomed. We see then how he meets their
perverseness, who had otherwise boasted that he had offered them only
his own fictions without any truth in them. Hence he restrains this
petulance, and shows that God had certainly appeared to him, and that
too a second time. Since he now says *that each living creature went,
forward in the direction of its face,* it is not doubtful that this
refers to their actions. Hence he points out that angels did not wander
in their course as a person usually does who looks this way and that, or
deserts the path, or turns to the right hand or the left. The Prophet
therefore says, that the living creatures proceeded so that each was
intent on its own end or scope: because if the motion of the angels had
been turbulent, they had not been the servants of God. Finally, the
Prophet signifies that the angels were not only alert and prepared for
obedience, but were at the same time arranged and formed after a fixed
rule, so that they did not in the slightest degree turn aside from. the
command and direction of God  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) It
now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc22013.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span> Or “enter.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc22013.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span> “Of the wheels.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc22013.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span> That is, “lighted coal.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc22013.htm#fr_212) <span
id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span> “To my eyes.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc22013.htm#fr_213) <span
id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> That is, “while he was entering.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc22013.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xiv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span> That is, “which was above the cherub.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc22013.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span> “Above the threshold of the temple.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc22013.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xiv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span> “Into his hands.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc22013.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xiv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p4"></span> That is, “the appearance of each was the
same.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc22013.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xiv.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p4"></span> “Going forward.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc22013.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p7"></span> Compare *Milton* here: —

<span id="xiv.xiii-p8"></span>*“Wheel within wheel indrawn,  
Itself instinct with spirit.”* — Par. Lost, *6:751.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc22013.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xiv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiv-p8"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xiv-p8.1"></span>*Virtutes*.” — Lat. “<span
id="xiv.xiv-p8.2"></span>*Vertus* de Dieu.” — *Fr.* An important word,
lint not very easily translatable by a single English word. — *Tr*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc22013.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xiv.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xvi-p4"></span> Or, “near them.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc22013.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xiv.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxi-p7"></span> The Latin is, “<span
id="xiv.xxi-p7.1"></span>merus *est fucus:”* the French, *“*<span
id="xiv.xxi-p7.2"></span>*mats* ce n’est que toute tromperie:”
*Anglice,* “all trash.” — *Tr.*

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc22013.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xiv.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p4"></span> This is, “four apiece.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc22013.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p4"></span> “The living creatures or cherubs
themselves.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc22013.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p5"></span> “Cherub.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc22013.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p6"></span> “Towards.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc22013.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p10"></span> The explanation which Calvin gives of
the meaning of these singular Disclosures is indeed very adverse to our
modern ideas of those physical laws by which the Almighty governs the
universe; and they will not perhaps be easily adopted by those who have
been inspired with the philosophy of Bacon and Newton. The reader of
Calvin may with satisfaction con-suit C. B. Michaelis’ *Sylloge Comment.
Theol.,* edited by D. T. Pott, volume 5, and following; Lightfoot’s
*Description of the Temple,* volume 1; and Jahn’s *Bibl. Archoeolog.,*
volume 2, sec. 187, and following.

<span id="xiv.xxiii-p11"></span>The learned *Commentary on Ezekiel* and
*Explanations of his Visions,* by Hieron. Pradus and Joan. Bapt.
Villalpandus, two Jesuits, published at Rome in 1596 and 1604, by the
permission of their superiors, illustrates this tenth chapter very
copiously, and displays great diligence, erudition, and accuracy.
Another valuable exegetical exposition of this chapter is given by
OEcolampadius in his *Comment. in omn. libr. Prophet.,* edit. 1558; he
occupies eighteen folio pages with an elaborate comment under the title
*“*<span id="xiv.xxiii-p11.1"></span>*Expositio mysterii quod hac
visione adumbratur,”* in which he sees <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p11.2"></span>*Christus dominus glorioe* and <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p11.3"></span>*gratia est firmamentum justitioe Christi*
The discussion of the Cherubim is very complete, though it may be well
to consult the article in Kitto’s *Biblical Cyclopedia* on the word
“Cherub.” Rosenmuller, in his valuable *Scholia,* makes constant use of
the Arable and Syriac versions, quotes fully from the Greek. of
Theodoret, and diligently compares the Hebrew Codices of Kennicott and
De Rossi, as well as the Greek texts of the Roman Codex, the
Complutensian, and the Alexandrine. With such <span
id="xiv.xxiii-p11.4"></span>*adminicula* the reader of these Lectures on
Ezekiel will have sufficient *data* for forming a correct judgment on
the merits of Calvin’s interpretation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc22014)
