[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22010)  [Next](cc22012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>Chapter 8

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass in the sixth year,
in the sixth *month,* in the fifth *day* of the month, *as* I sat in
mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the
Lord GOD fell there upon me.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit anno sexto, mense sexto, die
quinto mensis, ego sedebam  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) domi
meae*,* et Seniores Jehudah sedentes coram facie mea, et cecidit super
me illic manus Dominatoris Iehovae.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span><span id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>There is no doubt that a prophetic vision is
here narrated; for the Prophet was not carried to Jerusalem, nor had he
changed his place, nor were the elders of Judah before him, but he
seemed to himself to be seized by the Spirit of God, that he might
perceive the pollutions by which the Jews had profaned the temple. For
he says, *that he was at home when this vision occurred to him,* and yet
it was possible for him to be walking in the field. He does not,
therefore, relate the thing as done, but simply teaches how God
appeared, and adds the circumstances. By *elders of Judah* I do not
understand captives, but those who were then dwelling at Jerusalem, that
they should be witnesses of this prophecy, and so all excuse and
pretense of mistake was taken away from them. He also expresses the time
at which this vision happened, namely *the sixth year,* which he numbers
from the exile of Jechoniah, as we saw in the first chapter. Hence an
interval of a year and two months has elapsed since the first vision
which was then unfolded, and the present which is now to be treated.
Since, therefore, fourteen months had elapsed, God appeared again to his
Prophet. This circumstance of the time is by no means superfluous, for
this shows the great obstinacy of the people. The Prophet, as I have
said, numbers the years from the exile of the king. But they were
accustomed to count from the jubilee year; but he now renews the grief
for that slaughter, when the king was treated ignominiously as a vile
captive, and was harassed as a slave by the enemy. Since, therefore, the
Prophet humbles the Jews by this computation of years, hence it appears
how hardened was their obstinacy, as they did not grow wise though so
severely chastened. But we shall see that they were seized with a
prodigious madness, so that they cast aside the worship of God, they
heaped together on every side new idolatries, and infected the temple
with their abominations. We saw in Jeremiah (<span
id="xii.i-p7.2"></span>[Jer 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017)<span
id="xii.i-p7.2"></span>, and <span id="xii.i-p7.3"></span>[Jer
44:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017)<span id="xii.i-p7.3"></span>)
that the worship of God was overthrown in the city Jerusalem, and in the
temple itself; for they poured out libations to the workmanship of
heaven — others translate, the queen of heaven, but we have shown that
those places ought to be understood of all the stars — since, therefore,
they offered incense to the workmanship of heaven, then they afterwards
took to themselves idols and polluted themselves with the superstitions
of all the nations. Our Prophet shows that they were not touched with
any sense of their punishment, but that they became worse from the time
when God began to raise his hand against them; for it was just as if he
had begun to show himself from heaven the avenger of their
superstitions. Hence we have a reason why the Prophet here mentions
years and months, and even the fifth day of the month, namely, that the
Jews may be held more convicted of their obstinacy, since no punishments
recalled them into the way, but they wrestled with diabolical obstinacy
against God. He says, *the hand of God fell;* by *hand* I do not simply
understand prophecy as some do, but strength; for the sense seems too
restricted to say, God’s prophecy fell — the phrase is too cold. But
this is properly said of the power of God. It is just as if he professed
that he did not bring forward anything of his own, because he put off,
as it were, the man whilst Gods power reigned in him. Thus the power of
God is opposed to all human faculties. It follows —

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as
the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins even downward
fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness,
as the colour of amber.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et aspexi, et ecce similitudo  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) tanquam aspectus ignis: ab aspectu
lumborum infra ignis: et a lumbis ejus sursum tanquam aspectus
splendoris, tanquam figura chasmal.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>Some translate the last word angel, but in
my opinion erroneously: for <span id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>עין, *gnin,*
properly signifies color, and I have already refuted that error in the
first chapter. I am not clear as to what color it was, hence I follow
the received opinion that, it was like amber. Now the Prophet says, *he
saw a likeness,* or image composed of two parts; *for from the loins
downward it was like fire, but upwards it was brightness.* By the word
<span id="xii.ii-p7.2"></span>דמות, *demoth,* I do not doubt that he
means the image of a man. God, therefore, appeared to his servant under
some image; nor is the human figure out of place, because if it had been
any other figure without doubt the Prophet had been silent. But we have
already seen that God had put on the human form, and so represented
himself in the person of his only begotten Son, as we have said, and
shall see again in the tenth chapter. This, therefore, is the likeness
of which the Prophet speaks, but he uses this word on purpose, that we
may know that it was not a true and solid and substantial thing called
body. As to the Prophet’s beholding a figure or likeness, this took
place only in a bare vision, not that God then put on a body; and
concerning this point also I have treated at length in the first
chapter, and shortly I shall glance at it again. Now as to his saying,
*one part of the figure was fiery,* but in another, *the aspect of
splendor,* he seems here to express what the Jews ought to hope for,
when at length they perceived God to be near, from whom they thought
themselves very far off, since they so boldly despised his law and all
the prophecies. As to the splendor, God’s majesty and incomprehensible
glory is signified. For if brightness blinds our eyes, what would happen
if we endeavor to penetrate to that immense light of which the sun is
only a little spark? Since, therefore, Ezekiel says, *there was the
likeness of splendor above his loins,* he doubtless shows how formidable
the majesty of God ought to be to us. For God dwells in light, but
inaccessible, as the Apostle says: *but below,* says he, *was the
appearance of fire,* namely, because he must not. wait till the Jews
received any joy from the presence of God. (<span
id="xii.ii-p7.3"></span>[1Ti 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="xii.ii-p7.3"></span>.) We know, indeed, that hypocrites always boast
rashly in the name of God, as Amos reproves them, What is to you the day
of the Lord? it is a day of darkness and not light. (<span
id="xii.ii-p7.4"></span>[Am 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)<span
id="xii.ii-p7.4"></span>.) For they boast that God would be entreated in
their miseries, and that he must assist them, because he had taken them
under his protection. The Prophet refutes this arrogance, and says, that
the day of the Lord would be darkness. So also in this place, God
appeared in the form of fire towards the earth, that the Jews should
tremble when they saw the vengeance of God lighted up to consume them.
Therefore in the splendor God’s majesty was shown, which humbled the
Prophet and all the pious, that they should receive the vision
reverently; for in the fire God’s vengeance was shown, lest the Jews
should make for themselves too wide a shield of the name of God, which
they extended falsely and fallaciously.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**3.** And he put forth the form of an
hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up
between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God
to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the
north; where *was* the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to
jealousy.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et misit similitudinem marius, et
sustulit me in cincinno capiris met: et erexit  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) me spiritus inter terram et inter
coelum: et adduxit me Hierosolymam in visionibus Dei, ad ostium portae
interioris, quae respicit Aquilonem: ubi illic sedes idoli zeli zelare
facientis.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>The Prophet here relates that he was
carried to Jerusalem that he might behold the foul superstitions by
which the Jews had defiled the temple. But first he says, *that the form
of a hand was put forth* Whence again we collect that the body was not
solid or substantial which the Prophet had seen; but was only a visible
figure as a symbol of God’s presence. This explains the word likeness or
figure, for it was not a real hand which seized the Prophet by the locks
or hair of the head, but it was the likeness of a hand, and therefore he
adds*, in the visions of God it was done. He* says indeed that he was
carried up between heaven and earth, but let no one imagine that this
was really done, for he explains himself and says, *in the visions of
God* By *visions of God* he understands a revelation free from all
doubt: for there is a silent opposition between these divine revelations
and the spectres which often deceive men’s senses. Those who interpret
“visions of God” simply as prophecy weaken what the Prophet wished to
express emphatically; and those who think God’s name used here as an
epithet, (as the Hebrews call anything remarkable, divine,) also depart
from the genuine sense of the Prophet. There is no doubt, therefore,
that he opposes the visions of God to all spectres: for Satan as we know
deludes men’s senses with his prodigies and his wonderful arts of
fascination: for it happens that the children of God are sometimes
deluded: hence the Prophet, to take away all doubt from his teaching,
says *that he was carried to Jerusalem in visions of God,* and adds,
*that he was carried to the northern gate.* We know that there were many
gates of the large area, so that the people’s entrance should be more
commodious. For if there had been only one gate open, they would have
been more tumultuous, as a multitude usually is. The area of the temple
then had an eastern and a northern gate: then it had other gates, which
gave an easy entrance to the people as well as to the priests. The
priests indeed had an inner area which was distinct, but when they
offered victims on the altar, they mingled with the people. This
therefore was the reason why the floor of the temple had different
gates. Now the Prophet says, *that he was carried to the porch of the
gate,* so that he did not penetrate directly into the secret part of the
temple, but seemed to himself to be standing before the doors, till God
informed him of what was doing within. He says, *there was the seat of
the idol.* We know not what the idol was, except that the Prophet says
it was abominable. He first calls it *the idol of jealousy,* and then
adds the participle, *provoking God to jealousy* But although the noun
as well as the verb is often taken in a bad sense, yet God transfers the
affection of jealousy to himself, and in this sense he says in
Deuteronomy,

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>“They provoked me: they made me jealous
with what is not God: therefore will I make them jealous,” (<span
id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span id="xii.iii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>He alludes to the jealousy of husband and
wife, for if the woman prostitutes herself, the husband burns with
indignation, and that outbreak of his anger is most flagrant, So also
when the wife in her turn knows that her husband is an adulterer, she is
carried away with intemperance and excess. Hence God, when he shows how
he esteems his glory and worship, compares himself to a jealous man,
when we turn aside to idolatrous and adulterous worship. In this sense
the idol which was in the porch or entrance of the temple is called *the
idol of jealousy, and the idol which causes jealousy.* Although we may
also translate, it was the seat of the idol causing jealousy, since the
noun, <span id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>קנאה*, kenah,* is taken in the
ablative case. It is said that this idol provoked to jealousy, because
the Jews by erecting this idol trod under foot their God, or at least
endeavored to prostrate his glory. Now it follows —

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#004)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** And, behold, the glory of the God of
Israel *was* there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain.

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et ecce illic gloria Dei Israel,
secundum visionem quam videram in planicie.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>Now he only says that he saw God’s glory as
he had formerly beheld it near the bank of the river. This was as it
were the seal of his prophecy: for the holy man ought to be so
strengthened, that he should boldly restrain the furious audacity and
obstinacy of the people. Hence he had to strive with hard heads, and God
did not arm him in vain; and to this end again a new vision was offered.
He knew that to be the glory of God. Hence he was again made more
certain that the whole action was under divine direction, and that it
was neither human nor fictitious, nor deceptive nor doubtful. It follows
—

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span><span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#005)<span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**5.** Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift
up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the
way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this
image of jealousy in the entry.

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et dixit ad me, Fib hominis, tolle
agedurn oculos tuos ad viam septentrionis: et sustuli oculos meos ad
viam septentrionis: et ecce a septentrione ad portam altaris idolum
illud zeli in introitu.

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span><span id="xii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>Here one profanation of the temple, is shown
to the Prophet, namely, the idol erected at the entrance of the area
near the altar. It may happen that the worship of God is but slightly
vitiated, so that the corruption is scarcely apparent. But while the
Prophet repeats that the idol was *that of jealousy,* lie points out the
gross and shameful disgrace of that spectacle, so that they could not
gloss over their impiety by any pretense, after they had so openly and
confessedly revolted from the law of God. But when *he is ordered to
raise his eyes to the way of the north,* this also avails for the
confirmation of his teaching. For if the Prophet had turned his eyes
that way of his own accord, his looking that way would have been of less
moment, but when God directs his eyes by express command, the reproach
which afterwards follows has more weight. This, therefore, is the reason
why the Prophet did not cast his eyes of his own accord towards the
idol, as he might have done, but was admonished by God to do so.
Meanwhile it appears with what docility he obeyed God’s commands. He
puts these two things together, *that he was ordered to raise his eyes,*
and *that he immediately did so* We see here that he was so obedient to
God’s command, that he did not delay but instantly obeyed it. He says,
*the idol was near the gate of the altar,* which circumstance
exaggerates the crime. If the idol had been erected in any remote corner
it would have been an intolerable sacrilege, though the modesty of the
Jews had been greater: but when they erected the idol before the altar
they flew as it were in the very face of God. If an immodest woman runs
after an adulterer, her husband is justly enraged; but if she brings him
before her husband, and wantons with him before his eyes, and
prostitutes herself to all crimes, then certainly such wanton lust
cannot be endured. But such was the audacity of the people, that when
the idol was erected before the gate of the altar it seemed like wishing
to dethrone the Almighty, and to contaminate his altar by the sight of
the idol. It follows —

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#006)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** He said furthermore unto me, Son of
man, seest thou what they do? *even* the great abominations that the
house of Israel committeth here, that should go far off from my
sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, *and* thou shalt see greater
abominations.

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Et dixit ad me, Fili hominis, an tu
vidisti quod isti faciunt? abominationes magnas, quas domus Israel
faeiunt  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) illic ut procul recedam
a sanctuario meo? et adhuc converte to,  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) et videbis abominationes magnas.

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>Now God complains with his Prophet; and we
must always mark the object and consider God’s design, because at the
end of the chapter we shall see how severe a vengeance God was about to
take on the people. Hence the Prophet prevents those obstreperous
reproaches with which the people loaded him through envy, when he
chastised them according to their deserts. Hence he doubtless wished the
exiles to be persuaded of what they could scarcely conceive, namely,
that the destruction of Jerusalem was near. For we have said that those
who had been drawn into captivity had displeased him, and wished to
return to their country. Since therefore their condition was too
grievous and severe, for this reason God wished to testify to them that
the last overthrow of Jerusalem was at hand. He does this while he shows
the great abominations which reigned in the very temple, whence the
Almighty must of necessity appear as the avenger of his glory and
worship. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
treated us so indulgently, and when provoked by our iniquities, hast yet
shown thyself a propitious Father to us, that we may no longer abuse thy
patience, but return directly to thy way and submit ourselves to thee —
and, being humbled by a true sense of penitence, grant that we may be so
dissatisfied with our sins, that we may devote ourselves to thee with
our whole heart and follow the direction of thy holy calling; until
after finishing the pursuits of this rife, we may arrive at that happy
repose which thine only-begotten Son has acquired for us by his blood. —
Amen.

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Second.

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>WE stopped yesterday at that. clause when
God asks his Prophet, *whether he saw the abominations which the sons of
were perpetrating* in the very temple: by which words he not only cites
his servant as a witness, but constitutes him in some sense a judge, so
that all should know that the coating vengeance was not only just but
must be immediate. This is the reason why God asks, *whether he saw the
abominations.* For if a mortal is compelled to pass an opinion, surely
God, who sees much further than the eyes of man, cannot be ignorant of
their crimes, when they had come to such a pitch of obstinacy that his
patience could no longer hold out. Now the adverb of place is used,
which seems to be put emphatically, because he refers to the temple,
from which all filth and defilements ought to be removed. Since
therefore God complains that abominations were perpetrated there, he
magnifies the people’s wickedness, because even the temple did not
remain pure. He adds, *for retreating:* some refer this to the people
and elicit this sense, that those who so pervert God’s worship recede
from his sanctuary, because they have no longer anything in common with
God. But I rather interpret it concerning God himself, who is compelled
to depart from his sanctuary, as we shall afterwards see. For while they
so defiled the temple with their sacrilege, they yet thought God
included therein. He now renounces the temple, and says, that he left
the place empty and void, because he could not bear to dwell among that
sordid defilement. The meaning is, that God would depart from his
temple, because the complete worship which he had commanded under the
law did not flourish there. And this place is worthy of notice, because
we gather from it that God could not bear the profanation of his
worship, but will leave those who pervert his law by their fictions, as
we see the Jews did. At this day we know how haughtily the Papists pride
themselves in their figments, but the more they heap together fictitious
ceremonies the more they provoke God’s anger. Hence it happens that they
vainly boast that they have him in their temples, as they think. For
this sentiment will ever remain fixed, that God cannot dwell in a
profane place. Now nothing sanctifies a place more than obedience and
sincerity of faith. When men introduce their inventions, it immediately
causes God to depart from them: this is the full meaning. Now he adds,
*turn thyself, and thou shalt see great abominations.* Some translate
greater, but because a question would arise, why he calls the
abomination first greater and then different, I interpret it simply that
the Prophet should see other great abominations. Afterwards indeed he
will express another, for he will say <span
id="xii.viii-p2.1"></span>גדלות מאלהתועבות, *gedloth-maleh-thogn-both,*
but in my opinion there is no comparison here between greater and less;
<span id="xii.viii-p2.2"></span>מאלה, *maleh,* I simply interpret
*“beyond* others,” and I rather approve of this simplicity, because
interpreters anxiously labor to show this last abomination heavier than
all others, though the reason for it does not clearly appear. But there
is no need of our making these difficulties, because the Prophet only
speaks of great abominations. Let us go on —

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#007)<span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** And he brought me to the door of the
court; and, when I looked, behold a hole in the wall.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Et induxit me in portam Atrii et
aspexi, et ecce foramen unum in pariete.

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span>**8.** Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig
now in the wall: and, when I had digged in the wall, behold a door.

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span>**8.** Et dixit ad me, Fill hominis, fode
agedum parietem: et fodi in pariete, et ecce porta una.

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span>**9.** And he said unto me, Go in, and
behold the wicked abominations that they do here.

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span>**9.** Et dixit ad me, Ingredere, et vide
abominationes malas quas ipsi faciunt.

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span>**10.** So I went in and saw; and behold
every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols
of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span>**10.** Et ingressus sum, et aspexi: et ecce
omnis similitudo reptilis, et animalis abominatio, et omnia idola domus
Israel, depictum  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) in pariete
circum circa.

<span id="xii.ix-p11"></span>**11.** And there stood before them seventy
men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them
stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his
hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.

<span id="xii.ix-p12"></span>**11.** Et viri septuaginta ex seni-oribus
domus Israel, et Iazanias, filius Saphan stabat in medio ipso-rum qui
stabant coram ipsis,  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) et viro
 <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) thuribulum in manu sua: et
densiter nubis suffitus ascendebat.

<span id="xii.ix-p15"></span> 

<span id="xii.ix-p16"></span><span id="xii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p17"></span>Here now the Prophet is brought to another
place, where another kind of abomination is shown. If an idol had been
erected in some *recess* of the temple only, even that impiety when
joined with sacrilege could not have been borne. But when all parts of
the temple were contaminated with such filth, hence we collect that the
people was utterly desperate. For the Prophet says, *that he was led
into a more secret place,* and since there was a hole there, he dug it
by God’s command, so that it became a door by which he could enter. This
only ought to be understood of a vision. For the Prophet had brought
nothing with him with which he could so dig a wall, but when he could
only behold that hidden abomination through a chink, God opened the
wall. But the Prophet seems to himself to *make* a door of entrance by
his own hand. But he says, *there were painted birds, reptiles, and
animals:* then he adds, *an abomination and all the idols of the house
of Israel* We see that there was not only one idol, but a great number.
And in truth as soon as the true worship of God is *neglected,* men
place no bounds to themselves: they are not content with one or two
errors, but they heap to themselves numberless delusions. So the
children of Israel fell away from one idol to a great multitude.
Meanwhile it must be remarked, that the idol which he has mentioned was
detestable beyond all others. For it was not called a *provocative of
jealousy* without reason, since it inflamed God to jealousy. It is
therefore probable that this idol was more noble than others, and held
in greater price and veneration, since the unbelievers had greater and
lesser deities. But now the Prophet refers to common idols, of which
there was a great abundance, but not such great honor. For he says,
*that part of the temple was full of pictures all around* It is indeed
certain, that the use of painting was always plentiful, but God wished
his temple to be pure from images, lest men, being taken with such
enticements, should turn aside directly to superstition. For if we see a
man or an animal painted in a profane place, a religious feeling does
not creep into our minds: for all acknowledge it as a painting: nay
idols themselves as long as they are in taverns or workshops, are not
worshipped. If the painter’s workshop is full of pictures, all *pass*
them by, and if they are delighted with the view of them they do not
show any sign of reverence to the paintings. But as soon as the picture
is carried to another place, its sacredness blinds men and so stupifies
them, that they do not remember that they had already seen that picture
in a profane dwelling. This therefore is the reason why God did not
admit any pictures into his temple, and surely when the place is
consecrated, it must happen that the painting will astonish men just as
if some secret divinity belonged to it. Although the Prophet here does
not say simply that the walls were full of pictures, yet he says, *that
an abomination and the idols of the house of Israel were there* We see
therefore not only that the walls were so decorated for the sake of
ornament, but because the people desired to celebrate all the deities
whose names it knew to be famous among the profane nations.

<span id="xii.ix-p18"></span>Now as to the Prophet’s being ordered *to
dig through the wall,* we gather from this that superstitions are
sometimes so hidden in secret places, that they escape our eyes even
while we look at them. For such is the weakness of the human mind, that
it does not easily perceive how abominable it is to vitiate the worship
of God. Thus the Prophet only looked through a chink, so that he could
not form a correct judgment concerning those pollutions; hence he is
ordered *to dig through the wall,* just as if God assured him that a
thin and obscure view was not sufficient, but that a door must be opened
by which he should look in and thoroughly consider what would otherwise
be concealed beneath those coverings. Now he says *that he entered and
saw the likeness of everything,* and we must remember what I have lately
touched upon, that the Jews are here condemned for heaping to themselves
a multitude of gods: for it was very disgraceful to worship reptiles and
brutes. The worship of a human figure has a specious pretext, for the
Greeks, who always seemed to themselves wise above others, and thought
the rest of the world barbarians, were deceived in idols referring to
the human figure, but it was too base and gross for them to worship an
ox, a dog, or an ass, as a god. We see therefore how basely the Jews
were blinded who mingled brutes and reptiles for gods. But it is no
wonder that they were so deluded, because Egypt was near, where we know
that dogs and oxen, and even cats, were considered deities: nay they
worshipped all kinds of herbs. Since therefore the Egyptians imagined
that the deity resided in reptiles and unclean animals, as well as in
herbs, it is no wonder that the Jews were drawn into these delusions
through neighborhood. But since heavenly teaching had shown them the
way, such blindness was inexcusable, because *they* could not err so
basely without suffocating and so extinguishing the light which had been
set before their eyes. But we see how men’s audacity breaks forth, when
they do not restrain themselves within obedience to God’s teaching. He
says that pictures *were painted all round* on the wall, which again
confirms our observation, that the Jews were inflamed with such desires
that they left no space empty, because they wished their eyes to fall
upon those figures, which more and more inflamed their superstition.

<span id="xii.ix-p19"></span><span id="xii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p20"></span>He says also, *that seventy elders of the
house of Israel made incense for their idols* I do not think that the
seventy who were chosen for ruling the people are referred to here,
though I suppose the Prophet to allude to this number. For we know that
from the beginning seventy were set over the people, and were chosen
from each tribe, and were united together. But with regard to this
place, I think the number seventy is used of those whom, although they
were not prefects, they called seniors in respect to their office, not
through their age only. Meanwhile we must remember that the Prophet
looks to that order, because from the beginning God had wished the
seventy to bear rule and hold the government. (<span
id="xii.ix-p20.1"></span>[Nu
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016)<span id="xii.ix-p20.1"></span>.)
Thus the Prophet signifies that the leaders of the people, who ought to
rule others by their counsel, were remarkable for corrupting the worship
of God. He puts *Jezaniah, the son of Saphah,* who was probably a man of
great repute. Since therefore he excelled in the reputation for prudence
and piety, the Prophet wished to exaggerate his crime, because he also,
among others, offered incense to idols. What then could remain pure
among the people, when he who was esteemed a holy man, so profaned
himself among the rest! Hence we see that the Prophet means, that the
whole people, from the least to the greatest, was so corrupt, that those
who were superior to the rest prostituted themselves to idolatry. He
says, then, *that he stood before them, and each had a censer in his
hand* Incense was the sign of the greatest veneration, and even this was
retained for common use. Hence at the outset of Christianity, when the
impious wished to seduce the Christians to idolatry, they only gave two
or three grains of frankincense:  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) that was a sign of apostasy: they did
not order them to bend the knee before idols, nor to offer sacrifices,
but only to smell to a few grains of incense. In sign, therefore, of
veneration, the seventy men are said to bear censers or incense dishes.
The Prophet adds, *and the incense ascended in a thick cloud.* Here
understand the particle of likeness. *The incense ascended as a thick
cloud.* I do not doubt that they were profuse, or rather prodigal, in
their madness, so as to spare no expense: since idolaters rashly
squander all things, when the *intemperance* of their zeal seizes upon
them. And this was not considered with sufficient prudence. The Prophet
therefore says that it was not common incense, but was dense like a
cloud, since they threw it forth in great abundance, so that the
offering might be fatter and richer: just as if he had said, that they
were so intemperate in their superstitions, that they threw away an
abundance of incense, and had all their expense for nothing, and only to
satisfy their idols. Now it follows —

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span><span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012)<span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>**12.** Then said he unto me, Son of man,
hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark,
every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The LORD seeth
us not; the LORD hath forsaken the earth.

<span id="xii.x-p3"></span>**12.** Et dixit mihi, An vidisti, fili
hominis, quae seniores domus Israel faciunt in tenebris,  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) quisque in absconditis  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) imaginationis suae? qui dicunt, non
rider nos Iehovah, deseruit Iehovah terram.

<span id="xii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.x-p7"></span><span id="xii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p8"></span>Again God questions his servant: we have
explained the reason — that he may pass sentence as a judge on his own
people, whence it may be more clearly evident that those who had
provoked God were unworthy of any pardon. *Thou seest,* says he, *what
the elders do?* Through a feeling of honor he does not here name these
*elders of the house of Israel,* but rather reproves their ingratitude,
because they so drive others with them into alliance with their impiety.
For elders ought to show the way to others. Since, therefore, the
profanation of the worship of God took its origin from them, hence their
disgrace is increased, and they were worthy of greater reproach. *Seest
thou,* says he, *what they do in darkness?* From this word I gather that
the place was remote from public observation; for there were near the
floor of the Temple many cells and many chambers, as we see in Jeremiah.
(<span id="xii.x-p8.1"></span>[Jer
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#002)<span id="xii.x-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.x-p8.2"></span>[1Ki
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005)<span id="xii.x-p8.2"></span>.)
Since, then, the ciders had their apartments there, it is not surprising
that a place was shown to the Prophet which they had so stained with
their paintings. But he says that they did it *in darkness,* because
they kept secret their sacred rites; as also there were mysteries among
profane nations, which were not open to any but the initiated. Since
therefore the multitude was not thought worthy of those mysteries, it is
therefore probable that the place among the Jews of which the Prophet
speaks was like a small chapel, which the elders, and those who had
authority among the people, retained to themselves. he adds, *each
within the recesses* Some translate — in the chambers of their painting;
but I take the word <span id="xii.x-p8.3"></span>משכית*, meshkith,* for
imagination, as it is also taken in other places. It properly signifies
painting, but it is also transferred to the thoughts of men. Therefore
when he speaks of recesses or hidden places, I do not understand
chambers, though I do not deny that he alludes to those recesses by
which men separate themselves from the multitude, by way of honor. In
the meantime he equally reproves those tortuous and perverse counsels
which the ciders of the people inwardly cherished. For those who think
themselves wiser than the vulgar, have some hidden pride, and swell with
concealed haughtiness; and therefore they are said by Isaiah to dig for
themselves hiding-places to escape from God, while they seem to
themselves cunning. (<span id="xii.x-p8.4"></span>[Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span id="xii.x-p8.4"></span>.)

<span id="xii.x-p9"></span>Now, therefore, we see in what sense the
Prophet mentions *hiding-places of their imagination,* namely, because
they reckon such pictures the mark of the greatest and rarest prudence.
This was again prodigious, that the elders so gave themselves up to foul
defilements. For among profane nations no religion held the leaders and
heads of the people. We shall not find, either among the Greeks or the
Latins, any of the higher classes, and of the chief governors, involved
in the errors of the common people, but they pretended religion, that
they might hold others in obedience. They instituted, indeed, great
pomp; they pretended no small degree of reverence; but when they passed
their time as friends at home, they laughed at all these trifles. Since,
therefore, all the ceremonies of the Gentiles were a laughing-stock to
sensible men, this was indeed a detestable prodigy *that the elders of
the people of Israel, in a secret place, in the very recesses of their
thoughts, fabricated idols for themselves. Now* the cause is expressed
why they heaped to themselves that multitude of gods, namely, *because
they thought that God no longer regarded them* This passage is badly
explained when interpreters think that the elders were epicureans, who
dreamt that God *enjoyed* case and indulgence in heaven. They bring
forward other passages, which seem similar but in words only, as where,
in the book of Job, the impiety of the multitude is described, he says
they think that God walks upon the hinges of heaven. (<span
id="xii.x-p9.1"></span>[Job 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#014)<span
id="xii.x-p9.1"></span>.) But the Prophet speaks more within bounds.
Hence those who take this passage generally, extenuate the force of the
doctrine which ought to be elicited from these words. Why, then, had the
Jews fabricated so many idols for themselves? because they thought that
God no longer regarded them, as I have already explained it; and this
was the sign of their gross depravity; for God had chastised them in
various ways: they ought to have returned into the way, yet they were so
far from repenting, that they rather champed the bit, and thus persuaded
themselves to seek other deities. And this impiety has occurred in all
ages. At this time it clearly appears in the Papacy; nay, even the blind
may even feel it with their hands. For when God afflicts these wretched
ones, at first they suppliantly ask pardon; but. when he presses upon
them more severely, then they begin to rage and look hither and thither,
and have a common proverb — “I know not to what saint I ought to pay my
vows.” Boys learn this proverb in the Papacy, and old men always have it
on their lips in perplexity. Hence Ezekiel reproves this fault, when he
gives this as a reason for the aged heaping up this multitude of deities
— that they thought themselves overlooked by God — *Jehovah,* they say,
*does not see us here:* they do not speak simply of God’s providence,
but indignantly complain of his disregard, because he did not relieve
their miseries, and had deserted the land, as they afterwards explain
themselves; for they immediately assert that *God had deserted the land*
We see, therefore, that they did not speak simply against God’s
providence, as if he despised human things, but that they were inflamed
with fury, because God’s hand pressed them heavily, and they did not
feel any help in him. Hence they descended to brutes, reptiles, various
painting’s, and all kinds of abomination, because they thought that they
were worshipping in vain the one true God. It follows —

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#013)<span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p2"></span>**13.** He said also unto me, Turn thee yet
again, *and* thou shalt see greater abominations that they do.

<span id="xii.xi-p3"></span>**13.** Et dixit ad me, adhuc con-vertere,
et videbis abominationes magnas quas ipsi faciunt.

<span id="xii.xi-p4"></span>**14.** Then he brought me to the door of
the gate of the LORD’S house which *was* toward the north; and, behold,
there sat women weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="xii.xi-p5"></span>**14.** Et deduxit  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) me ad ostium portae domus Iehovae quod
respicit ad aquilonem: et ecce illic mulieres sedebant lugentes Thammuz.

<span id="xii.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xi-p8"></span><span id="xii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p9"></span>He now mentions the third kind of idolatry
by which the Jews polluted the temple; for this was a kind of sin
peculiar to females; and we know that they were always more addicted to
such wickedness. Satan, indeed, fascinates men always more than enough,
but in women recklessness reigned more than superstition. They had
therefore a female worship in bewailing Thammuz. Who Thammuz was is
uncertain. Jerome translates it Adonis, and Adonis was beloved by Venus,
as the poets trifle; and when torn to pieces by a boar, he was turned
into a flower of sweetest odor; and in honor of Venus women yearly
solemnized by lamentations the death of that beautiful youth; but it is
not probable that this rite prevailed in Judaea, because we do not read
that this lamentation was practiced in the neighboring regions, but in
Greece and Asia Minor I refer it rather to Osiris, for, as we said
before, the Jews were neighbors to the Egyptians — hence they adopted
various rites from them; but we know that Osiris was yearly wept for by
the Egyptians, and that great pollution occurred; for they carried the
virile member on a pole in procession, and called it Phallus;  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) and women also showed their parts to
the idol, as if offering themselves to debauchery. This was a most
disgraceful spectacle. But I conjecture that the Jews had adopted this
rite when the women bewailed Thammuz. Here also we perceive, that when
once Satan has prevailed, and cast men into deep depravity, they despise
all moderation, nay, are *reduced* to more than brutal stupor. Who would
think this could occur, that women should be reduced to such a pitch of
defilement, when they had been taught in the doctrine of the law from
their early childhood. But when God’s temple was open to such
pollutions, we see the Jews so blinded by madness, that God already was
showing signs of his extreme *vengeance,* since he had endured them up
to this point.

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
delivered to us a sure rule of worship, which cannot deceive us, and
since thy Son became for us a perfect master of all wisdom and of solid
piety, that we may obediently follow whatever he prescribes for us, and
turn neither to the right hand nor the left; but being content with that
simplicity which we have learnt from his Gospel, may go on in the course
of our holy calling, until at length, that pursuit being finished, we
may arrive at the perfect state of thy glory, and may so enjoy it that
we may be transformed into it, as thou hast promised us by the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-third

<span id="xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#015)<span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p2"></span>**15.** Then said he unto me, Hast thou
seen *this, O* son of man? Turn thee yet again, *and* thou shalt see
greater abominations than these.

<span id="xii.xiv-p3"></span>**15.** Et dixit mihi, Fili hominis, adhuc
convertere, videbis abominationes magnas prae istis.  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185)

<span id="xii.xiv-p5"></span>**16.** And he brought me into the inner
court of the LORD’S house, and, behold, at the door of the temple of the
LORD, between the porch and the altar, *were* about five and twenty men,
with their backs toward the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward
the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east.

<span id="xii.xiv-p6"></span>**16.** Et deduxit me in Atrium doritos
Iehovae interins: et ecce ad portam Templi Iehovae inter vestibulum et
inter altare, circiter viginti quinque viri, posteriora eorum versus
Templum Iehovae, et facies eorum versus orientem: et ipsi adorabant in
oriente Solem.

<span id="xii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p9"></span>Here the Prophet refers to another
profanation of the temple, since the chief citizens of Jerusalem and
those who ought to point out the way to others, prostituted themselves
to impious worship, lie says, therefore, *that he saw about five and
twenty men,* and it is probable, that there were as many as this among
the first rank of citizens. But a certain number is put for an
uncertain, and I think that the Prophet. was not so scrupulous on this
point, or rather the Spirit of God, who showed that number in the
vision; whatever it was, they not only worshipped the sun in private
houses, but in the temple itself, and that not without gross and pointed
contempt of God. For when they turned their back upon the sanctuary,
they made a laughing-stock of God. It hence appears, that they were of
so daring a front, that they openly boasted in their superstitions, and
purposely polluted God’s temple. This, indeed, was monstrous, to see the
elders of the city, and those practiced in the teaching and worship of
the law, so alienated from all piety as to worship the sun. For this
could not happen through either error or ignorance. For God in his law
when he forbids the worship of the sun and stars, adds as a reason, that
the whole celestial host was created for our use. (<span
id="xii.xiv-p9.1"></span>[De 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#003)<span
id="xii.xiv-p9.1"></span>.) Since, therefore, the sun is our servant and
the moon our handmaid, and the stars also were created to serve us, it
is preposterous to depart from the divinely ordained order, that the sun
which was given us to spend his time in our service should be to us a
god. Since, therefore, God has borne witness to this in his law, there
was no excuse for error when the Jews adored towards the east.

<span id="xii.xiv-p10"></span>Now he adds also another grosser dishonor
done to God, when *they turned their backs upon his sanctuary.* They
could, as I have said, pollute themselves at home and in conceal-merit
with such defilements. But while they came of their own accord into the
temple, it is just as if they provoked God by open daring, Now, when
they turn their back, this is not only a foul denial but a contempt of
God, as if they had said, that he was unworthy of their respect. Now,
therefore, we see the whole force of the passage. But he says, *turn yet
again, and thou shalt see great abominations:* some translate greater,
as I have formerly mentioned, but I do not think it suitable. I do not
contend for it, but if a reason is asked why this abomination is greater
than others, it is not clear to me; hence I prefer to take it more
simply in the positive degree. Nor is it an objection to this that <span
id="xii.xiv-p10.1"></span>מאלה*, maleh,* is added, for <span
id="xii.xiv-p10.2"></span>מ is not always taken comparatively; but as I
think it means only, as if God had said, you will see other abominations
besides those of which mention has been already made. But he points out
the place of the temple where they worshipped the sun, namely, *between
the porch and the altar.* This was the sign of great impiety to break
into the holy place, and from thence to despise God. Now we know this to
be a sign of lawful adoration, when the faithful turned their eyes to
the sanctuary and the ark of the covenant, but when they turned their
backs upon it, there is no doubt that they professedly wished to boast
in a contempt of God and the law. It already appears, that they had
adopted various and numberless forms of superstition. In Egypt they had
not seen the worship of the sun, nor do we read that such worship was in
use in Chaldea; but because they heard that the Persians and other
Orientals worshipped the sun as a god, they imitated their custom.
Therefore we see, that from these people they heaped up rites for
themselves, so as to make an immense assemblage. It follows —

<span id="xii.xv"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#017)<span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p2"></span>**17.** Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen
*this, O* son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that
they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have
filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger:
and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.

<span id="xii.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Et dixit mihi, Vidisti-ne fili
hominis? an leve est domui Iehudah, ut faciat abominationes istas quas
feterunt illic? quia repleverant terrain violentia: et conversi sunt ad
me provocandum: et ecce ipsi emittunt ramum  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) ad nasum suum.  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187)

<span id="xii.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.xv-p7"></span><span id="xii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p8"></span>God complains as formerly of the wickedness
of the people, especially of their perfidious and wicked revolt, because
they so defiled the temple which ought to be sacred to God alone. He
adds besides another complaint, that they were not content in their
wickedness, which tended to violate human society and common rights, and
the pursuit of mutual equity, unless even religion should be weakened by
them. For under the word <span id="xii.xv-p8.1"></span>חמס*, chemes,* is
comprehended whatever is contrary to the second table of the law. There
is, therefore, a use of the figure a part for the whole, in this word
<span id="xii.xv-p8.2"></span>חמס, *chemes,* violence, as if he had
said, they were addicted to frauds, rapine, slaughter, cruelty,
perjuries, spoliations. Since, therefore, they abstained from no
injustice, says God, they manifestly provoke me also: as if he had said,
after being unjust towards men, they now dare to erect their horns
against me. We know that God’s law was comprehended in the two tables.
As to the former table, it prescribes what the true and pure worship of
God is. The Jews had violated the second table, since they neglected all
the duties of charity, and neither equity nor uprightness flourished
among them. *After they had filled the land with iniquity;* this was
their intolerable ungodliness, that after despising men they attacked
God himself. We see now the reason of the context, *Is this a light
thing?* says he. Thereafter he had spoken of the wickedness simply and
by itself, as they say, he now amplifies by comparison when he says,
*before this they had filled the earth with violence, but now they have
turned themselves to provoke me* — *behold these,* he says, etc. The
adverb of place must be noticed here, as I have before advised. For
their impiety is the more detestable, since they broke into the temple
to defile themselves with their idols. That place at least ought to
remain pure and unpolluted, though the whole land had been infected with
many defilements; but when not even the temple is spared, this is a sign
of desperate and almost furious audacity. He, therefore, repeats the
adverb which he had used before, and in the same sense.

<span id="xii.xv-p9"></span>As to the latter part of the verse, some, as
I have said, take <span id="xii.xv-p9.1"></span>הזמורה, *hez-moreh,* for
foulness: I know not why, for I am not aware that this noun is used
elsewhere in this sense. But because nothing better occurred to them,
they think it probable, and some have invented a foolish fable that they
broke wind in honor of the sun, as if the noise of the belly was a
grateful offering to the idol, since by this means they openly despised
God. But these are conjectures. Others think more correctly who suppose
this to be used metaphorically: for they were accustomed to burn incense
to their idols; and so, according to them, God alludes to a pleasing and
sweet odor when he names it a foul smell, as if he had said, even if the
Jews pleased themselves in their superstitions, yet the incense sent
forth a foetid odor and they should perceive it: for if he speaks of the
nostrils it ought to be considered as a punishment. Some suppose that
the relative of the third person is put for that of the first, as if God
would say, to my nose or to my wrath: and they fabricate an insipid
comment, that this place was changed by the Rabbins through reverence
for God, as if forsooth there were not numberless passages where God
pronounces in clearer words that he was disgracefully despised. But
first, because this noun properly signifies a branch, and is taken in
that sense in many places; then since the noun <span
id="xii.xv-p9.2"></span>אפ, *aph,* may be explained as well passively as
actively, the context will flow best if we say, *they put forth a branch
to their wrath* — that is, to their destruction, because they provoked
God. For what is the meaning of putting forth a branch, but that they
heaped evil upon evil. They had violated, as I have said, the second
table of the law, they were thieves, robbers, perjurers, and violent.
Now at length their rage was directed against the former table of the
law, so as to overthrow the whole worship of God. So therefore it will
make good sense to say, *that boughs were put forth* — for the singular
number is taken for the plural, as often happens. Since, therefore, they
so put forth boughs or budded, God says, that this should be for their
destruction, *because* at length when he had spared them a long time,
after a fit time for their punishment arrived, he would consume them.
Now, therefore, we understand what the Prophet means. But if any other
conjecture pleases, every one may form his own opinion; I do not contest
the point, but I show what I think most probable. It follows —

<span id="xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#018)<span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** Therefore will I also deal in fury:
mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry
in mine ears with a loud voice, *yet* will I not hear them.

<span id="xii.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Ego etiam  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) vicissim faciam in iracundia mea: non
parcet oculus meus et non miserebor: et cum elamaverint ad aurem meam
voce magna, non audiam ipsos.

<span id="xii.xvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvi-p6"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p7"></span>This seems to me a confirmation of the last
clause. For he had said, that they sent forth their boughs or east them
forth, but yet to their destruction. He now repeats the same thing in
other words. *Therefore I will also act* in, my turn — that is, as they
now boldly increase their superstitions, and so continually provoke *me,
at length I will act,* says he. There is a tacit contrast, since God
forsooth had ceased for a long time, because there is a certain form of
rest when he ceases from his judgments: God seems to rest when he does
not *take vengeance* on man’s wickedness, when he indulges them and
passes them by for a time. Since, therefore, he had so suspended his
judgments against the Jews, he seemed to cultivate ease in heaven: with
this view he says, *that he would do it in his anger,* and he adds, that
his vengeance would be so dreadful that there would be no place for
pity. This ought indeed to strike us when God pronounces himself
implacable. For what is more formidable than to have God hostile, and to
be verily without any hope of pardon? As often as God withdraws his
mercy he shows us material for trembling, nor is it wonderful that he
threatened the Jews so harshly, because he had proved by all methods
that they were desperate in their wickedness. For truly nothing had been
omitted towards curing them, unless they had been of an abandoned
disposition and of most obstinate manners. Since, therefore, they were
such, it is not surprising that God was extremely enraged against them,
so that he left them no hope of pardon. But this ought to be referred
generally to the whole body of the people: meanwhile it is by no means
doubtful, as we shall afterwards see, that God excepts his elect from
the ordinary multitude. If any one object, that God always hears
prayers, I reply that he never rejects prayers which spring from faith:
but here that tumultuous clamor is alluded to which necessity occasions
to unbelievers. For although they fly to God as their natural sense
impels them, yet they do not this with composed minds, nor even relying
upon the promises of God: but because the torture of their minds does
not suffer them to rest, so that by a natural impulse they are carried
to God and cry to him without any faith or sincere affection. He speaks,
therefore, concerning that kind of ejaculation which is described to us
in the case of Esau, and hence he says with *a loud voice,* (<span
id="xii.xvi-p7.1"></span>[Ge
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#034)<span id="xii.xvi-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.xvi-p7.2"></span>[Ps
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)<span id="xii.xvi-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.xvi-p7.3"></span>[Ps
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)<span id="xii.xvi-p7.3"></span>;
and <span id="xii.xvi-p7.4"></span>[Ps
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003)<span id="xii.xvi-p7.4"></span>,
and elsewhere often.) Although the faithful also raise their voice: nay
even cry out loudly, as David testifies of himself, yet it is *peculiar*
to the incredulous to utter their clamor with full cheeks though the
mind is void of faith, and is even obstinate in its wickedness. Hence
they do not open the heart when they thus cry to God. Hence it is not
wonderful if God rejects them and is deaf to their complaints. Now it
follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc22011.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span> Verbally, “sitting.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc22011.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> Or, “image.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc22011.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> “Raised.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc22011.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span> “It is properly a valley, because <span
id="xii.iv-p4.1"></span>בקעה, *bek-gneh,* is deduced from cutting: for a
valley when interposed seems to break the mountains, and prevent their
running in a continual track. But it is also taken generally for any
plain, and the first vision occurred to the Prophet near the river
Chebar, where there were no mountains.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc22011.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span> That is, “perpetrate.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc22011.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span> That is, “to turn again ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc22011.htm#fr_177) <span
id="xii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span> “There is a change of number from plural
to singular. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc22011.htm#fr_178) <span
id="xii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p13"></span> Meaning “idols.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc22011.htm#fr_179) <span
id="xii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p14"></span> That is, “to each.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc22011.htm#fr_180) <span
id="xii.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p21"></span> Plin., lib 10, ep. 2, <span
id="xii.ix-p21.1"></span>de Christianis ad Trajanum.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc22011.htm#fr_181) <span
id="xii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p4"></span> “In darkness.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc22011.htm#fr_182) <span
id="xii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p5"></span> Or, “inward places.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc22011.htm#fr_183) <span
id="xii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p6"></span> Or, “introduced.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc22011.htm#fr_184) <span
id="xii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p10"></span> Herod. 2, c. 48. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc22011.htm#fr_185) <span
id="xii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p4"></span> “Or, “besides these.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc22011.htm#fr_186) <span
id="xii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p4"></span> “Others translate it, a foul *smell.”* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc22011.htm#fr_187) <span
id="xii.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p5"></span> “As many think, but I approve of ‘to their
own wrath,’ the word ‘wrath’ being taken passively for the anger of God
which they roused against themselves.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc22011.htm#fr_188) <span
id="xii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p4"></span> “I also.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc22012)
