<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

PAUL'S DEFENSE BEFORE THE SAMHEDRIM DIVIDES THE RIVAL FACTIONS, FROM
WHOSE VIOLENCE THE COMMANDANT HAS THE APOSTLE REMOVED INTO THE FORTRESS.
([Act 23:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001))

Paul, earnestly beholding the council--with a look of conscious
integrity and unfaltering courage, perhaps also recognizing some of his
early fellow pupils.

I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day--The word
has an indirect reference to the "polity" or "commonwealth of Israel,"
of which he would signify that he had been, and was to that hour, an
honest and God-fearing member.

[Acts 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 23:2</span></span>

the high priest . . . commanded . . . to smite him on the mouth--a
method of silencing a speaker common in the East to this day \[HACKET\].
But for a judge thus to treat a prisoner on his "trial," for merely
prefacing his defense by a protestation of his integrity, was infamous.

[Acts 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 23:3</span></span>

God shall smite thee--as indeed He did; for he was killed by an assassin
during the Jewish war \[JOSEPHUS, Wars of the Jews, 2.17.9\].

thou whited wall--that is, hypocrite ([Mat
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)). This epithet, however
correctly describing the man, must not be defended as addressed to a
judge, though the remonstrance which follows--"for sittest thou,"
&c.--ought to have put him to shame.

[Acts 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 23:5</span></span>

I wist not . . . that he was the high priest--All sorts of explanations
of this have been given. The high priesthood was in a state of great
confusion and constant change at this time (as appears from JOSEPHUS),
and the apostle's long absence from Jerusalem, and perhaps the manner in
which he was habited or the seat he occupied, with other circumstances
to us unknown, may account for such a speech. But if he was thrown off
his guard by an insult which touched him to the quick, "what can surpass
the grace with which he recovered his self-possession, and the frankness
with which he acknowledged his error? If his conduct in yielding to the
momentary impulse was not that of Christ Himself under a similar
provocation ([Joh 18:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022)), certainly
the manner in which he atoned for his fault was Christ-like" \[HACKET\].

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

when Paul perceived--from the discussion which plainly had by this time
arisen between the parties.

that the one part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried
out--raising his voice above both parties.

I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee--The true reading seems to be,
"the son of Pharisees," that is, belonging to a family who from father
to son had long been such.

of the hope and resurrection of the dead--that is, not the vague hope of
immortality, but the definite expectation of the resurrection.

I am called in question--By this adroit stroke, Paul engages the whole
Pharisaic section of the council in his favor; the doctrine of a
resurrection being common to both, though they would totally differ in
their application of it. This was, of course, quite warrantable, and the
more so as it was already evident that no impartiality in trying his
cause was to be looked for from such an assembly.

[Acts 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 23:8</span></span>

the Sadducees say . . . there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor
spirit--(See on [Luk 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#037)).

the scribes . . . of the Pharisees' part . . . strove, saying, We find
no evil in this man, but--as to those startling things which he brings
to our ears.

if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him--referring, perhaps, to his
trance in the temple, of which he had told them ([Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)). They put this favorable
construction upon his proceedings for no other reason than that they had
found him one of their own party. They care not to inquire into the
truth of what he alleged, over and above their opinions, but only to
explain it away as something not worth raising a noise about. (The
following words, "Let us not fight against God," seem not to belong to
the original text, and perhaps are from [Act
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039). In this case, either the meaning
is, "If he has had some divine communication, what of that?" or, the
conclusion of the sentence may have been drowned in the hubbub, which
[Act 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010) shows to have been
intense).

[Acts 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 23:10</span></span>

the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should have been pulled to pieces .
. . commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force, &c.--This
shows that the commandant was not himself present, and further, that
instead of the Sanhedrim trying the cause, the proceedings quickly
consisted in the one party attempting to seize the prisoner, and the
other to protect him.

[Acts 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 23:11</span></span>

IN THE FORTRESS PAUL IS CHEERED BY A NIGHT VISION--AN INFAMOUS
CONSPIRACY TO ASSASSINATE HIM IS PROVIDENTIALLY DEFEATED, AND HE IS
DESPATCHED BY NIGHT WITH A LETTER FROM THE COMMANDANT TO FELIX AT
CÃ†SAREA, BY WHOM ARRANGEMENTS ARE MADE FOR A HEARING OF HIS CAUSE.
(Acts 23:11-35)

the night following--his heart perhaps sinking, in the solitude of his
barrack ward, and thinking perhaps that all the predictions of danger at
Jerusalem were now to be fulfilled in his death there.

the Lord--that is, Jesus.

stood by him . . . Be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou hast testified of
me in Jerusalem, so must thou . . . also at Rome--that is, "Thy work in
Jerusalem is done, faithfully and well done; but thou art not to die
here; thy purpose next to 'see Rome' ([Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)) shall not be disappointed, and
there also must thou bear witness of Me." As this vision was not
unneeded now, so we shall find it cheering and upholding him throughout
all that befell him up to his arrival there.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

bound themselves under a curse . . . that they would neither eat . . .
fill they had killed Paul--Compare [Sa2
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035); [Sa1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024).

[Acts 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 23:15</span></span>

Now . . . ye with the council signify to the chief captain . . . as
though, &c.--That these high ecclesiastics fell in readily with this
infamous plot is clear. What will not unscrupulous and hypocritical
religionists do under the mask of religion? The narrative bears
unmistakable internal marks of truth.

or ever he come near--Their plan was to assassinate him on his way down
from the barracks to the council. The case was critical, but He who had
pledged His word to him that he should testify for Him at Rome provided
unexpected means of defeating this well-laid scheme.

[Acts 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 23:16</span></span>

Paul's sister's son--(See on [Act
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)). If he was at this time residing
at Jerusalem for his education, like Paul himself, he may have got at
the schools those hints of the conspiracy on which he so promptly acted.

[Acts 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 23:17</span></span>

Then Paul called one of the centurions--Though divinely assured of
safety, he never allows this to interfere with the duty he owed to his
own life and the work he had yet to do. (See on [Act
27:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#022); [Act
27:31](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#031)).

[Acts 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 23:19</span></span>

took him by the hand--This shows that he must have been quite in his
boyhood, and throws a pleasing light on the kind-hearted impartiality of
this officer.

[Acts 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 23:21</span></span>

and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee--Thus, as is so
often the case with God's people, not till the last moment, when the
plot was all prepared, did deliverance come.

[Acts 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 23:23</span></span>

two hundred soldiers--a formidable guard for such an occasion; but Roman
officials felt their honor concerned in the preservation of the public
peace, and the danger of an attempted rescue would seem to require it.
The force at Jerusalem was large enough to spare this convoy.

the third hour of the night--nine o'clock.

[Acts 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 23:24</span></span>

beasts . . . set Paul on--as relays, and to carry baggage.

unto Felix, the governor--the procurator. See on [Act
24:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024).

[Acts 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 23:26</span></span>

Claudius--the Roman name he would take on purchasing his citizenship.

Lysias--his Greek family name.

the most excellent governor--an honorary title of office.

[Acts 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 23:27</span></span>

came I with an army--rather, "with the military."

[Acts 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 23:29</span></span>

perceived to be accused of questions of their law, &c.--Amidst all his
difficulty in getting at the charges laid against Paul, enough, no
doubt, come out to satisfy him that the whole was a question of
religion, and that there was no case for a civil tribunal.

[Acts 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 23:30</span></span>

gave commandment to his accusers . . . to say before thee--This was not
done when he wrote, but would be before the letter reached its
destination.

[Acts 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 23:31</span></span>

brought him . . . to Antipatris--nearly forty miles from Jerusalem, on
the way to CÃ&brvbr;sarea; so named by Herod in honor of his father,
Antipater.

[Acts 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 23:32</span></span>

On the morrow they--the infantry.

left the horsemen--themselves no longer needed as a guard. The remaining
distance was about twenty-five or twenty-six miles.

[Acts 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 23:34</span></span>

asked of what province he was--the letter describing him as a Roman
citizen.

[Acts 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 23:35</span></span>

I will hear thee--The word means, "give thee a full hearing."

to be kept in Herod's judgment hall--"prÃ&brvbr;torium," the palace
built at CÃ&brvbr;sarea by Herod, and now occupied by the Roman
procurators; in one of the buildings attached to which Paul was ordered
to be kept.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024)

</div>
