<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1020)  [Next](ch1022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 21:1</span></span>

DAVID SINS IN NUMBERING THE PEOPLE. ([Ch1
21:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001))

Satan stood up against Israel--God, by withdrawing His grace at this
time from David (see on [Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)),
permitted the tempter to prevail over him. As the result of this
successful temptation was the entail of a heavy calamity as a punishment
from God upon the people, it might be said that "Satan stood up against
Israel."

number Israel--In the act of taking the census of a people, there is not
only no evil, but much utility. But numbering Israel--that people who
were to become as the stars for multitude, implying a distrust of the
divine promise, was a sin; and though it had been done with impunity in
the time of Moses, at that enumeration each of the people had
contributed "half a shekel towards the building of the tabernacle," that
there might be no plague among them when he numbered them ([Exo
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012)). Hence the numbering of that
people was in itself regarded as an undertaking by which the anger of
God could be easily aroused; but when the arrangements were made by
Moses for the taking of the census, God was not angry because the people
were numbered for the express purpose of the tax for the sanctuary, and
the money which was thus collected ("the atonement money," [Exo
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#016)) appeased Him. Everything
depended, therefore, upon the design of the census \[BERTHEAU\]. The sin
of David numbering the people consisted in its being either to gratify
his pride to ascertain the number of warriors he could muster for some
meditated plan of conquest; or, perhaps, more likely still, to institute
a regular and permanent system of taxation, which he deemed necessary to
provide an adequate establishment for the monarchy, but which was
regarded as a tyrannical and oppressive exaction--an innovation on the
liberty of the people--a departure from ancient usage unbecoming a king
of Israel.

[1 Chronicles 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch1 21:3</span></span>

why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel?--or bring an occasion of
punishment on Israel. In Hebrew, the word "sin" is often used
synonymously with the punishment of sin. In the course of Providence,
the people frequently suffer for the misconduct of their rulers.

[1 Chronicles 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 21:5</span></span>

Joab gave the sum of the number of the children of Israel--It amounted
to one million one hundred thousand men in Israel, capable of bearing
arms, inclusive of the three hundred thousand military ([Ch1
27:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001)), which, being already enlisted
in the royal service, were not reckoned ([Sa2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009)), and to four hundred seventy
thousand men in Judah, omitting thirty thousand which formed an army of
observation stationed on the Philistine frontier ([Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)). So large a population at this
early period, considering the limited extent of the country and
comparing it with the earlier census (Num. 26:1-65), is a striking proof
of the fulfilment of the promise ([Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)).

[1 Chronicles 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 21:6</span></span>

Levi and Benjamin counted he not--If this census was ordered with a view
to the imposition of taxes, this alone would account for Levi, who were
not warriors ([Ch1 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005)), not being
numbered (see on [Num 1:47-54](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047)). The
population of Benjamin had been taken (see on [Ch1
7:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#006)), and the register preserved in
the archives of that tribe. This, however, was taken on another
occasion, and by other agency than that of Joab. The non-numbering of
these two tribes might have originated in the special and gracious
providence of God, partly because Levi was devoted to His service, and
Benjamin had become the least of all the tribes (Jdg. 21:1-25); and
partly because God foresaw that they would remain faithful to the house
of David in the division of the tribes, and therefore He would not have
them diminished \[POOLE\]. From the course followed in this survey (see
on [Sa2 24:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#004)), it would appear that
Judah and Benjamin were the last tribes that were to be visited; and
that, after the census in Judah had been finished, Joab, before entering
on that of Benjamin, had to return to Jerusalem, where the king, now
sensible of his great error, gave orders to stop all further proceedings
in the business. Not only the remonstrance of Joab at the first, but his
slow progress in the survey ([Sa2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#008)) showed the strong repugnance and
even horror of the old general at this unconstitutional measure.

[1 Chronicles 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 21:9</span></span>

the Lord spake unto Gad, David's seer--Although David was himself
endowed with a prophetic gift, yet, in matters relating to himself or
his kingdom, he was in the habit of consulting the Lord through the
medium of the priests; and when he failed to do so, a prophet was sent
on extraordinary occasions to admonish or chastise him. Gad, a private
friend, was occasionally employed as the bearer of these prophetic
messages.

[1 Chronicles 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 21:11</span></span>

Choose thee, &c.--To the three evils these correspond in beautiful
agreement: three years, three months, three days \[BERTHEAU\]. (See on
[Sa2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013)).

[1 Chronicles 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch1 21:13</span></span>

let me fall now into the hand of the Lord . . . let me not fall into the
hand of man--Experience had taught him that human passion and vengeance
had no bounds, whereas our wise and gracious Father in heaven knows the
kind, and regulates the extent, of chastisement which every one needs.

[1 Chronicles 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 21:14</span></span>

So the Lord . . . sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it--The
infliction only of the pestilence is here noticed, without any account
of its duration or its ravages, while a minute description is given of
the visible appearance and menacing attitude of the destroying angel.

[1 Chronicles 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 21:15</span></span>

stood by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite--Ornan was probably
his Hebrew or Jewish, Araunah his Jebusite or Canaanitish, name. Whether
he was the old king of Jebus, as that title is given to him ([Sa2
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#023)), or not, he had been converted
to the worship of the true God, and was possessed both of property and
influence.

[1 Chronicles 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 21:16</span></span>

David and the elders . . . clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their
faces--They appeared in the garb and assumed the attitude of humble
penitents, confessing their sins, and deprecating the wrath of God.

[1 Chronicles 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 21:18</span></span>

HE BUILDS AN ALTAR. ([Ch1 21:18-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#018))

the angel of the Lord commanded Gad to say--The order about the erection
of an altar, as well as the indication of its site, is described ([Sa2
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)) as brought directly by Gad.
Here we are informed of the quarter whence the prophet got his
commission. It is only in the later stages of Israel's history that we
find angels employed in communicating the divine will to the prophets.

[1 Chronicles 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 21:20</span></span>

Ornan was threshing wheat--If the census was entered upon in autumn, the
beginning of the civil year, the nine and a half months it occupied
would end at wheat harvest. The common way of threshing corn is by
spreading it out on a high level area, and driving backwards and
forwards upon it two oxen harnessed to a clumsy sledge with three
rollers and some sharp spikes. The driver sits on his knees on the box,
while another person is employed in drawing back the straw and
separating it from the grain underneath. By this operation the chaff is
very much chopped, and the grain threshed out.

[1 Chronicles 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 21:23</span></span>

I give thee . . . the threshing instruments for wood--that is, to burn
the sacrifice of the oxen. Very little real import--the haste and the
value of the present offered--can be understood in this country. The
offering was made for instant use. Ornan, hereby hoping to terminate the
pestilence without a moment's delay, "gave all," oxen, the large
threshing machine, and the wheat.

[1 Chronicles 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch1 21:25</span></span>

David gave . . . for the place six hundred shekels of gold--At first he
bought only the cattle and the threshing instruments, for which he paid
fifty shekels of silver ([Sa2 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024));
afterwards he purchased the whole property, Mount Moriah, on which the
future temple stood. High in the center of the mountain platform rises a
remarkable rock, now covered by the dome of "the Sakrah." It is
irregular in its form, and measures about sixty feet in one direction
and fifty feet in the other. It is the natural surface of Mount Moriah
and is thought by many to be the rock of the threshing-floor of Araunah,
selected by David, and continued by Solomon and Zerubbabel as "the
unhewn stone" on which to build the altar \[BARTLETT, Walks about
Jerusalem; STANLEY\].

[1 Chronicles 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch1 21:26</span></span>

David built there an altar--He went in procession with his leading men
from the royal palace, down Mount Zion, and through the intervening
city. Although he had plenty of space on his own property, he was
commanded, under peremptory direction, to go a considerable distance
from his home, up Mount Moriah, to erect an altar on premises which he
had to buy. It was on or close to the spot where Abraham had offered up
Isaac.

answered him by fire from heaven--(See [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024); [Kg1
18:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021); [Kg2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#012); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)).

[1 Chronicles 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch1 21:28</span></span>

when David saw that the Lord had answered him . . ., he sacrificed
there--or, "he continued to sacrifice there." Perceiving his sacrifice
was acceptable, he proceeded to make additional offerings there, and
seek favor by prayer and expiatory rites; for the dread of the menacing
angel destroying Jerusalem while he was absent in the center of worship
at Gibeon, especially reverence for the Divine Being, led him to
continue his adorations in that place which God ([Ch2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)) had hallowed by the tokens of His
presence and gracious acceptance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 22](ch1022)

</div>
