<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2023)  [Next](ch2025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 24:1</span></span>

JOASH REIGNS WELL ALL THE DAYS OF JEHOIADA. ([Ch2
24:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#001))

Joash . . . began to reign--(See on [Kg2
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)).

[2 Chronicles 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 24:3</span></span>

Jehoiada took for him two wives--As Jehoiada was now too old to contract
such new alliances, the generality of interpreters apply this statement
to the young king.

[2 Chronicles 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 24:4</span></span>

Joash was minded to repair the house of the Lord--(See on [Kg2
12:4-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004)).

[2 Chronicles 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 24:15</span></span>

JEHOIADA BEING DEAD. ([Ch2 24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#015))

Jehoiada waxed old . . . and died--His life, protracted to unusual
longevity and spent in the service of his country, deserved some tribute
of public gratitude, and this was rendered in the posthumous honors that
were bestowed on him. Among the Hebrews, intramural interment was
prohibited in every city but Jerusalem, and there the exception was made
only to the royal family and persons of eminent merit, on whom the
distinction was conferred of being buried in the city of David, among
the kings, as in the case of Jehoiada.

[2 Chronicles 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 24:17</span></span>

JOASH FALLS INTO IDOLATRY. ([Ch2
24:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#017))

Now came the princes of Judah, and make obeisance to the king--Hitherto,
while Joash occupied the throne, his uncle had held the reins of
sovereign power, and by his excellent counsels had directed the young
king to such measures as were calculated to promote both the civil and
religious interests of the country. The fervent piety, practical wisdom,
and inflexible firmness of that sage counsellor exerted immense
influence over all classes. But now that the helm of the state-ship was
no longer steered by the sound head and firm hand of the venerable high
priest, the real merits of Joash's administration appear; and for want
of good and enlightened principle, as well as, perhaps, of natural
energy of character, he allowed himself to be borne onward in a course
which soon wrecked the vessel upon hidden rocks.

the king hearkened unto them, &c.--They were secretly attached to
idolatry, and their elevated rank affords sad proof how extensively and
deeply the nation had become corrupted during the reigns of Jehoram,
Ahaziah, and Athaliah. With strong professions of allegiance they humbly
requested that they might not be subjected to the continued necessity of
frequent and expensive journeys to Jerusalem, but allowed the privilege
their fathers had enjoyed of worshipping God in high places at home.
They framed their petition in this plausible and least offensive manner,
well knowing that, if excused attendance at the temple, they
might--without risk of discovery or disturbance--indulge their tastes in
the observance of any private rites they pleased. The weak-minded king
granted their petition; and the consequence was, that when they left the
house of the Lord God of their fathers, they soon "served groves and
idols."

[2 Chronicles 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 24:18</span></span>

wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem--The particular mention of Jerusalem
as involved in the sin implies that the neglect of the temple and the
consequent idolatry received not only the king's toleration, but his
sanction; and it naturally occurs to ask how, at his mature age, such a
total abandonment of a place with which all his early recollections were
associated can be accounted for. It has been suggested that what he had
witnessed of the conduct of many of the priests in the careless
performance of the worship, and especially their unwillingness to
collect the money, as well as apply a portion of their revenues for the
repairs of the temple, had alienated and disgusted him \[LE CLERC\].

[2 Chronicles 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 24:19</span></span>

Yet he sent prophets--Elisha, Micah, Jehu son of Hanani, Jahaziel son of
Zechariah ([Ch2 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014)), Eliezer son of
Dodavah ([Ch2 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#037)), lived and taught
at that time. But all their prophetic warnings and denunciations were
unheeded.

[2 Chronicles 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 24:20</span></span>

the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada--probably a
younger son, for his name does not occur in the list of Aaron's
successors (1Ch. 6:4-47).

stood above the people--Being of the priestly order, he spoke from the
inner court, which was considerably higher than that of the people.

and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments
of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper, &c.--His near relationship to the
king might have created a feeling of delicacy and reluctance to
interfere; but at length he, too, was prompted by an irresistible
impulse to protest against the prevailing impiety. The bold freedom and
energy of \[Zechariah's\] remonstrance, as well as his denunciation of
the national calamities that would certainly follow, were most
unpalatable to the king; while they so roused the fierce passions of the
multitude that a band of miscreants, at the secret instigation of Joash,
stoned him to death. This deed of violence involved complicated
criminality on the part of the king. It was a horrid outrage on a
prophet of the Lord--base ingratitude to a family who had preserved his
life--atrocious treatment of a true Hebrew patriot--an illegal and
unrighteous exercise of his power and authority as a king.

[2 Chronicles 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 24:22</span></span>

when he died, he said, The Lord look upon it and require it--These dying
words, if they implied a vindictive imprecation, exhibit a striking
contrast to the spirit of the first Christian martyr ([Act
7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)). But, instead of being the
expression of a personal wish, they might be the utterance of a
prophetic doom.

[2 Chronicles 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch2 24:23</span></span>

HE IS SLAIN BY HIS SERVANTS. ([Ch2
24:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023))

at the end of the year the host of Syria came up--This invasion took
place under the personal conduct of Hazael, whom Joash, to save the
miseries of a siege, prevailed on to withdraw his forces by a large
present of gold ([Kg2 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#018)). Most
probably, also, he promised the payment of an annual tribute, on the
neglect or refusal of which the Syrians returned the following year, and
with a mere handful of men inflicted a total and humiliating defeat on
the collected force of the Hebrews.

[2 Chronicles 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 24:25</span></span>

they left him in great diseases--The close of his life was embittered by
a painful malady, which long confined him to bed.

his own servants conspired against him--These two conspirators (whose
fathers were Jews, but their mothers aliens) were probably courtiers,
who, having constant access to the bedchamber, could the more easily
execute their design.

for the blood of the sons--read "the son" of Jehoiada. Public opinion
seems to have ascribed the disasters of his life and reign to that foul
crime. And as the king had long lost the esteem and respect of his
subjects, neither horror nor sorrow was expressed for his miserable end!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 25](ch2025)

</div>
