<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2008)  [Next](ch2010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 9:1</span></span>

THE QUEEN OF SHEBA VISITS SOLOMON; SHE ADMIRES HIS WISDOM AND
MAGNIFICENCE. ([Ch2 9:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001))

when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon--(See on [Kg1
10:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001)). It is said that among the
things in Jerusalem which drew forth the admiration of Solomon's royal
visitor was "his ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord."
This was the arched viaduct that crossed the valley from Mount Zion to
the opposite hill. In the commentary on the passage quoted above,
allusion was made to the recent discovery of its remains. Here we give a
full account of what, for boldness of conceptions for structure and
magnificence, was one of the greatest wonders in Jerusalem. "During our
first visit to the southwest corner of the area of the mosque, we
observed several of the large stones jutting out from the western wall,
which at first seemed to be the effect of a bursting of the wall from
some mighty shock or earthquake. We paid little regard to this at the
moment; but on mentioning the fact not long after to a circle of our
friends, the remark was incidentally dropped that the stones had the
appearance of having once belonged to a large arch. At this remark, a
train of thought flashed across my mind, which I hardly dared to follow
out until I had again repaired to the spot, in order to satisfy myself
with my own eyes as to the truth or falsehood of the suggestion. I found
it even so. The courses of these immense stones occupy their original
position; their external surface is hewn to a regular curve; and, being
fitted one upon another, they form the commencement or foot of an
immense arch which once sprung out from this western wall in a direction
towards Mount Zion, across the TyropÅ“on valley. This arch could only
have belonged to the bridge, which, according to JOSEPHUS, led from this
part of the temple to the Xystus (covered colonnade) on Zion; and it
proves incontestably the antiquity of that portion from which it
springs" \[ROBINSON\]. The distance from this point to the steep rock of
Zion ROBINSON calculates to be about three hundred and fifty feet, the
probable length of this ancient viaduct. Another writer adds, that "the
arch of this bridge, if its curve be calculated with an approximation to
the truth, would measure sixty feet, and must have been one of five
sustaining the viaduct (allowing for the abutments on either side), and
that the piers supporting the center arch of this bridge must have been
of great altitude--not less, perhaps, than one hundred and thirty feet.
The whole structure, when seen from the southern extremity of the
TyropÅ“on, must have had an aspect of grandeur, especially as connected
with the lofty and sumptuous edifices of the temple, and of Zion to the
right and to the left" \[ISAAC TAYLOR'S EDITION OF TRAILL'S JOSEPHUS\].

[2 Chronicles 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 9:13</span></span>

HIS RICHES. (2Ch. 9:13-28)

Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year--(See on 1Ki.
10:14-29).

six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold--The sum named is
equal to Â£3,646,350; and if we take the proportion of silver ([Ch2
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#014)), which is not taken into
consideration, at one to nine, there would be about Â£200,000, making a
yearly supply of nearly Â£6,000,000, being a vast amount for an infant
effort in maritime commerce \[NAPIER\].

[2 Chronicles 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 9:21</span></span>

the king's ships went to Tarshish--rather, "the king's ships of Tarshish
went" with the servants of Huram.

ships of Tarshish--that is, in burden and construction like the large
vessels built for or used at Tarshish \[CALMET, Fragments\].

[2 Chronicles 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 9:25</span></span>

Solomon had four thousand stalls--It has been conjectured \[GESENIUS,
Hebrew Lexicon\] that the original term may signify not only stall or
stable, but a number of horses occupying the same number of stalls.
Supposing that ten were put together in one part, this would make forty
thousand. According to this theory of explanation, the historian in
Kings refers to horses \[see [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026)\]; while the historian in
Chronicles speaks of the stalls in which they were kept. But more recent
critics reject this mode of solving the difficulty, and, regarding the
four thousand stalls as in keeping with the general magnificence of
Solomon's establishments, are agreed in considering the text in Kings as
corrupt, through the error of some copyist.

[2 Chronicles 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch2 9:28</span></span>

they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt--(See on [Ch2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#014)). Solomon undoubtedly carried the
Hebrew kingdom to its highest pitch of worldly glory. His completion of
the grand work, the centralizing of the national worship at Jerusalem,
whither the natives went up three times a year, has given his name a
prominent place in the history of the ancient church. But his reign had
a disastrous influence upon "the peculiar people," and the example of
his deplorable idolatries, the connections he formed with foreign
princes, the commercial speculations he entered into, and the luxuries
introduced into the land, seem in a great measure to have altered and
deteriorated the Jewish character.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 10](ch2010)

</div>
