<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2002)  [Next](ch2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 3:1</span></span>

PLACE AND TIME OF BUILDING THE TEMPLE. ([Ch2
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001))

Mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David--These words seem to
intimate that the region where the temple was built was previously known
by the name of Moriah ([Gen 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)), and
do not afford sufficient evidence for affirming, as has been done
\[STANLEY\], that the name was first given to the mount, in consequence
of the vision seen by David. Mount Moriah was one summit of a range of
hills which went under the general name of Zion. The platform of the
temple is now, and has long been, occupied by the haram, or sacred
enclosure, within which stand the three mosques of Omar (the smallest),
of El Aksa, which in early times was a Christian church, and of Kubbet
el Sakhara, "The dome of the rock," so called from a huge block of
limestone rock in the center of the floor, which, it is supposed, formed
the elevated threshing-floor of Araunah, and on which the great brazen
altar stood. The site of the temple, then, is so far established for an
almost universal belief is entertained in the authenticity of the
tradition regarding the rock El Sakhara; and it has also been
conclusively proved that the area of the temple was identical on its
western, eastern, and southern sides with the present enclosure of the
haram \[ROBINSON\]. "That the temple was situated somewhere within the
oblong enclosure on Mount Moriah, all topographers are agreed, although
there is not the slightest vestige of the sacred fane now remaining; and
the greatest diversity of sentiment prevails as to its exact position
within that large area, whether in the center of the haram, or in its
southwest corner" \[BARCLAY\]. Moreover, the full extent of the temple
area is a problem that remains to be solved, for the platform of Mount
Moriah being too narrow for the extensive buildings and courts attached
to the sacred edifice, Solomon resorted to artificial means of enlarging
and levelling it, by erecting vaults, which, as JOSEPHUS states, rested
on immense earthen mounds raised from the slope of the hill. It should
be borne in mind at the outset that the grandeur of the temple did not
consist in its colossal structure so much as in its internal splendor,
and the vast courts and buildings attached to it. It was not intended
for the reception of a worshipping assembly, for the people always stood
in the outer courts of the sanctuary.

[2 Chronicles 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 3:3</span></span>

MEASURES AND ORNAMENTS OF THE HOUSE. ([Ch2
3:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#003))

these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the building of
the house of God--by the written plan and specifications given him by
his father. The measurements are reckoned by cubits, "after the first
measure," that is, the old Mosaic standard. But there is great
difference of opinion about this, some making the cubit eighteen, others
twenty-one inches. The temple, which embodied in more solid and durable
materials the ground-form of the tabernacle (only being twice as large),
was a rectangular building, seventy cubits long from east to west, and
twenty cubits wide from north to south.

[2 Chronicles 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 3:4</span></span>

the porch--The breadth of the house, whose length ran from east to west,
is here given as the measure of the length of the piazza. The portico
would thus be from thirty to thirty-five feet long, and from fifteen to
seventeen and a half feet broad.

the height was an hundred and twenty cubits--This, taking the cubit at
eighteen inches, would be one hundred eighty feet; at twenty-one inches,
two hundred ten feet; so that the porch would rise in the form of a
tower, or two pyramidal towers, whose united height was one hundred
twenty cubits, and each of them about ninety or one hundred five feet
high \[STIEGLITZ\]. This porch would thus be like the propylÃ&brvbr;um
or gateway of the palace of Khorsabad \[LAYARD\], or at the temple of
Edfou.

[2 Chronicles 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 3:5</span></span>

the greater house--that is, the holy places, the front or outer chamber
(see [Kg1 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#017)).

[2 Chronicles 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 3:6</span></span>

he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty--better, he paved
the house with precious and beautiful marble \[KITTO\]. It may be, after
all, that these were stones with veins of different colors for
decorating the walls. This was an ancient and thoroughly Oriental kind
of embellishment. There was an under pavement of marble, which was
covered with planks of fir. The whole interior was lined with boards,
richly decorated with carved work, clusters of foliage and flowers,
among which the pomegranate and lotus (or water-lily) were conspicuous;
and overlaid, excepting the floor, with gold, either by gilding or in
plates (1Ki. 6:1-38).

[2 Chronicles 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 3:8</span></span>

DIMENSIONS, &C., OF THE MOST HOLY HOUSE. ([Ch2
3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#008))

the most holy house--It was a perfect cube (compare [Kg1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020)).

overlaid it with . . . gold, amounting to six hundred talents--at Â£4
per ounce, equal to Â£3,600,000.

[2 Chronicles 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 3:10</span></span>

two cherubims--These figures in the tabernacle were of pure gold (Exo.
25:1-40) and overshadowed the mercy seat. The two placed in the temple
were made of olive wood, overlaid with gold. They were of colossal size,
like the Assyrian sculptures; for each, with expanded wings, covered a
space of ten cubits in height and length--two wings touched each other,
while the other two reached the opposite walls; their faces were inward,
that is, towards the most holy house, conformably to their use, which
was to veil the ark.

The united height is here given; and though the exact dimensions would
be thirty-six cubits, each column was only seventeen cubits and a half,
a half cubit being taken up by the capital or the base. They were
probably described as they were lying together in the mould before they
were set up \[POOLE\]. They would be from eighteen to twenty-one feet in
circumference, and stand forty feet in height. These pillars, or
obelisks, as some call them, were highly ornamented, and formed an
entrance in keeping with the splendid interior of the temple.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 4](ch2004)

</div>
