<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2015)  [Next](ch2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 16:1</span></span>

ASA, BY A LEAGUE WITH THE SYRIANS, DIVERTS BAASHA FROM BUILDING RAMAH.
([Ch2 16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001))

In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha . . . came up
against Judah--Baasha had died several years before this date ([Kg1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#033)), and the best biblical critics
are agreed in considering this date to be calculated from the separation
of the kingdoms, and coincident with the sixteenth year of Asa's reign.
This mode of reckoning was, in all likelihood, generally followed in the
book of the kings of Judah and Israel, the public annals of the time
([Ch2 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#011)), the source from which
the inspired historian drew his account.

Baasha . . . built Ramah--that is, fortified it. The blessing of God
which manifestly rested at this time on the kingdom of Judah, the signal
victory of Asa, the freedom and purity of religious worship, and the
fame of the late national covenant, were regarded with great interest
throughout Israel, and attracted a constantly increasing number of
emigrants to Judah. Baasha, alarmed at this movement, determined to stem
the tide; and as the high road to and from Jerusalem passed by Ramah, he
made that frontier town, about six miles north of Asa's capital, a
military station, where the vigilance of his sentinels would effectually
prevent all passage across the boundary of the kingdom (see on [Kg1
15:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#016); also [Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009)).

[2 Chronicles 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 16:4</span></span>

Ben-hadad . . . sent the captains of his armies . . . and they smote . .
. Abelmaim--"The meadow of waters," supposed to have been situated on
the marshy plain near the uppermost lake of the Jordan. The other two
towns were also in the northern district of Palestine. These unexpected
hostilities of his Syrian ally interrupted Baasha's fortifications at
Ramah, and his death, happening soon after, prevented his resuming them.

[2 Chronicles 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 16:7</span></span>

Hanani the seer came to Asa . . . and said--His object was to show the
king his error in forming his recent league with Ben-hadad. The prophet
represented the appropriation of the temple treasures to purchase the
services of the Syrian mercenaries, as indicating a distrust in God most
blameable with the king's experience. He added, that in consequence of
this want of faith, Asa had lost the opportunity of gaining a victory
over the united forces of Baasha and Ben-hadad, more splendid than that
obtained over the Ethiopians. Such a victory, by destroying their
armies, would have deprived them of all power to molest him in the
future; whereas by his foolish and worldly policy, so unworthy of God's
vicegerent, to misapply the temple treasures and corrupt the fidelity of
an ally of the king of Israel, he had tempted the cupidity of the one,
and increased the hostility of the other, and rendered himself liable to
renewed troubles ([Kg1 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#032)). This
rebuke was pungent and, from its truth and justness, ought to have
penetrated and afflicted the heart of such a man as Asa. But his pride
was offended at the freedom taken by the honest reprover of royalty, and
in a burst of passionate resentment, he ordered Hanani to be thrown into
prison.

[2 Chronicles 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 16:10</span></span>

Asa oppressed some of the people the same time--The form or degree of
this oppression is not recorded. The cause of his oppressing them was
probably due to the same offense as that of Hanani--a strong expression
of their dissatisfaction with his conduct in leaguing with Ben-hadad, or
it may have been his maltreatment of the Lord's servant.

[2 Chronicles 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 16:12</span></span>

Asa . . . was diseased in his feet--probably the gout.

yet his disease was exceeding great--better, "moved upwards" in his
body, which proves the violent and dangerous type of the malady.

yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
physicians--most probably Egyptian physicians, who were anciently in
high repute at foreign courts, and who pretended to expel diseases by
charms, incantations, and mystic arts. Asa's fault consisted in his
trusting to such physicians, while he neglected to supplicate the aid
and blessing of God. The best and holiest men have been betrayed for a
time into sins, but through repentance have risen again; and as Asa is
pronounced a good man ([Ch2 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#017)), it
may be presumed that he also was restored to a better state of mind.

[2 Chronicles 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 16:14</span></span>

they buried him in his own sepulchres--The tombs in the neighborhood of
Jerusalem were excavated in the side of a rock. One cave contained
several tombs or sepulchres.

laid him in the bed . . . filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of
spices--It is evident that a sumptuous public funeral was given him as a
tribute of respect and gratitude for his pious character and patriotic
government. But whether "the bed" means a state couch on which he lay
exposed to public view, the odoriferous perfumes being designed to
neutralize the offensive smell of the corpse, or whether it refers to an
embalmment, in which aromatic spices were always used in great
profusion, it is impossible to say.

they made a very great burning for him--according to some, for consuming
the spices. According to others, it was a magnificent pile for the
cremation of the corpse--a usage which was at that time, and long after,
prevalent among the Hebrews, and the omission of which in the case of
royal personages was reckoned a great indignity ([Ch2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019); [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012); [Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005); [Amo
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 17](ch2017)

</div>
