<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan006)  [Next](dan008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

[Daniel 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 7:1</span></span>

VISION OF THE FOUR BEASTS. (Dan. 7:1-28)

Belshazzar--Good Hebrew manuscripts have "Belshazzar"; meaning "Bel is
to be burnt with hostile fire" ([Jer
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002); [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)). In the history he is called by
his ordinary name; in the prophecy, which gives his true destiny, he is
called a corresponding name, by the change of a letter.

visions of his head--not confused "dreams," but distinct images seen
while his mind was collected.

sum--a "summary." In predictions, generally, details are not given so
fully as to leave no scope for free agency, faith, and patient waiting
for God manifesting His will in the event. He "wrote" it for the Church
in all ages; he "told" it for the comfort of his captive fellow
countrymen.

[Daniel 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 7:2</span></span>

the four winds--answering to the "four beasts"; their several conflicts
in the four quarters or directions of the world.

strove--burst forth (from the abyss) \[MAURER\].

sea--The world powers rise out of the agitations of the political sea
([Jer 46:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007); [Luk
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025); compare [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015); [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)); the kingdom of God and the Son
of man from the clouds of heaven ([Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013); compare [Joh
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023)). TREGELLES takes "the great sea"
to mean, as always elsewhere in Scripture ([Jos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004); [Jos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)), the Mediterranean, the center
territorially of the four kingdoms of the vision, which all border on it
and have Jerusalem subject to them. Babylon did not border on the
Mediterranean, nor rule Jerusalem, till Nebuchadnezzar's time, when both
things took place simultaneously. Persia encircled more of this sea,
namely, from the Hellespont to Cyrene. Greece did not become a monarchy
before Alexander's time, but then, succeeding to Persia, it became
mistress of Jerusalem. It surrounded still more of the Mediterranean,
adding the coasts of Greece to the part held by Persia. Rome, under
Augustus, realized three things at once--it became a monarchy; it became
mistress of the last of the four parts of Alexander's empire (symbolized
by the four heads of the third beast), and of Jerusalem; it surrounded
all the Mediterranean.

[Daniel 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 7:3</span></span>

beasts--not living animals, as the cherubic four in [Rev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007) (for the original is a different
word from "beasts," and ought to be there translated, living animals).
The cherubic living animals represent redeemed man, combining in himself
the highest forms of animal life. But the "beasts" here represent the
world powers, in their beast-like, grovelling character. It is on the
fundamental harmony between nature and spirit, between the three
kingdoms of nature, history, and revelation, that Scripture symbolism
rests. The selection of symbols is not arbitrary, but based on the
essence of things.

[Daniel 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 7:4</span></span>

lion--the symbol of strength and courage; chief among the kingdoms, as
the lion among the beasts. Nebuchadnezzar is called "the lion" ([Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007)).

eagle's wings--denoting a widespread and rapidly acquired ([Isa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011); [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013); [Lam
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019); [Hab
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006)) empire ([Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040)).

plucked--Its ability for widespread conquests passed away under
Evil-merodach, &c. \[GROTIUS\]; rather, during Nebuchadnezzar's
privation of his throne, while deranged.

it was lifted up from the earth--that is, from its grovelling
bestiality.

made stand . . . as a man--So long as Nebuchadnezzar, in haughty pride,
relied on his own strength, he forfeited the true dignity of man, and
was therefore degraded to be with the beasts. [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016) : "Let his heart be changed from
man's, and let a beast's heart be given unto him." But after he learned
by this sore discipline that "the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of
men" ([Dan 4:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035)), the change took
place in him, "a man's heart is given to him; instead of his former
beast's heart, he attains man's true position, namely, to be consciously
dependent on God." Compare [Psa 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020).

[Daniel 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 7:5</span></span>

bear--symbolizing the austere life of the Persians in their mountains,
also their cruelty ([Isa 13:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017);
Cambyses, Ochus, and other of the Persian princes were notoriously
cruel; the Persian laws involved, for one man's offense, the whole
kindred and neighborhood in destruction, [Dan
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)) and rapacity. "A bear is an
all-devouring animal" \[ARISTOTLE, 8.5\], ([Jer
51:48](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#048), [Jer
51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056)).

raised . . . itself on one side--but the Hebrew, "It raised up one
dominion." The Medes, an ancient people, and the Persians, a modern
tribe, formed one united sovereignty in contrast to the third and fourth
kingdoms, each originally one, afterwards divided. English Version is
the result of a slight change of a Hebrew letter. The idea then would
be, "It lay on one of its fore feet, and stood on the other"; a figure
still to be seen on one of the stones of Babylon \[MUNTER, The Religion
of Babylonia, 112\]; denoting a kingdom that had been at rest, but is
now rousing itself for conquest. Media is the lower side, passiveness;
Persia, the upper, active element \[AUBERLEN\]. The three ribs in its
mouth are Media, Lydia, and Babylon, brought under the Persian sway.
Rather, Babylon, Lydia, and Egypt, not properly parts of its body, but
seized by Medo-Persia \[SIR ISAAC NEWTON\]. Called "ribs" because they
strengthened the Medo-Persian empire. "Between its teeth," as being much
grinded by it.

devour much flesh--that is, subjugate many nations.

[Daniel 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 7:6</span></span>

leopard--smaller than the lion; swift ([Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008)); cruel ([Isa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)), the opposite of tame; springing
suddenly from its hiding place on its prey ([Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007)); spotted. So Alexander, a small
king, of a small kingdom, Macedon, attacked Darius at the head of the
vast empire reaching from the Ã†gean Sea to the Indies. In twelve years
he subjugated part of Europe, and all Asia from Illyricum and the
Adriatic to the Ganges, not so much fighting as conquering \[JEROME\].
Hence, whereas Babylon is represented with two wings, Macedon has four,
so rapid were its conquests. The various spots denote the various
nations incorporated into his empire \[BOCHART\]; Or Alexander's own
variation in character, at one time mild, at another cruel, now
temperate, and now drunken and licentious.

four heads--explained in [Dan 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008),
[Dan 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022); the four kingdoms of the
Diadochi or "successors" into which the Macedonian empire was divided at
the death of Alexander, namely, Macedon and Greece under Cassander,
Thrace and Bithynia under Lysimachus, Egypt under PTOLEMY, and Syria
under Seleucus.

dominion . . . given to it--by God; not by Alexander's own might. For
how unlikely it was that thirty thousand men should overthrow several
hundreds of thousands! JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 11.6\] says that
Alexander adored the high priest of Jerusalem, saying that he at Dium in
Macedonia had seen a vision of God so habited, inviting him to go to
Asia, and promising him success.

[Daniel 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 7:7</span></span>

As Daniel lived under the kingdom of the first beast, and therefore
needed not to describe it, and as the second and third are described
fully in the second part of the book, the chief emphasis falls on the
fourth. Also prophecy most dwells on the end, which is the consummation
of the preceding series of events. It is in the fourth that the world
power manifests fully its God-opposing nature. Whereas the three former
kingdoms were designated respectively, as a lion, bear, and leopard, no
particular beast is specified as the image of the fourth; for Rome is so
terrible as to be not describable by any one, but combines in itself all
that we can imagine inexpressibly fierce in all beasts. Hence thrice
([Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), [Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019), [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023)) it is repeated, that the fourth
was "diverse from all" the others. The formula of introduction, "I saw
in the night visions," occurs here, as at [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002), and again at [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), thus dividing the whole vision
into three parts--the first embracing the three kingdoms, the second the
fourth and its overthrow, the third Messiah's kingdom. The first three
together take up a few centuries; the fourth, thousands of years. The
whole lower half of the image in the second chapter is given to it. And
whereas the other kingdoms consist of only one material, this consists
of two, iron and clay (on which much stress is laid, [Dan
2:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041)); the "iron teeth" here allude
to one material in the fourth kingdom of the image.

ten horns--It is with the crisis, rather than the course, of the fourth
kingdom that this seventh chapter is mainly concerned. The ten kings
([Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024), the "horns" representing
power), that is, kingdoms, into which Rome was divided on its
incorporation with the Germanic and Slavonic tribes, and again at the
Reformation, are thought by many to be here intended. But the variation
of the list of the ten, and their ignoring the eastern half of the
empire altogether, and the existence of the Papacy before the breaking
up of even the Western empire, instead of being the "little horn"
springing up after the other ten, are against this view. The Western
Roman empire continued till A.D. 731, and the Eastern, till A.D. 1453.
The ten kingdoms, therefore, prefigured by the ten "toes" ([Dan
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041); compare [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)), are the ten kingdoms into
which Rome shall be found finally divided when Antichrist shall appear
\[TREGELLES\]. These, probably, are prefigured by the number ten being
the prevalent one at the chief turning points of Roman history.

[Daniel 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 7:8</span></span>

little horn--little at first, but afterwards waxing greater than all
others. He must be sought "among them," namely, the ten horns. The Roman
empire did not represent itself as a continuation of Alexander's; but
the Germanic empire calls itself "the holy Roman empire." Napoleon's
attempted universal monarchy was avowedly Roman: his son was called king
of Rome. The czar (CÃ&brvbr;sar) also professes to represent the eastern
half of the Roman empire. The Roman civilization, church, language, and
law are the chief elements in Germanic civilization. But the Romanic
element seeks universal empire, while the Germanic seeks
individualization. Hence the universal monarchies attempted by the
Papacy, Charlemagne, Charles V, and Napoleon have failed, the iron not
amalgamating with the clay. In the king symbolized by "the little horn,"
the God-opposing, haughty spirit of the world, represented by the fourth
monarchy, finds its intensest development. "The man of sin," "the son of
perdition" ([Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)). Antichrist
([Jo1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018), [Jo1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022); [Jo1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003)). It is the complete evolution of
the evil principle introduced by the fall.

three of the first horns plucked up--the exarchate of Ravenna, the
kingdom of the Lombards and the state of Rome, which constituted the
Pope's dominions at the first; obtained by Pope Zachary and Stephen II
in return for acknowledging the usurper Pepin lawful king of France
\[NEWTON\]. See TREGELLES' objections, [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), "ten horns," Note. The "little
horn," in his view, is to be Antichrist rising three and a half years
before Christ's second advent, having first overthrown three of the ten
contemporaneous kingdoms, into which the fourth monarchy, under which we
live, shall be finally divided. Popery seems to be a fulfilment of the
prophecy in many particulars, the Pope claiming to be God on earth and
above all earthly dominions; but the spirit of Antichrist prefigured by
Popery will probably culminate in ONE individual, to be destroyed by
Christ's coming; He will be the product of the political world powers,
whereas Popery which prepares His way, is a Church become worldly.

eyes of man--Eyes express intelligence ([Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018)); so ([Gen
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)) the serpent's promise was, man's
"eyes should be opened," if he would but rebel against God. Antichrist
shall consummate the self-apotheosis, begun at the fall, high
intellectual culture, independent of God. The metals representing
Babylon and Medo-Persia, gold and silver, are more precious than brass
and iron, representing Greece and Rome; but the latter metals are more
useful to civilization ([Gen 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022)).
The clay, representing the Germanic element, is the most plastic
material. Thus there is a progress in culture; but this is not a
progress necessarily in man's truest dignity, namely, union and likeness
to God. Nay, it has led him farther from God, to self-reliance and
world-love. The beginnings of civilization were among the children of
Cain ([Gen 4:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017); [Luk
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008)). Antiochus Epiphanes, the first
Antichrist, came from civilized Greece, and loved art. As Hellenic
civilization produced the first, so modern civilization under the fourth
monarchy will produce the last Antichrist. The "mouth" and "eyes" are
those of a man, while the symbol is otherwise brutish that is it will
assume man's true dignity, namely, wear the guise of the kingdom of God
(which comes as the "Son of man" from above), while it is really
bestial, namely, severed from God. Antichrist promises the same things
as Christ, but in an opposite way: a caricature of Christ, offering a
regenerated world without the cross. Babylon and Persia in their
religion had more reverence for things divine than Greece and Rome in
the imperial stages of their history. Nebuchadnezzar's human heart,
given him ([Dan 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016)) on his
repentance, contrasts with the human eyes of Antichrist, the pseudo son
of man, namely, intellectual culture, while heart and mouth blaspheme
God. The deterioration politically corresponds: the first kingdom, an
organic unity; the second, divided into Median and Persian; the third
branches off into four; the fourth, into ten. The two eastern kingdoms
are marked by nobler metals; the two western, by baser;
individualization and division appear in the latter, and it is they
which produce the two Antichrists.

[Daniel 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 7:9</span></span>

I beheld till--I continued looking till.

thrones . . . cast down--rather, "thrones were placed" \[Vulgate and
LUTHER\], namely, for the saints and elect angels to whom "judgment is
given" ([Dan 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)), as assessors with
the Judge. Compare [Dan 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010),
"thousand thousands ministered unto Him" ([Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028); [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030); [Co1
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002); [Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021); [Rev
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026); [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004)). In English Version the thrones
cast down are those of the previously mentioned kings who give place to
Messiah.

Ancient of days--"The everlasting Father" ([Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)). HE is the Judge here, as THE SON
does not judge in His own cause, and it is His cause which is the one at
issue with Antichrist.

sit--the attitude of a judge about to pass sentence.

white--The judicial purity of the Judge, and of all things round Him, is
hereby expressed ([Rev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)).

wheels--as Oriental thrones move on wheels. Like the rapid flame, God's
judgments are most swift in falling where He wills them ([Eze
1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)). The judgment here is not the
last judgment, for then there will be no beast, and heaven and earth
shall have passed away; but it is that on Antichrist (the last
development of the fourth kingdom), typical of the last judgment: Christ
coming to substitute the millennial kingdom of glory for that of the
cross ([Rev 17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012); [Rev
19:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)).

[Daniel 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 7:10</span></span>

thousand . . . ministered unto him--so at the giving of the law ([Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022); [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014)).

ten . . . thousand before him--image from the Sanhedrim, in which the
father of the consistory sat with his assessors on each side, in the
form of a semicircle, and the people standing before him.

judgment was set--The judges sat ([Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)).

books . . . opened-- ([Rev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)).
Forensic image; all the documents of the cause at issue, connected with
the condemnation of Antichrist and his kingdom, and the setting up of
Messiah's kingdom. Judgment must pass on the world as being under the
curse, before the glory comes; but Antichrist offers glory without the
cross, a renewed world without the world being judged.

[Daniel 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 7:11</span></span>

Here is set forth the execution on earth of the judgment pronounced in
the unseen heavenly court of judicature ([Dan
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)).

body . . . given to . . . flame-- ([Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)).

[Daniel 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 7:12</span></span>

the rest of the beasts--that is, the three first, had passed away not by
direct destroying judgments, such as consumed the little horn, as being
the finally matured evil of the fourth beast. They had continued to
exist but their "dominion was was taken away"; whereas the fourth beast
shall cease utterly, superseded by Messiah's kingdom.

for a season . . . time--Not only the triumph of the beasts over the
godly, but their very existence is limited to a definite time, and that
time the exactly suitable one (compare [Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)). Probably a definite period is
meant by a "season and time" (compare [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025); [Rev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003)). It is striking, the fourth
monarchy, though Christianized for fifteen hundred years past, is not
distinguished from the previous heathen monarchies, or from its own
heathen portion. Nay, it is represented as the most God-opposed of all,
and culminating at last in blasphemous Antichrist. The reason is:
Christ's kingdom now is not of this world ([Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)); and only at the second advent
of Christ does it become an external power of the world. Hence Daniel,
whose province it was to prophesy of the world powers, does not treat of
Christianity until it becomes a world power, namely, at the second
advent. The kingdom of God is a hidden one till Jesus comes again ([Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017); [Col
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002); [Ti2
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)). Rome was worldly while
heathen, and remains worldly, though Christianized. So the New Testament
views the present Ã&brvbr;on or age of the world as essentially
heathenish, which we cannot love without forsaking Christ ([Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002); [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020); [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006), [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008); [Co1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018); [Co1
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031); [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004); [Gal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004); [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002); [Ti2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010); compare [Jo1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015), [Jo1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017)). The object of Christianity is
not so much to Christianize the present world as to save souls out of
it, so as not to be condemned with the world ([Co1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)), but to rule with Him in His
millennium ([Mat 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005); [Luk
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032); [Luk
22:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028); [Rom
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017); [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002); [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006); [Rev
2:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026); [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021); [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)). This is to be our hope, not to
reign in the present world course ([Co1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008); [Co2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018); [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020); [Heb
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014)). There must be a "regeneration"
of the world, as of the individual, a death previous to a resurrection,
a destruction of the world kingdoms, before they rise anew as the
kingdoms of Christ ([Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)). Even
the millennium will not perfectly eradicate the world's corruption;
another apostasy and judgment will follow ([Rev
20:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#007)), in which the world of nature
is to be destroyed and renewed, as the world of history was before the
millennium ([Pe2 3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)); then comes
the perfect earth and heaven ([Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)). Thus there is an onward
progress, and the Christian is waiting for the consummation ([Mar
13:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#033); [Luk
12:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035), ; [Th1
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)), as His Lord also is
"expecting" ([Heb 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013)).

[Daniel 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 7:13</span></span>

Son of man--(See on [Eze 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001)). Not
merely Son of David, and King of Israel, but Head of restored humanity
(corresponding to the world-wide horizon of Daniel's prophecy); the seed
of the woman, crushing Antichrist, the seed of the serpent, according to
the Prot-evangel in Paradise ([Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)). The Representative Man shall
then realize the original destiny of man as Head of the creation ([Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)); the center of unity to Israel
and the Gentiles. The beast, which taken conjointly represents the four
beasts, ascends from the sea ([Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)); the Son of man descends from
"heaven." Satan, as the serpent, is the representative head of all that
bestial; man, by following the serpent, has become bestial. God must,
therefore, become man, so that man may cease to be beast-like. Whoever
rejects the incarnate God will be judged by the Son of man just because
He is the Son of man ([Joh 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)). This
title is always associated with His coming again, because the kingdom
that then awaits Him in that ch belongs to Him as the Saviour of man,
the Restorer of the lost inheritance. "Son of man" expresses His VISIBLE
state formerly in his humiliation hereafter in His exaltation. He "comes
to the Ancient of days" to be invested with the kingdom. Compare [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002) : "The Lord shall send the rod
of thy strength (Messiah) out of Zion." This investiture was at His
ascension "with the clouds of heaven" ([Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009); [Act
2:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033); [Psa
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)), which is a pledge of His
return "in like manner" in the clouds" ([Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)), and "with clouds" ([Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)). The kingdom then was given to
Him in title and invisible exercise; at His second coming it shall be in
visible administration. He will vindicate it from the misrule of those
who received it to hold for and under God, but who ignored His
supremacy. The Father will assert His right by the Son, the heir, who
will hold it for Him ([Eze 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Rev
19:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013)). TREGELLES thinks the
investiture here immediately precedes Christ's coming forth; because He
sits at God's right hand until His enemies are made His footstool, then
the kingdom is given to the Son in actual investiture, and He comes to
crush His so prepared footstool under His feet. But the words, "with the
clouds," and the universal power actually, though invisibly, given Him
then ([Eph 1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)), agree best with
His investiture at the ascension, which, in the prophetic view that
overleaps the interval of ages, is the precursor of His coming visibly
to reign; no event of equal moment taking place in the interval.

[Daniel 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 7:15</span></span>

body--literally, "sheath": the body being the "sheath" of the soul.

[Daniel 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 7:17</span></span>

kings--that is, kingdoms. Compare [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023), "fourth kingdom"; [Dan
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038); [Dan
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020). Each of the four kings
represents a dynasty. Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, Antiochus, and
Antichrist, though individually referred to, are representatives of
characteristic tendencies.

[Daniel 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 7:18</span></span>

the Most High--the emphatic title of God in this prophecy, who delegates
His power first to Israel; then to the Gentiles ([Dan
2:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037)) when Israel fails to realize
the idea of the theocracy; lastly, to Messiah, who shall rule truly for
God, taking it from the Gentile world powers, whose history is one of
continual degeneracy culminating in the last of the kings, Antichrist.
Here, in the interpretation, "the saints," but in the vision ([Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)), "the Son of man," takes the
kingdom; for Christ and His people are one in suffering, and one in
glory. TREGELLES translates, "most high places" ([Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003); [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)). Though oppressed by the beast
and little horn, they belong not to the earth from which the four beasts
arise, but to the most high places.

[Daniel 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 7:19</span></span>

Balaam, an Aramean, dwelling on the Euphrates, at the beginning of
Israel's independent history, and Daniel at the close of it,
prophetically exhibit to the hostile world powers Israel as triumphant
over them at last, though the world powers of the East (Asshur) and the
West (Chittim) carry all before them and afflict Eber (Israel) for a
time ([Num 23:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#008), [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028); [Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002), [Num
24:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#007), [Num
24:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#022)). To Balaam's "Asshur"
correspond Daniel's two eastern kingdoms, Babylon and Medo-Persia; to
"Chittim," the two western kingdoms, Greece and Rome (compare [Gen
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004), [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), [Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)). In Babel, Nimrod the hunter
(revolter) founds the first kingdom of the world ([Gen
10:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)). The Babylonian world power
takes up the thread interrupted at the building of Babel, and the
kingdom of Nimrod. As at Babel, so in Babylon the world is united
against God; Babylon, the first world power, thus becomes the type of
the God-opposed world. The fourth monarchy consummates the evil; it is
"diverse" from the others only in its more unlimited universality. The
three first were not in the full sense universal monarchies. The fourth
is; so in it the God-opposed principle finds its full development. All
history moves within the Romanic, Germanic, and Slavonic nations; it
shall continue so to Christ's second advent. The fourth monarchy
represents universalism externally; Christianity, internally. Rome is
Babylon fully developed. It is the world power corresponding in contrast
to Christianity, and therefore contemporary with it ([Mat
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038); [Mar
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#015); [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001); [Gal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)).

[Daniel 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 7:20</span></span>

look . . . more stout than . . . fellows--namely, than that of the other
horns.

[Daniel 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 7:21</span></span>

made war with the saints--persecuted the Church ([Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007); [Rev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007)).

prevailed--but not ultimately. The limit is marked by "until" ([Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)). The little horn continues,
without intermission, to persecute up to Christ's second advent ([Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014); [Rev
19:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019)).

[Daniel 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 7:22</span></span>

Ancient of days came--The title applied to the Father in [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013) is here applied to the Son; who
is called "the everlasting Father" ([Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)). The Father is never said to
"come"; it is the Son who comes.

judgment was given to . . . saints--Judgment includes rule; "kingdom" in
the end of this verse ([Co1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002); [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006); [Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010); [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)). Christ first receives
"judgment" and the "kingdom," then the saints with Him ([Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)).

[Daniel 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 7:24</span></span>

ten horns--answering to the ten "toes" ([Dan
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041)).

out of this kingdom--It is out of the fourth kingdom that ten others
arise, whatever exterior territory any of them possess ([Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)).

rise after them--yet contemporaneous with them; the ten are
contemporaries. Antichrist rises after their rise, at first "little"
([Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)); but after destroying three
of the ten, he becomes greater than them all ([Dan
7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020)). The three being gone, he is
the eighth (compare [Rev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)); a
distinct head, and yet "of the seven." As the previous world kingdoms
had their representative heads (Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar; Persia, Cyrus;
Greece, Alexander), so the fourth kingdom and its Antichrists shall have
their evil concentrated in the one final Antichrist. As Antiochus
Epiphanes, the Antichrist of the third kingdom in [Dan
8:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023), was the personal enemy of
God, so the final Antichrist of the fourth kingdom, his antitype. The
Church has endured a pagan and a papal persecution; there remains for
her an infidel persecution, general, purifying, and cementing \[CECIL\].
He will not merely, as Popery, substitute himself for Christ in Christ's
name, but "deny the Father and the Son" ([Jo1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)). The persecution is to continue
up to Christ's second coming ([Dan
7:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021)); the horn of blasphemy cannot
therefore be past; for now there is almost a general cessation of
persecution.

[Daniel 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 7:25</span></span>

Three attributes of Antichrist are specified: (1) The highest worldly
wisdom and civilization. (2) The uniting of the whole civilized world
under his dominion. (3) Atheism, antitheism, and autotheism in its
fullest development ([Jo1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)).
Therefore, not only is power taken from the fourth beast, as in the case
of the other three, but God destroys it and the world power in general
by a final judgment. The present external Christianity is to give place
to an almost universal apostasy.

think--literally, "carry within him as it were the burden of the
thought."

change times--the prerogative of God alone ([Dan
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021)); blasphemously assumed by
Antichrist. The "times and laws" here meant are those of religious
ordinance; stated times of feasts \[MAURER\]. Perhaps there are included
the times assigned by God to the duration of kingdoms. He shall set
Himself above all that is called God ([Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)), putting his own "will" above
God's times and laws ([Dan 11:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036)).
But the "times" of His wilfulness are limited for the elect's sake ([Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)).

they--the saints.

given into his hand--to be persecuted.

time . . . times and . . . dividing of time--one year, two years, and
half a year: 1260 days ([Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006),
[Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014)); forty-two months ([Rev
11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002)). That literally three and a
half years are to be the term of Antichrist's persecution is favored by
[Dan 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016), [Dan
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023), where the year-day theory would
be impossible. If the Church, moreover, had been informed that 1260
years must elapse before the second advent, the attitude of expectancy
which is inculcated ([Luk 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#038); [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); [Th1
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009); [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012)) on the ground of the uncertainty
of the time, would be out of place. The original word for "time" denotes
a stated period or set feast; or the interval from one set feast to its
recurrence, that is, a year \[TREGELLES\]; [Lev
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004), "seasons"; [Lev
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#044), "feasts." The passages in favor
of the year-day theory are [Eze 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006),
where each day of the forty during which Ezekiel lay on his right side
is defined by God as meaning a year. Compare [Num
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034), where a year of wandering in
the wilderness was appointed for each day of the forty during which the
spies searched Canaan; but the days were, in these two cases, merely the
type or reason for the years, which were announced as they were to be
fulfilled. In the prophetic part of [Num
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034) "years" are literal. If the
year-day system was applied to them, they would be 14,400 years! In [Eze
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004), if day meant year, Ezekiel
would have lain on his right side forty years! The context here in [Dan
7:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024), is not symbolical. Antichrist
is no longer called a horn, but a king subduing three out of ten kings
(no longer horns, [Dan 7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007)). So in
[Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007), where "time, times, and
half a time," again occurs, nothing symbolic occurs in the context. So
that there is no reason why the three and a half years should be so. For
the first four centuries the "days" were interpreted literally; a
mystical meaning of the 1260 days then began. WALTER BRUTE first
suggested the year-day theory in the end of the fourteenth century. The
seventy years of the Babylonian captivity foretold by Jeremiah ([Jer
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012); [Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)) were understood by Daniel ([Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002)) as literal years, not symbolical,
which would have been 25,200 years! \[TREGELLES\]. It is possible that
the year-day and day-day theories are both true. The seven (symbolical)
times of the Gentile monarchies ([Lev
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#024)) during Israel's casting off
will end in the seven years of Antichrist. The 1260 years of papal
misrule in the name of Christ may be represented by three and a half
years of open Antichristianity and persecution before the millennium.
Witnessing churches may be succeeded by witnessing individuals, the
former occupying the longer, the latter the shorter period ([Rev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003)). The beginning of the 1260 years
is by ELLIOTT set at A.D. 529 or 533, when Justinian's edict
acknowledged Pope John II to be head of the Church; by LUTHER, at 606,
when Phocas confirmed Justinian's grant. But 752 is the most likely
date, when the temporal dominion of the popes began by Pepin's grant to
Stephen II (for Zachary, his predecessor's recognition of his title to
France), confirmed by Charlemagne. For it was then first that the little
horn plucked up three horns, and so became the prolongation of the
fourth secular kingdom \[NEWTON\]. This would bring us down to about
A.D. 2000, or the seventh thousand millenary from creation. But CLINTON
makes about 1862 the seventh millenary, which may favor the dating from
A.D. 529.

[Daniel 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 7:26</span></span>

consume . . . destroy--a twofold operation. Antichrist is to be
gradually "consumed," as the Papacy has been consuming for four hundred
years past, and especially of late years. He is also to be "destroyed"
suddenly by Christ at His coming; the fully developed man of sin ([Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)) or false prophet making a last
desperate effort in confederacy with the "beast" ([Rev
16:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013), [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016)) or secular power of the Roman
empire (some conjecture Louis Napoleon): destroyed at Armageddon in
Palestine.

[Daniel 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 7:27</span></span>

greatness of the kingdom under . . . whole heaven--The power, which
those several kingdoms had possessed, shall all be conferred on
Messiah's kingdom. "Under . . . heaven" shows it is a kingdom on earth,
not in heaven.

people of . . . saints of . . . Most High--"the people of the saints,"
or "holy ones" ([Dan 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024), Margin):
the Jews, the people to whom the saints stand in a peculiar relation.
The saints are gathered out of Jews and Gentiles, but the stock of the
Church is Jewish ([Rom 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024); [Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)); God's faithfulness to this
election Church is thus virtually faithfulness to Israel, and a pledge
of their future national blessing. Christ confirms this fact, while
withholding the date ([Act 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006)).

everlasting kingdom--If everlasting, how can the kingdom here refer to
the millennial one? Answer: Daniel saw the whole time of future
blessedness as one period. The clearer light of the New Testament
distinguishes, in the whole period, the millennium and the time of the
new heaven and new earth (compare [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004) with [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001) and [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)). Christ's kingdom is
"everlasting." Not even the last judgment shall end it, but only give it
a more glorious appearance, the new Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven, with the throne of God and the Lamb in it (compare [Rev
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)).

[Daniel 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 7:28</span></span>

cogitations . . . troubled me--showing that the Holy Spirit intended
much more to be understood by Daniel's words than Daniel himself
understood. We are not to limit the significance of prophecies to what
the prophets themselves understood ([Pe1
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)).

With this chapter the Hebrew part of the book begins and continues to be
the language of the remainder; the visions relating wholly to the Jews
and Jerusalem. The scene here narrows from world-wide prophecies to
those affecting the one covenant-people in the five centuries between
the exile and the advent. Antichrist, like Christ, has a more immediate
future, as well as one more remote. The vision, the eighth chapter,
begins, and that, the tenth through twelfth chapters, concludes, the
account of the Antichrist of the third kingdom. Between the two visions
the ninth chapter is inserted, as to Messiah and the covenant-people at
the end of the half millennium (seventy weeks of years).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 8](dan008)

</div>
