<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu003)  [Next](deu005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 4:1</span></span>

AN EXHORTATION TO OBEDIENCE. ([Deu
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001))

hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I
teach you--By statutes were meant all ordinances respecting religion and
the rites of divine worship; and by judgments, all enactments relative
to civil matters. The two embraced the whole law of God.

[Deuteronomy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 4:2</span></span>

Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you--by the introduction
of any heathen superstition or forms of worship different from those
which I have appointed ([Deu 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#032);
[Num 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#039); [Mat
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009)).

neither shall ye diminish aught from it--by the neglect or omission of
any of the observances, however trivial or irksome, which I have
prescribed. The character and provisions of the ancient dispensation
were adapted with divine wisdom to the instruction of that infant state
of the church. But it was only a temporary economy; and although God
here authorizes Moses to command that all its institutions should be
honored with unfailing observance, this did not prevent Him from
commissioning other prophets to alter or abrogate them when the end of
that dispensation was attained.

[Deuteronomy 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 4:3</span></span>

Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor . . . the
Lord thy God hath destroyed them from among you--It appears that the
pestilence and the sword of justice overtook only the guilty in that
affair ([Num 25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)) while the rest of
the people were spared. The allusion to that recent and appalling
judgment was seasonably made as a powerful dissuasive against idolatry,
and the fact mentioned was calculated to make a deep impression on
people who knew and felt the truth of it.

[Deuteronomy 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 4:5</span></span>

this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations,
which shall hear all these statutes--Moses predicted that the faithful
observance of the laws given them would raise their national character
for intelligence and wisdom. In point of fact it did do so; for although
the heathen world generally ridiculed the Hebrews for what they
considered a foolish and absurd exclusiveness, some of the most eminent
philosophers expressed the highest admiration of the fundamental
principle in the Jewish religion--the unity of God; and their
legislators borrowed some laws from the constitution of the Hebrews.

[Deuteronomy 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 4:7</span></span>

what nation is there so great--Here he represents their privileges and
their duty in such significant and comprehensive terms, as were
peculiarly calculated to arrest their attention and engage their
interest. The former, their national advantages, are described ([Deu
4:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)), and they were twofold: 1.
God's readiness to hear and aid them at all times; and 2. the excellence
of that religion in which they were instructed, set forth in the
"statutes and judgments so righteous" which the law of Moses contained.
Their duty corresponding to these pre-eminent advantages as a people,
was also twofold: 1. their own faithful obedience to that law; and 2.
their obligation to imbue the minds of the young and rising generation
with similar sentiments of reverence and respect for it.

[Deuteronomy 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 4:10</span></span>

the day that thou stoodest before the Lord . . . in Horeb--The delivery
of the law from Sinai was an era never to be forgotten in the history of
Israel. Some of those whom Moses was addressing had been present, though
very young; while the rest were federally represented by their parents,
who in their name and for their interest entered into the national
covenant.

[Deuteronomy 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 4:12</span></span>

ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude--Although
articulate sounds were heard emanating from the mount, no form or
representation of the Divine Being who spoke was seen to indicate His
nature or properties according to the notions of the heathen.

[Deuteronomy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 4:15</span></span>

A PARTICULAR DISSUASIVE AGAINST IDOLATRY. (Deu. 4:14-40)

Take . . . good heed . . . for ye saw no manner of similitude--The
extreme proneness of the Israelites to idolatry, from their position in
the midst of surrounding nations already abandoned to its seductions,
accounts for their attention being repeatedly drawn to the fact that God
did not appear on Sinai in any visible form; and an earnest caution,
founded on that remarkable circumstance, is given to beware, not only of
making representations of false gods, but also any fancied
representation of the true God.

[Deuteronomy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 4:16</span></span>

Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image--The things are
here specified of which God prohibited any image or representation to be
made for the purposes of worship; and, from the variety of details
entered into, an idea may be formed of the extensive prevalence of
idolatry in that age. In whatever way idolatry originated, whether from
an intention to worship the true God through those things which seemed
to afford the strongest evidences of His power, or whether a divine
principle was supposed to reside in the things themselves, there was
scarcely an element or object of nature but was deified. This was
particularly the case with the Canaanites and Egyptians, against whose
superstitious practices the caution, no doubt, was chiefly directed. The
former worshipped Baal and Astarte, the latter Osiris and Isis, under
the figure of a male and a female. It was in Egypt that animal-worship
most prevailed, for the natives of that country deified among beasts the
ox, the heifer, the sheep, and the goat, the dog, the cat, and the ape;
among birds, the ibis, the hawk, and the crane; among reptiles, the
crocodile, the frog, and the beetle; among fishes, all the fish of the
Nile; some of these, as Osiris and Isis, were worshipped over all Egypt,
the others only in particular provinces. In addition they embraced the
Zabian superstition, the adoration of the Egyptians, in common with that
of many other people, extending to the whole starry host. The very
circumstantial details here given of the Canaanitish and Egyptian
idolatry were owing to the past and prospective familiarity of the
Israelites with it in all these forms.

[Deuteronomy 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 4:20</span></span>

But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron
furnace--that is, furnace for smelting iron. A furnace of this kind is
round, sometimes thirty feet deep, and requiring the highest intensity
of heat. Such is the tremendous image chosen to represent the bondage
and affliction of the Israelites \[ROSENMULLER\].

to be unto him a people of inheritance--His peculiar possession from age
to age; and therefore for you to abandon His worship for that of idols,
especially the gross and debasing system of idolatry that prevails among
the Egyptians, would be the greatest folly--the blackest ingratitude.

[Deuteronomy 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 4:26</span></span>

I call heaven and earth to witness against you--This solemn form of
adjuration has been common in special circumstances among all people. It
is used here figuratively, or as in other parts of Scripture where
inanimate objects are called up as witnesses ([Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001); [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)).

[Deuteronomy 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 4:28</span></span>

there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands--The compulsory
measures of their tyrannical conquerors would force them into idolatry,
so that their choice would become their punishment.

[Deuteronomy 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 4:30</span></span>

in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God--either towards the
destined close of their captivities, when they evinced a returning
spirit of repentance and faith, or in the age of Messiah, which is
commonly called "the latter days," and when the scattered tribes of
Israel shall be converted to the Gospel of Christ. The occurrence of
this auspicious event will be the most illustrious proof of the truth of
the promise made in [Deu 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#031).

[Deuteronomy 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 4:41</span></span>

Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan--(See on [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007)).

[Deuteronomy 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 4:44</span></span>

this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel--This is a
preface to the rehearsal of the law, which, with the addition of various
explanatory circumstances, the following chapters contain.

[Deuteronomy 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">deu 4:46</span></span>

Beth-peor--that is, "house" or "temple of Peor." It is probable that a
temple of this Moabite idol stood in full view of the Hebrew camp, while
Moses was urging the exclusive claims of God to their worship, and this
allusion would be very significant if it were the temple where so many
of the Israelites had grievously offended.

[Deuteronomy 4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">deu 4:49</span></span>

The springs of Pisgah--more frequently, Ashdoth-pisgah ([Deu
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017); [Jos
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#003); [Jos
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#020)), the roots or foot of the
mountains east of the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 5](deu005)

</div>
