<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu002)  [Next](deu004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 3:1</span></span>

CONQUEST OF OG, KING OF BASHAN. (Deu. 3:1-20)

we turned, and went up the way to Bashan--Bashan ("fruitful" or "flat"),
now El-Bottein, lay situated to the north of Gilead and extended as far
as Hermon. It was a rugged mountainous country, valuable however for its
rich and luxuriant pastures.

Og the king of Bashan came out against us--Without provocation, he
rushed to attack the Israelites, either disliking the presence of such
dangerous neighbors, or burning to avenge the overthrow of his friends
and allies.

[Deuteronomy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 3:2</span></span>

The Lord said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and all his
people, and his land, into thy hand--Og's gigantic appearance and the
formidable array of forces he will bring to the field, need not
discourage you; for, belonging to a doomed race, he is destined to share
the fate of Sihon \[[Num 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025)\].

[Deuteronomy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 3:3</span></span>

Argob was the capital of a district in Bashan of the same name, which,
together with other fifty-nine cities in the same province, were
conspicuous for their lofty and fortified walls. It was a war of
extermination. Houses and cities were razed to the ground; all classes
of people were put to the sword; and nothing was saved but the cattle,
of which an immense amount fell as spoil into the hands of the
conquerors. Thus, the two Amorite kings and the entire population of
their dominions were extirpated. The whole country east of the
Jordan--first upland downs from the torrent of the Arnon on the south to
that of the Jabbok on the north; next the high mountain tract of Gilead
and Bashan from the deep ravine of Jabbok--became the possession of the
Israelites.

[Deuteronomy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 3:9</span></span>

Hermon--now Jebel-Es-Sheick--the majestic hill on which the long and
elevated range of Anti-Lebanon terminates. Its summit and the ridges on
its sides are almost constantly covered with snow. It is not so much one
high mountain as a whole cluster of mountain peaks, the highest in
Palestine. According to the survey taken by the English Government
Engineers in 1840, they were about 9376 feet above the sea. Being a
mountain chain, it is no wonder that it should have received different
names at different points from the different tribes which lay along the
base--all of them designating extraordinary height: Hermon, the lofty
peak; "Sirion," or in an abbreviated form "Sion" ([Deu
4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048)), the upraised, glittering;
"Shenir," the glittering breastplate of ice.

[Deuteronomy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 3:11</span></span>

only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants--literally, "of
Rephaim." He was not the last giant, but the only living remnant in the
trans-jordanic country ([Jos 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014)),
of a certain gigantic race, supposed to be the most ancient inhabitants
of Palestine.

behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron--Although beds in the East
are with the common people nothing more than a simple mattress,
bedsteads are not unknown. They are in use among the great, who prefer
them of iron or other metals, not only for strength and durability, but
for the prevention of the troublesome insects which in warm climates
commonly infest wood. Taking the cubit at half a yard, the bedstead of
Og would measure thirteen and a half feet, so that as beds are usually a
little larger than the persons who occupy them, the stature of the
Amorite king may be estimated at about eleven or twelve feet; or he
might have caused his bed to be made much larger than was necessary, as
Alexander the Great did for each of his foot soldiers, to impress the
Indians with an idea of the extraordinary strength and stature of his
men \[LE CLERC\]. But how did Og's bedstead come to be in Rabbath, of
the children of Ammon? In answer to this question, it has been said,
that Og had, on the eve of engagement, conveyed it to Rabbath for
safety. Or it may be that Moses, after capturing it, may have sold it to
the Ammonites, who had kept it as an antiquarian curiosity till their
capital was sacked in the time of David. This is a most unlikely
supposition, and besides renders it necessary to consider the latter
clause of this verse as an interpolation inserted long after the time of
Moses. To avoid this, some eminent critics take the Hebrew word rendered
"bedstead" to mean "coffin." They think that the king of Bashan having
been wounded in battle, fled to Rabbath, where he died and was buried;
hence the dimensions of his "coffin" are given \[DATHE, ROOS\].

[Deuteronomy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 3:12</span></span>

this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer . . . gave I unto
the Reubenites and to the Gadites--The whole territory occupied by Sihon
was parcelled out among the pastoral tribes of Reuben and Gad. It
extended from the north bank of the Arnon to the south half of mount
Gilead--a small mountain ridge, now called Djelaad, about six or seven
miles south of the Jabbok, and eight miles in length. The northern
portion of Gilead and the rich pasture lands of Bashan--a large
province, consisting, with the exception of a few bleak and rocky spots,
of strong and fertile soil--was assigned to the half-tribe of Manasseh.

[Deuteronomy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 3:14</span></span>

Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob--The original
inhabitants of the province north of Bashan, comprising sixty cities
([Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004)), not having been extirpated
along with Og, this people were afterwards brought into subjection by
the energy of Jair. This chief, of the tribe of Manasseh, in accordance
with the pastoral habits of his people, called these newly acquired
towns by a name which signifies "Jair's Bedouin Villages of Tents."

unto this day--This remark must evidently have been introduced by Ezra,
or some of the pious men who arranged and collected the books of Moses.

[Deuteronomy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 3:15</span></span>

I gave Gilead unto Machir--It was only the half of Gilead ([Deu
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)) which was given to the
descendants of Machir, who was now dead.

[Deuteronomy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 3:16</span></span>

from Gilead--that is, not the mountainous region, but the town
Ramoth-gilead,

even unto the river Arnon half the valley--The word "valley" signifies a
wady, either filled with water or dry, as the Arnon is in summer, and
thus the proper rendering of the passage will be--"even to the half or
middle of the river Arnon" (compare [Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002)). This prudent arrangement of the
boundaries was evidently made to prevent all disputes between the
adjacent tribes about the exclusive right to the water.

[Deuteronomy 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 3:25</span></span>

I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond
Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon--The natural and very earnest
wish of Moses to be allowed to cross the Jordan was founded on the idea
that the divine threatening might be conditional and revertible. "That
goodly mountain" is supposed by Jewish writers to have pointed to the
hill on which the temple was to be built ([Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005); [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)). But biblical scholars now,
generally, render the words--"that goodly mountain, even Lebanon," and
consider it to be mentioned as typifying the beauty of Palestine, of
which hills and mountains were so prominent a feature.

[Deuteronomy 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 3:26</span></span>

speak no more unto me of this matter--that is, My decree is unalterable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 4](deu004)

</div>
