<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 29:1</span></span>

AN EXHORTATION TO OBEDIENCE. (Deu. 29:1-29)

These are the words of the covenant--The discourse of Moses is
continued, and the subject of that discourse was Israel's covenant with
God, the privileges it conferred, and the obligations it imposed.

beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb--It was
substantially the same; but it was renewed now, in different
circumstances. They had violated its conditions. Moses rehearses these,
that they might have a better knowledge of its conditions and be more
disposed to comply with them.

[Deuteronomy 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 29:2</span></span>

Moses called unto all Israel, . . . Ye have seen all that the Lord did,
&c.--This appeal to the experience of the people, though made generally,
was applicable only to that portion of them who had been very young at
the period of the Exodus, and who remembered the marvellous transactions
that preceded and followed that era. Yet, alas! those wonderful events
made no good impression upon them ([Deu
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)). They were strangers to that
grace of wisdom which is liberally given to all who ask it; and their
insensibility was all the more inexcusable that so many miracles had
been performed which might have led to a certain conviction of the
presence and the power of God with them. The preservation of their
clothes and shoes, the supply of daily food and fresh water--these
continued without interruption or diminution during so many years'
sojourn in the desert. They were miracles which unmistakably proclaimed
the immediate hand of God and were performed for the express purpose of
training them to a practical knowledge of, and habitual confidence in,
Him. Their experience of this extraordinary goodness and care, together
with their remembrance of the brilliant successes by which, with little
exertion or loss on their part, God enabled them to acquire the valuable
territory on which they stood, is mentioned again to enforce a faithful
adherence to the covenant, as the direct and sure means of obtaining its
promised blessings.

[Deuteronomy 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 29:10</span></span>

Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God--The whole
congregation of Israel, of all ages and conditions, all--young as well
as old; menials as well as masters; native Israelites as well as
naturalized strangers--all were assembled before the tabernacle to renew
the Sinaitic covenant. None of them were allowed to consider themselves
as exempt from the terms of that national compact, lest any lapsing into
idolatry might prove a root of bitterness, spreading its noxious seed
and corrupt influence all around (compare [Heb
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)). It was of the greatest
consequence thus to reach the heart and conscience of everyone, for some
might delude themselves with the vain idea that by taking the oath ([Deu
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012)) by which they engaged
themselves in covenant with God, they would surely secure its blessings.
Then, even though they would not rigidly adhere to His worship and
commands, but would follow the devices and inclinations of their own
hearts, yet they would think that He would wink at such liberties and
not punish them. It was of the greatest consequence to impress all with
the strong and abiding conviction, that while the covenant of grace had
special blessings belonging to it, it at the same time had curses in
reserve for transgressors, the infliction of which would be as certain,
as lasting and severe. This was the advantage contemplated in the law
being rehearsed a second time. The picture of a once rich and
flourishing region, blasted and doomed in consequence of the sins of its
inhabitants, is very striking, and calculated to awaken awe in every
reflecting mind. Such is, and long has been, the desolate state of
Palestine; and, in looking at its ruined cities, its blasted coast, its
naked mountains, its sterile and parched soil--all the sad and
unmistakable evidences of a land lying under a curse--numbers of
travellers from Europe, America, and the Indies ("strangers from a far
country," [Deu 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022)) in the present
day see that the Lord has executed His threatening. Who can resist the
conclusion that it has been inflicted "because the inhabitants had
forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers. . . . and the
anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all
the curses that are written in this book"?

[Deuteronomy 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 29:29</span></span>

The secret things belong unto the Lord--This verse has no apparent
connection with the thread of discourse. It is thought to have been said
in answer to the looks of astonishment or the words of inquiry as to
whether they would be ever so wicked as to deserve such punishments. The
recorded history of God's providential dealings towards Israel presents
a wonderful combination of "goodness and severity." There is much of it
involved in mystery too profound for our limited capacities to fathom;
but, from the comprehensive wisdom displayed in those parts which have
been made known to us, we are prepared to enter into the full spirit of
the apostle's exclamation, "How unsearchable are his judgments" ([Rom
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030)

</div>
