<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu007)  [Next](deu009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 8:1</span></span>

AN EXHORTATION TO OBEDIENCE. (Deu. 8:1-20)

All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to
do, that ye may live--In all the wise arrangements of our Creator duty
has been made inseparably connected with happiness; and the earnest
enforcement of the divine law which Moses was making to the Israelites
was in order to secure their being a happy (because a moral and
religious) people: a course of prosperity is often called "life" ([Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018); [Pro
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#002)).

live, and multiply--This reference to the future increase of their
population proves that they were too few to occupy the land fully at
first.

[Deuteronomy 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 8:2</span></span>

thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these
forty years in the wilderness--The recapitulation of all their checkered
experience during that long period was designed to awaken lively
impressions of the goodness of God. First, Moses showed them the object
of their protracted wanderings and varied hardships. These were trials
of their obedience as well as chastisements for sin. Indeed, the
discovery of their infidelity, inconstancy, and their rebellions and
perverseness which this varied discipline brought to light, was of
eminently practical use to the Israelites themselves, as it has been to
the church in all subsequent ages. Next, he enlarged on the goodness of
God to them, while reduced to the last extremities of despair, in the
miraculous provision which, without anxiety or labor, was made for their
daily support (see on [Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)).
Possessing no nutritious properties inherent in it, this contributed to
their sustenance, as indeed all food does ([Mat
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)) solely through the ordinance and
blessing of God. This remark is applicable to the means of spiritual as
well as natural life.

[Deuteronomy 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 8:4</span></span>

Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these
forty years--What a striking miracle was this! No doubt the Israelites
might have brought from Egypt more clothes than they wore at their
outset; they might also have obtained supplies of various articles of
food and raiment in barter with the neighboring tribes for the fleeces
and skins of their sheep and goats; and in furnishing them with such
opportunities the care of Providence appeared. But the strong and
pointed terms which Moses here uses (see also [Deu
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005)) indicate a special or miraculous
interposition of their loving Guardian in preserving them amid the wear
and tear of their nomadic life in the desert. Thirdly, Moses expatiated
on the goodness of the promised land.

[Deuteronomy 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 8:7</span></span>

For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land--All accounts,
ancient and modern, concur in bearing testimony to the natural beauty
and fertility of Palestine, and its great capabilities if properly
cultivated.

a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of
valleys and hills--These characteristic features are mentioned first, as
they would be most striking; and all travellers describe how delightful
and cheerful it is, after passing through the barren and thirsty desert,
to be among running brooks and swelling hills and verdant valleys. It is
observable that water is mentioned as the chief source of its ancient
fertility.

[Deuteronomy 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 8:8</span></span>

A land of wheat, and barley--These cereal fruits were specially promised
to the Israelites in the event of their faithful allegiance to the
covenant of God ([Psa 81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016); [Psa
147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014)). The wheat and barley were so
abundant as to yield sixty and often an hundredfold ([Gen
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012); [Mat
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)).

vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates--The limestone rocks and abrupt
valleys were entirely covered, as traces of them still show, with
plantations of figs, vines, and olive trees. Though in a southern
latitude, its mountainous formations tempered the excessive heat, and
hence, figs, pomegranates, &c., were produced in Palestine equally with
wheat and barley, the produce of northern regions.

honey--The word "honey" is used often in a loose, indeterminate sense,
very frequently to signify a syrup of dates or of grapes, which under
the name of dibs is much used by all classes, wherever vineyards are
found, as a condiment to their food. It resembles thin molasses, but is
more pleasant to the taste \[ROBINSON\]. This is esteemed a great
delicacy in the East, and it was produced abundantly in Palestine.

[Deuteronomy 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 8:9</span></span>

a land whose stones are iron--The abundance of this metal in Palestine,
especially among the mountains of Lebanon, those of Kesraoun, and
elsewhere, is attested not only by JOSEPHUS, but by Volney, Buckingham,
and other travellers.

brass--not the alloy brass, but the ore of copper. Although the mines
may now be exhausted or neglected, they yielded plenty of those metals
anciently ([Ch1 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#003); [Ch1
29:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002); [Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017)).

[Deuteronomy 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 8:11</span></span>

Beware that thou forget not the Lord--After mentioning those instances
of the divine goodness, Moses founded on them an argument for their
future obedience.

[Deuteronomy 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 8:15</span></span>

Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were
fiery serpents, and scorpions--Large and venomous reptiles are found in
great numbers there still, particularly in autumn. Travellers must use
great caution in arranging their tents and beds at night; even during
the day the legs not only of men, but of the animals they ride, are
liable to be bitten.

who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint--(See on [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 9](deu009)

</div>
