<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu016)  [Next](deu018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 17:1</span></span>

THINGS SACRIFICED MUST BE SOUND. ([Deu
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001))

Thou shalt not sacrifice . . . any bullock, or sheep, wherein is
blemish--Under the name of bullock were comprehended bulls, cows, and
calves; under that of sheep, rams, lambs, kids, he- and she-goats. An
ox, from mutilation, was inadmissible. The qualifications required in
animals destined for sacrifice are described ([Exo
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005); [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)).

[Deuteronomy 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 17:2</span></span>

IDOLATERS MUST BE SLAIN. ([Deu 17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002))

If there be found among you . . . man or woman, that hath wrought
wickedness--The grand object contemplated in choosing Israel was to
preserve the knowledge and worship of the one true God; and hence
idolatry of any kind, whether of the heavenly bodies or in some grosser
form, is called "a transgression of His covenant." No rank or sex could
palliate this crime. Every reported case, even a flying rumor of the
perpetration of so heinous an offense, was to be judicially examined;
and if proved by the testimony of competent witnesses, the offender was
to be taken without the gates and stoned to death, the witnesses casting
the first stone at him. The object of this special arrangement was
partly to deter the witnesses from making a rash accusation by the
prominent part they had to act as executioners, and partly to give a
public assurance that the crime had met its due punishment.

[Deuteronomy 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 17:8</span></span>

THE PRIESTS AND JUDGES TO DETERMINE CONTROVERSIES. ([Deu
17:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008))

If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment--In all civil or
criminal cases, where there was any doubt or difficulty in giving a
decision, the local magistrates were to submit them by reference to the
tribunal of the Sanhedrim--the supreme council, which was composed
partly of civil and partly of ecclesiastical persons. "The priests and
Levites," should rather be "the priests--the Levites"; that is, the
Levitical priests, including the high priest, who were members of the
legislative assembly; and who, as forming one body, are called "the
judge." Their sittings were held in the neighborhood of the sanctuary
because in great emergencies the high priest had to consult God by Urim
([Num 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)). From their judgment
there was no appeal; and if a person were so perverse and refractory as
to refuse obedience to their sentences, his conduct, as inconsistent
with the maintenance of order and good government, was then to be
regarded and punished as a capital crime.

[Deuteronomy 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 17:14</span></span>

THE ELECTION AND DUTY OF A KING. ([Deu
17:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014))

When thou . . . shalt say, I will set a king over me--In the following
passage Moses prophetically announces a revolution which should occur at
a later period in the national history of Israel. No sanction or
recommendation was indicated; on the contrary, when the popular clamor
had effected that constitutional change on the theocracy by the
appointment of a king, the divine disapproval was expressed in the most
unequivocal terms ([Sa1 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)).
Permission at length was granted, God reserving to Himself the
nomination of the family and the person who should be elevated to the
regal dignity ([Sa1 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#015); [Sa1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024); [Sa1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012); [Ch1
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#004)). In short, Moses foreseeing that
his ignorant and fickle countrymen, insensible to their advantages as a
peculiar people, would soon wish to change their constitution and be
like other nations, provides to a certain extent for such an emergency
and lays down the principles on which a king in Israel must act. He was
to possess certain indispensable requisites. He was to be an Israelite,
of the same race and religion, to preserve the purity of the established
worship, as well as be a type of Christ, a spiritual king, one of their
brethren.

[Deuteronomy 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 17:15</span></span>

thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother--that
is, by their free and voluntary choice. But God, in the retributions of
His providence, did allow foreign princes to usurp the dominion ([Jer
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017); [Mat
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)).

[Deuteronomy 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 17:16</span></span>

he shall not multiply horses to himself--The use of these animals was
not absolutely prohibited, nor is there any reason to conclude that they
might not be employed as part of the state equipage. But the
multiplication of horses would inevitably lead to many evils, to
increased intercourse with foreign nations, especially with Egypt, to
the importation of an animal to which the character of the country was
not suited, to the establishment of an Oriental military despotism, to
proud and pompous parade in peace, to a dependence upon Egypt in time of
war, and a consequent withdrawal of trust and confidence in God. ([Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004); [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026); [Ch2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#016); [Ch2
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#028); [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)).

[Deuteronomy 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 17:17</span></span>

Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
away--There were the strongest reasons for recording an express
prohibition on this point, founded on the practice of neighboring
countries in which polygamy prevailed, and whose kings had numerous
harems; besides, the monarch of Israel was to be absolutely independent
of the people and had nothing but the divine law to restrain his
passions. The mischievous effects resulting from the breach of this
condition were exemplified in the history of Solomon and other princes,
who, by trampling on the restrictive law, corrupted themselves as well
as the nation.

neither shall he greatly multiply . . . silver and gold--that is, the
kings were forbidden to accumulate money for private purposes.

[Deuteronomy 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 17:18</span></span>

he shall write him a copy of this law in a book--The original scroll of
the ancient Scriptures was deposited in the sanctuary under the strict
custody of the priests (see on [Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026); [Kg2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)). Each monarch, on his accession,
was to be furnished with a true and faithful copy, which he was to keep
constantly beside him, and daily peruse it, that his character and
sentiments being cast into its sanctifying mould, he might discharge his
royal functions in the spirit of faith and piety, of humility and a love
or righteousness.

[Deuteronomy 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 17:20</span></span>

that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his children--From
this it appears that the crown in Israel was to be hereditary, unless
forfeited by personal crime.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 18](deu018)

</div>
