<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu023)  [Next](deu025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 24:1</span></span>

OF DIVORCES. (Deu. 24:1-22)

When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that
she find no favour in his eyes--It appears that the practice of divorces
was at this early period very prevalent amongst the Israelites, who had
in all probability become familiar with it in Egypt \[LANE\]. The usage,
being too deep-rooted to be soon or easily abolished, was tolerated by
Moses ([Mat 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008)). But it was
accompanied under the law with two conditions, which were calculated
greatly to prevent the evils incident to the permitted system; namely:
(1) The act of divorcement was to be certified on a written document,
the preparation of which, with legal formality, would afford time for
reflection and repentance; and (2) In the event of the divorced wife
being married to another husband, she could not, on the termination of
that second marriage, be restored to her first husband, however desirous
he might be to receive her.

[Deuteronomy 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 24:5</span></span>

When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war--This law
of exemption was founded on good policy and was favorable to matrimony,
as it afforded a full opportunity for the affections of the newly
married pair being more firmly rooted, and it diminished or removed
occasions for the divorces just mentioned.

[Deuteronomy 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 24:6</span></span>

No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge--The
"upper" stone being concave, covers the "nether" like a lid; and it has
a small aperture, through which the corn is poured, as well as a handle
by which it is turned. The propriety of the law was founded on the
custom of grinding corn every morning for daily consumption. If either
of the stones, therefore, which composed the handmill was wanting, a
person would be deprived of his necessary provision.

[Deuteronomy 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 24:7</span></span>

If a man be found stealing any of his brethren--(See [Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016)).

[Deuteronomy 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 24:8</span></span>

Take heed in the plague of leprosy--(See [Lev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#014)).

[Deuteronomy 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 24:10</span></span>

When thou dost lend thy brother anything, thou shalt not go into his
house to fetch his pledge--The course recommended was, in kind and
considerate regard, to spare the borrower's feelings. In the case of a
poor man who had pledged his cloak, it was to be restored before night,
as the poor in Eastern countries have commonly no other covering for
wrapping themselves in when they go to sleep than the garment they have
worn during the day.

[Deuteronomy 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 24:14</span></span>

Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy--Hired
servants in the East are paid at the close of the day; and for a master
to defraud the laborer of his hire, or to withhold it wrongfully for a
night, might have subjected a poor man with his family to suffering and
was therefore an injustice to be avoided ([Lev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013)).

[Deuteronomy 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 24:16</span></span>

The fathers shall not be put to death for the children--The rule was
addressed for the guidance of magistrates, and it established the
equitable principle that none should be responsible for the crimes of
others.

[Deuteronomy 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 24:19</span></span>

When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field--The grain, pulled up
by the roots or cut down with a sickle, was laid in loose sheaves; the
fruit of the olive was obtained by striking the branches with long
poles; and the grape clusters, severed by a hook, were gathered in the
hands of the vintager. Here is a beneficent provision for the poor.
Every forgotten sheaf in the harvest-field was to lie; the olive tree
was not to be beaten a second time; nor were grapes to be gathered, in
order that, in collecting what remained, the hearts of the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow might be gladdened by the bounty of
Providence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 25](deu025)

</div>
