<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est007)  [Next](est009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

[Esther 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 8:1</span></span>

MORDECAI ADVANCED. ([Est 8:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001))

On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman . . . unto
Esther--His property was confiscated, and everything belonging to him,
as some compensation for the peril to which she had been exposed.

Mordecai came before the king--that is, was introduced at court and
appointed one of the seven counsellors. Esther displayed great prudence
and address in acknowledging Mordecai's relation to her at the moment
most fitted to be of eminent service to him.

[Esther 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 8:2</span></span>

the king took off his ring, . . . and gave it unto Mordecai--By that act
transferring to him all the power and authority which the ring
symbolized, and promoting him to the high dignity which Haman had
formerly filled.

Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman--as her steward or factor,
to manage that large and opulent estate which had been assigned to her.

[Esther 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 8:3</span></span>

Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet--The
king was then not reclining at table, but sitting on a divan, most
probably in the Persian attitude, leaning back against the cushions, and
one foot under him.

besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman--that is, to
repeal the sanguinary edict which, at the secret instigation of Haman,
had been recently passed ([Est 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012)).

[Esther 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 8:4</span></span>

Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther--in token that
her request was accepted, and that she needed no longer to maintain the
humble attitude of a suppliant.

[Esther 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 8:5</span></span>

reverse the letters devised by Haman . . . to destroy the Jews--The
whole conduct of Esther in this matter is characterized by great tact,
and the variety of expressions by which she describes her willing
submission to her royal husband, the address with which she rolls the
whole infamy of the meditated massacre on Haman, and the argument she
draws from the king's sanction being surreptitiously obtained, that the
decree should be immediately reversed--all indicate the queen's wisdom
and skill, and she succeeded in this point also.

[Esther 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 8:8</span></span>

AHASUERUS GRANTS TO THE JEWS TO DEFEND THEMSELVES. ([Est
8:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#007))

Write . . . in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring--Hence
it is evident that the royal ring had a seal in it, which, being affixed
to any document, authenticated it with the stamp of royal authority.

which . . . may no man reverse--This is added as the reason why he could
not comply with the queen's request for a direct reversal or recall of
Haman's letters; namely, that the laws of the Medes and Persians, once
passed, were irrevocable.

[Esther 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 8:10</span></span>

sent . . . by posts . . . and riders on . . . camels, and young
dromedaries--The business being very urgent, the swiftest kind of camel
would be employed, and so the word in the original denotes the
wind-camel. Young dromedaries also are used to carry expresses, being
remarkable for the nimbleness and ease of their movements. Animals of
this description could convey the new rescript of Ahasuerus over the
length and breadth of the Persian empire in time to relieve the unhappy
Jews from the ban under which they lay.

[Esther 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 8:11</span></span>

the king granted the Jews . . . to stand for their life . . . to slay .
. . all . . . that would assault them--The fixed and unalterable
character claimed for Persian edicts often placed the king in a very
awkward dilemma; for, however bitterly he might regret things done in a
moment of haste and thoughtlessness, it was beyond even his power to
prevent the consequences. This was the reason on account of which the
king was laid under a necessity not to reverse, but to issue a
contradictory edict; according to which it was enacted that if, pursuant
to the first decree, the Jews were assaulted, they might, by virtue of
the second, defend themselves and even slay their enemies. However
strange and even ridiculous this mode of procedure may appear, it was
the only one which, from the peculiarities of court etiquette in Persia,
could be adopted. Instances occur in sacred ([Dan
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#014)), no less than profane, history.
Many passages of the Bible attest the truth of this, particularly the
well-known incident of Daniel's being cast into the den of lions, in
conformity with the rash decree of Darius, though, as it afterwards
appeared, contrary to the personal desire of that monarch. That the law
of Persia has undergone no change in this respect, and the power of the
monarch not less immutable, appear from many anecdotes related in the
books of modern travellers through that country.

[Esther 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 8:15</span></span>

MORDECAI'S HONORS, AND THE JEWS' JOY. ([Est
8:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015))

Mordecai went out . . . in royal apparel--He was invested with the
khelaat of official honor. A dress of blue and white was held in great
estimation among the Persians; so that Mordecai, whom the king delighted
to honor, was in fact arrayed in the royal dress and insignia. The
variety and the kind of insignia worn by a favorite at once makes known
to the people the particular dignity to which he has been raised.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 9](est009)

</div>
