<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est008)  [Next](est010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)

[Esther 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 9:1</span></span>

THE JEWS SLAY THEIR ENEMIES WITH THE TEN SONS OF HAMAN. (Est. 9:1-19)

in the twelfth month, . . . on the thirteenth day of the same--This was
the day which Haman's superstitious advisers had led him to select as
the most fortunate for the execution of his exterminating scheme against
the Jews \[[Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007)\].

[Esther 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 9:2</span></span>

The Jews gathered themselves . . . no man could withstand them--The
tables were now turned in their favor; and though their enemies made
their long meditated attack, the Jews were not only at liberty to act on
the defensive, but through the powerful influence enlisted on their side
at court together with the blessing of God, they were everywhere
victorious.

the fear of them fell upon all people--This impression arose not alone
from the consciousness of the all-powerful vizier being their
countryman, but from the hand of God appearing so visibly interposed to
effect their strange and unexpected deliverance.

[Esther 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 9:5</span></span>

Thus the Jews smote all their enemies--The effect of the two
antagonistic decrees was, in the meantime, to raise a fierce and bloody
war between the Jews and their enemies throughout the Persian empire;
but through the dread of Esther and Mordecai, the provincial governors
universally favored their cause, so that their enemies fell in great
numbers.

[Esther 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 9:13</span></span>

let it be granted to the Jews which are in Shushan to do to-morrow also
according unto this day's decree--Their enemies adroitly concealing
themselves for the first day might have returned on the next, when they
imagined that the privilege of the Jews was expired; so that that people
would have been surprised and slain. The extension of the decree to
another day at the queen's special desire has exposed her to the charge
of being actuated by a cruel and vindictive disposition. But her conduct
in making this request is capable of full vindication, on the ground (1)
that Haman's sons having taken a prominent part in avenging their
father's fall, and having been previously slain in the melee, the order
for the exposure of their dead bodies on the gallows was only intended
to brand them with public infamy for their malice and hatred to the
Jews; and (2) the anti-Jewish party having, in all probability, been
instigated through the arts or influence of Haman to acts of spiteful
and wanton oppression, the existing state of feeling among the natives
required some vigorous and decisive measure to prevent the outbreak of
future aggressions. The very circumstances of their slaying 800 eight
hundred Jews in the immediate vicinity of the court (v. 6, 15) is a
proof of the daring energy and deep-rooted malice by which multidues
were actuated against the Jews. To order an extension, therefore, of the
permissive edict to the Jews to defend themselves, was perhaps no more
than affording an opportunity for their enemies to be publicly known.
Though it led to so awful a slaughter of seventy-five thousand of their
enemies, there is reason to believe that these were chiefly Amalekites,
in the fall of whom on this occasion, the prophecies ([Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014), 16; [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019)) against that doomed race were
accomplished.

[Esther 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">est 9:19</span></span>

a day of . . . feasting . . . of sending portions one to another--The
princes and people of the East not only invite their friends to feasts,
but it is their custom to send a portion of the banquet to those who
cannot well come to it, especially their relations, and those who are
detained at home in a state of sorrow or distress.

[Esther 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">est 9:20</span></span>

THE TWO DAYS OF PURIM MADE FESTIVAL. ([Est
9:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020))

Mordecai wrote these things--Commentators are not agreed what is
particularly meant by "these things"; whether the letters following, or
an account of these marvellous events to be preserved in the families of
the Jewish people, and transmitted from one generation to another.

[Esther 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">est 9:26</span></span>

they called these days Purim after the name of Pur--"Pur," in the
Persian language, signifies "lot"; and the feast of Purim, or lots, has
a reference to the time having been pitched upon by Haman through the
decision of the lot. In consequence of the signal national deliverance
which divine providence gave them from the infamous machinations of
Haman, Mordecai ordered the Jews to commemorate that event by an
anniversary festival, which was to last for two days, in accordance with
the two days' war of defense they had to maintain. There was a slight
difference in the time of this festival; for the Jews in the provinces,
having defended themselves against their enemies on the thirteenth,
devoted the fourteenth to festivity; whereas their brethren in Shushan,
having extended that work over two days, did not observe their
thanksgiving feast till the fifteenth. But this was remedied by
authority, which fixed the fourteenth and fifteenth of Adar. It became a
season of sunny memories to the universal body of the Jews; and, by the
letters of Mordecai, dispersed through all parts of the Persian empire,
it was established as an annual feast, the celebration of which is kept
up still. On both days of the feast, the modern Jews read over the
Megillah or Book of Esther in their synagogues. The copy read must not
be printed, but written on vellum in the form of a roll; and the names
of the ten sons of Haman are written on it a peculiar manner, being
ranged, they say, like so many bodies on a gibbet. The reader must
pronounce all these names in one breath. Whenever Haman's name is
pronounced, they make a terrible noise in the synagogue. Some drum with
their feet on the floor, and the boys have mallets with which they knock
and make a noise. They prepare themselves for their carnival by a
previous fast, which should continue three days, in imitation of
Esther's; but they have mostly reduced it to one day \[JENNINGS, Jewish
Antiquities\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 10](est010)

</div>
