<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est004)  [Next](est006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001)

[Esther 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 5:1</span></span>

ESTHER INVITES THE KING AND HAMAN TO A BANQUET. ([Est
5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001))

Esther put on her royal apparel--It was not only natural, but, on such
occasions, highly proper and expedient, that the queen should decorate
herself in a style becoming her exalted station. On ordinary occasions
she might reasonably set off her charms to as much advantage as
possible; but, on the present occasion, as she was desirous to secure
the favor of one who sustained the twofold character of her husband and
her sovereign, public as well as private considerations--a regard to her
personal safety, no less than the preservation of her doomed
countrymen--urged upon her the propriety of using every legitimate means
of recommending herself to the favorable notice of Ahasuerus.

the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the
gate of the house--The palace of this Persian king seems to have been
built, like many more of the same quality and description, with an
advanced cloister, over against the gate, made in the fashion of a large
penthouse, supported only by one or two contiguous pillars in the front,
or else in the center. In such open structures as these, in the midst of
their guards and counsellors, are the bashaws, kadis, and other great
officers, accustomed to distribute justice, and transact the public
affairs of the provinces \[SHAW, Travels\]. In such a situation the
Persian king was seated. The seat he occupied was not a throne,
according to our ideas of one, but simply a chair, and so high that it
required a footstool. It was made of gold, or, at least, inlaid with
that metal, and covered with splendid tapestry, and no one save the king
might sit down on it under pain of death. It is often found pictured on
the Persepolitan monuments, and always of the same fashion.

[Esther 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 5:2</span></span>

the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his
hand--This golden scepter receives an interesting illustration from the
sculptured monuments of Persia and Assyria. In the bas-reliefs of
Persepolis, copied by Sir Robert Ker Porter, we see King Darius
enthroned in the midst of his court, and walking abroad in equal state;
in either case he carries in his right hand a slender rod or wand, about
equal in length to his own height, ornamented with a small knob at the
summit. In the Assyrian alabasters, those found at Nimroud as well as
those from Khorsabad, "the great king" is furnished with the same
appendage of royalty, a slender rod, but destitute of any knob or
ornament. On the Khorsabad reliefs the rod is painted red, doubtless to
represent gold; proving that "the golden sceptre" was a simple wand of
that precious metal, commonly held in the right hand, with one end
resting on the ground, and that whether the king was sitting or walking.
"The gold sceptre" has received little alteration or modification since
ancient times \[GOSS\]. It was extended to Esther as a token not only
that her intrusion was pardoned, but that her visit was welcome, and a
favorable reception given to the suit she had come to prefer.

touched the top of the sceptre--This was the usual way of acknowledging
the royal condescension, and at the same time expressing reverence and
submission to the august majesty of the king.

[Esther 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 5:3</span></span>

it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom--This mode of
speaking originated in the Persian custom of appropriating for the
maintenance of great men, or royal favorites, one city for his bread,
another for his wine, a third for his clothes, &c., so that the phrase
denoted great liberality.

[Esther 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 5:4</span></span>

let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have
prepared for him--There was great address in this procedure of Esther's;
for, by showing such high respect to the king's favorite, she would the
better insinuate herself into the royal affections; and gain a more
suitable opportunity of making known her request.

[Esther 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 5:8</span></span>

let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare--The
king ate alone, and his guests in an adjoining hall; but they were
admitted to sit with him at wine. Haman being the only invited guest
with the king and queen, it was natural that he should have been elated
with the honor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 6](est006)

</div>
