<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

[Esther 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 6:1</span></span>

AHASUERUS REWARDS MORDECAI FOR FORMER SERVICE. ([Est
6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001))

the king . . . commanded to bring the book of records of the
chronicles--In Eastern courts, there are scribes or officers whose duty
it is to keep a journal of every occurrence worthy of notice. A book of
this kind, abounding with anecdotes, is full of interest. It has been a
custom with Eastern kings, in all ages, frequently to cause the annals
of the kingdom to be read to them. It is resorted to, not merely as a
pastime to while away the tedium of an hour, but as a source of
instruction to the monarch, by reviewing the important incidents of his
own life, as well as those of his ancestors. There was, therefore,
nothing uncommon in this Persian monarch calling for the court journal.
But, in his being unable to sleep at that particular juncture, in his
ordering the book then to be read to him, and in his attention having
been specially directed to the important and as yet unrewarded services
of Mordecai, the immediate interposition of Providence is distinctly
visible.

[Esther 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 6:4</span></span>

Now Haman was come into the outward court--This was early in the
morning. It is the invariable custom for kings in Eastern countries to
transact business before the sun is hot, often in the open air, and so
Haman was in all probability come officially to attend on his master.

[Esther 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 6:6</span></span>

What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour?--In
bestowing tokens of their favor, the kings of Persia do not at once, and
as it were by their own will, determine the kind of honor that shall be
awarded; but they turn to the courtier standing next in rank to
themselves, and ask him what shall be done to the individual who has
rendered the service specified; and according to the answer received,
the royal mandate is issued.

[Esther 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 6:8</span></span>

the royal apparel . . . which the king useth to wear--A coat which has
been on the back of a king or prince is reckoned a most honorable gift,
and is given with great ceremony.

the horse that the king rideth upon--Persia was a country of horses, and
the highbred charger that the king rode upon acquired, in the eyes of
his venal subjects, a sort of sacredness from that circumstance.

and the crown royal which is set upon his head--either the royal turban,
or it may be a tiara, with which, on state processions, the horse's head
was adorned.

[Esther 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 6:9</span></span>

delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes . . .
array the man--On grand and public occasions, the royal steed is led by
the highest subject through the principal streets of the city, a
ceremony which may occupy several hours.

[Esther 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 6:11</span></span>

Then Haman took, &c.--This sudden reverse, however painful to Haman as
an individual, is particularly characteristic of the Persian manners.

[Esther 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 6:14</span></span>

came the king's chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet
that Esther had prepared--Besides the invitation given to an
entertainment, a message is always sent to the guests, immediately at
the day and hour appointed, to announce that all things are ready.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007)

</div>
