<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

[Exodus 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 14:2</span></span>

GOD INSTRUCTS THE ISRAELITES AS TO THEIR JOURNEY. (Exo. 14:1-31)

Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp--The
Israelites had now completed their three days' journey, and at Etham the
decisive step would have to be taken whether they would celebrate their
intended feast and return, or march onwards by the head of the Red Sea
into the desert, with a view to a final departure. They were already on
the borders of the desert, and a short march would have placed them
beyond the reach of pursuit, as the chariots of Egypt could have made
little progress over dry and yielding sand. But at Etham, instead of
pursuing their journey eastward with the sea on their right, they were
suddenly commanded to diverge to the south, keeping the gulf on their
left; a route which not only detained them lingering on the confines of
Egypt, but, in adopting it, they actually turned their backs on the land
of which they had set out to obtain the possession. A movement so
unexpected, and of which the ultimate design was carefully concealed,
could not but excite the astonishment of all, even of Moses himself,
although, from his implicit faith in the wisdom and power of his
heavenly Guide, he obeyed. The object was to entice Pharaoh to pursue,
in order that the moral effect, which the judgments on Egypt had
produced in releasing God's people from bondage, might be still further
extended over the nations by the awful events transacted at the Red Sea.

Pi-hahiroth--the mouth of the defile, or pass--a description well suited
to that of Bedea, which extended from the Nile and opens on the shore of
the Red Sea.

Migdol--a fortress or citadel.

Baal-zephon--some marked site on the opposite or eastern coast.

[Exodus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 14:3</span></span>

the wilderness hath shut them in--Pharaoh, who would eagerly watch their
movements, was now satisfied that they were meditating flight, and he
naturally thought from the error into which they appeared to have fallen
by entering that defile, he could intercept them. He believed them now
entirely in his power, the mountain chain being on one side, the sea on
the other, so that, if he pursued them in the rear, escape seemed
impossible.

[Exodus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 14:5</span></span>

the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people,
&c.--Alas, how soon the obduracy of this reprobate king reappears! He
had been convinced, but not converted--overawed, but not sanctified by
the appalling judgments of heaven. He bitterly repented of what he now
thought a hasty concession. Pride and revenge, the honor of his kingdom,
and the interests of his subjects, all prompted him to recall his
permission to reclaim those runaway slaves and force them to their
wonted labor. Strange that he should yet allow such considerations to
obliterate or outweigh all his painful experience of the danger of
oppressing that people. But those whom the Lord has doomed to
destruction are first infatuated by sin.

[Exodus 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 14:6</span></span>

he made ready his chariot--His preparations for an immediate and hot
pursuit are here described: A difference is made between "the chosen
chariots" and "the chariots of Egypt." The first evidently composed the
king's guard, amounting to six hundred, and they are called "chosen,"
literally, "third men"; three men being allotted to each chariot, the
charioteer and two warriors. As to "the chariots of Egypt," the common
cars contained only two persons, one for driving and the other for
fighting; sometimes only one person was in the chariot, the driver
lashed the reins round his body and fought; infantry being totally
unsuitable for a rapid pursuit, and the Egyptians having had no cavalry,
the word "riders" is in the grammatical connection applied to war
chariots employed, and these were of light construction, open behind,
and hung on small wheels.

[Exodus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 14:10</span></span>

when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes--The
great consternation of the Israelites is somewhat astonishing,
considering their vast superiority in numbers, but their deep dismay and
absolute despair at the sight of this armed host receives a satisfactory
explanation from the fact that the civilized state of Egyptian society
required the absence of all arms, except when they were on service. If
the Israelites were entirely unarmed at their departure, they could not
think of making any resistance \[WILKINSON and HENGSTENBERG\].

[Exodus 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 14:13</span></span>

Moses said, . . . Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the
Lord--Never, perhaps, was the fortitude of a man so severely tried as
that of the Hebrew leader in this crisis, exposed as he was to various
and inevitable dangers, the most formidable of which was the vengeance
of a seditious and desperate multitude; but his meek, unruffled,
magnanimous composure presents one of the sublimest examples of moral
courage to be found in history. And whence did his courage arise? He saw
the miraculous cloud still accompanying them, and his confidence arose
solely from the hope of a divine interposition, although, perhaps, he
might have looked for the expected deliverance in every quarter, rather
than in the direction of the sea.

[Exodus 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 14:15</span></span>

the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? &c.--When in
answer to his prayers, he received the divine command to go forward, he
no longer doubted by what kind of miracle the salvation of his mighty
charge was to be effected.

[Exodus 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 14:19</span></span>

the angel of God--that is, the pillar of cloud \[see on [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)\]. The slow and silent movement
of that majestic column through the air, and occupying a position behind
them must have excited the astonishment of the Israelites ([Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)). It was an effectual barrier
between them and their pursuers, not only protecting them, but
concealing their movements. Thus, the same cloud produced light (a
symbol of favor) to the people of God, and darkness (a symbol of wrath)
to their enemies (compare [Co2 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)).

[Exodus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 14:21</span></span>

Moses stretched out his hand, &c.--The waving of the rod was of great
importance on this occasion to give public attestation in the presence
of the assembled Israelites, both to the character of Moses and the
divine mission with which he was charged.

the Lord caused . . . a strong east wind all that night--Suppose a mere
ebb tide caused by the wind, raising the water to a great height on one
side, still as there was not only "dry land," but, according to the
tenor of the sacred narrative, a wall on the right hand and on the left
\[[Exo 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)\], it would be impossible
on the hypothesis of such a natural cause to rear the wall on the other.
The idea of divine interposition, therefore, is imperative; and,
assuming the passage to have been made at Mount Attakah, or at the mouth
of Wady Tawarik, an east wind would cut the sea in that line. The Hebrew
word kedem, however, rendered in our translation, "east," means, in its
primary signification, previous; so that this verse might, perhaps, be
rendered, "the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong previous wind
all that night"; a rendering which would remove the difficulty of
supposing the host of Israel marched over on the sand, in the teeth of a
rushing column of wind, strong enough to heap up the waters as a wall on
each side of a dry path, and give the intelligible narrative of divine
interference.

[Exodus 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 14:22</span></span>

the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea, &c.--It is highly
probable that Moses, along with Aaron, first planted his footsteps on
the untrodden sand, encouraging the people to follow him without fear of
the treacherous walls; and when we take into account the multitudes that
followed him, the immense number who through infancy and old age were
incapable of hastening their movements, together with all the
appurtenances of the camp, the strong and steadfast character of the
leaders' faith was strikingly manifested ([Jos
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#010); [Jos
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#023); [Psa
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006); [Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013); [Psa
106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009); [Psa
136:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#013); [Isa
63:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011); [Co1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001); [Heb
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#029)).

[Exodus 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 14:23</span></span>

the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the
sea--From the darkness caused by the intercepting cloud, it is probable
that they were not aware on what ground they were driving: they heard
the sound of the fugitives before them, and they pushed on with the fury
of the avengers of blood, without dreaming that they were on the bared
bed of the sea.

[Exodus 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 14:24</span></span>

Lord looked . . . through . . . the cloud, and troubled them--We suppose
the fact to have been that the side of the pillar of cloud towards the
Egyptians was suddenly, and for a few moments, illuminated with a blaze
of light, which, coming as it were in a refulgent flash upon the dense
darkness which had preceded, so frightened the horses of the pursuers
that they rushed confusedly together and became unmanageable. "Let us
flee," was the cry that resounded through the broken and trembling
ranks, but it was too late; all attempts at flight were vain \[BUSH\].

[Exodus 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 14:27</span></span>

Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, &c.--What circumstances
could more clearly demonstrate the miraculous character of this
transaction than that at the waving of Moses' rod, the dividing waters
left the channel dry, and on his making the same motion on the opposite
side, they returned, commingling with instantaneous fury? Is such the
character of any ebb tide?

[Exodus 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 14:28</span></span>

there remained not so much as one of them--It is surprising that, with
such a declaration, some intelligent writers can maintain there is no
evidence of the destruction of Pharaoh himself ([Psa
106:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#011)).

[Exodus 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 14:30</span></span>

Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore, &c.--The tide threw
them up and left multitudes of corpses on the beach; a result that
brought greater infamy on the Egyptians, but that tended, on the other
hand, to enhance the triumph of the Israelites, and doubtless enriched
them with arms, which they had not before. The locality of this famous
passage has not yet been, and probably never will be, satisfactorily
fixed. Some place it in the immediate neighborhood of Suez; where, they
say, the part of the sea is most likely to be affected by "a strong east
wind" \[[Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)\]; where the road
from the defile of Migdol (now Muktala) leads directly to this point;
and where the sea, not above two miles broad, could be crossed in a
short time. The vast majority, however, who have examined the spot,
reject this opinion, and fix the passage, as does local tradition, about
ten or twelve miles further down the shore at Wady Tawarik. "The time of
the miracle was the whole night, at the season of the year, too, when
the night would be about its average length. The sea at that point
extends from six and a half to eight miles in breadth. There was thus
ample time for the passage of the Israelites from any part of the
valley, especially considering their excitement and animation by the
gracious and wonderful interposition of Providence in their behalf"
\[WILSON\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
