<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

[Exodus 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 9:3</span></span>

MURRAIN OF BEASTS. ([Exo 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001))

Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle--A fifth application was
made to Pharaoh in behalf of the Israelites by Moses, who was instructed
to tell him that, if he persisted in opposing their departure, a
pestilence would be sent among all the flocks and herds of the
Egyptians, while those of the Israelites would be spared. As he showed
no intention of keeping his promise, he was still a mark for the arrows
of the Almighty's quiver, and the threatened plague of which he was
forewarned was executed. But it is observable that in this instance it
was not inflicted through the instrumentality or waving of Aaron's rod,
but directly by the hand of the Lord, and the fixing of the precise time
tended still further to determine the true character of the calamity
([Jer 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)).

[Exodus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 9:6</span></span>

all the cattle of Egypt died--not absolutely every beast, for we find
([Exo 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019), [Exo
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#021)) that there were still some left;
but a great many died of each herd--the mortality was frequent and
widespread. The adaptation of this judgment consisted in Egyptians
venerating the more useful animals such as the ox, the cow, and the ram;
in all parts of the country temples were reared and divine honors paid
to these domesticated beasts, and thus while the pestilence caused a
great loss in money, it also struck a heavy blow at their superstition.

[Exodus 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 9:7</span></span>

Pharaoh sent . . . there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites
dead--The despatch of confidential messengers indicates that he would
not give credit to vague reports, and we may conclude that some
impression had been made on his mind by that extraordinary exemption,
but it was neither a good nor a permanent impression. His pride and
obstinacy were in no degree subdued.

[Exodus 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 9:8</span></span>

PLAGUE OF BOILS. ([Exo 9:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008))

Take to you handfuls of ashes, &c.--The next plague assailed the persons
of the Egyptians, and it appeared in the form of ulcerous eruptions upon
the skin and flesh ([Lev 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#020); [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007); [Job
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)). That this epidemic did not arise
from natural causes was evident from its taking effect from the
particular action of Moses done in the sight of Pharaoh. The attitude he
assumed was similar to that of Eastern magicians, who, "when they
pronounce an imprecation on an individual, a village, or a country, take
the ashes of cows' dung (that is, from a common fire) and throw them in
the air, saying to the objects of their displeasure, such a sickness or
such a curse shall come upon you" \[ROBERTS\].

[Exodus 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 9:10</span></span>

Moses took ashes from the furnace--Hebrew, "brick-kiln." The magicians,
being sufferers in their own persons, could do nothing, though they had
been called; and as the brick-kiln was one of the principal instruments
of oppression to the Israelites \[[Deu
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020); [Kg1
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#051); [Jer
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004)\], it was now converted into a
means of chastisement to the Egyptians, who were made to read their sin
in their punishment.

[Exodus 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 9:18</span></span>

PLAGUE OF HAIL. (Exo. 9:18-35)

I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, &c.--The seventh plague
which Pharaoh's hardened heart provoked was that of hail, a phenomenon
which must have produced the greatest astonishment and consternation in
Egypt as rain and hailstones, accompanied by thunder and lightning, were
very rare occurrences.

such as hath not been in Egypt--In the Delta, or lower Egypt, where the
scene is laid, rain occasionally falls between January and March--hail
is not unknown, and thunder sometimes heard. But a storm, not only
exhibiting all these elements, but so terrific that hailstones of
immense size fell, thunder pealed in awful volleys, and lightning swept
the ground like fire, was an unexampled calamity.

[Exodus 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 9:20</span></span>

He that feared the word of the Lord . . . regarded not, &c.--Due
premonition, it appears, had been publicly given of the impending
tempest--the cattle seem to have been sent out to graze, which is from
January to April, when alone pasturage can be obtained, and accordingly
the cattle were in the fields. This storm occurring at that season, not
only struck universal terror into the minds of the people, but
occasioned the destruction of all--people and cattle--which, in neglect
of the warning, had been left in the fields, as well as of all
vegetation \[[Exo 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025)\]. It was the
more appalling because hailstones in Egypt are small and of little
force; lightning also is scarcely ever known to produce fatal effects;
and to enhance the wonder, not a trace of any storm was found in Goshen
\[[Exo 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#026)\].

[Exodus 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 9:27</span></span>

Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have
sinned--This awful display of divine displeasure did seriously impress
the mind of Pharaoh, and, under the weight of his convictions, he
humbles himself to confess he has done wrong in opposing the divine
will. At the same time he calls for Moses to intercede for cessation of
the calamity. Moses accedes to his earnest wishes, and this most awful
visitation ended. But his repentance proved a transient feeling, and his
obduracy soon became as great as before.

[Exodus 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 9:31</span></span>

the flax and the barley was smitten, &c.--The peculiarities that are
mentioned in these cereal products arise from the climate and physical
constitution of Egypt. In that country flax and barley are almost ripe
when wheat and rye (spelt) are green. And hence the flax must have been
"bolled"--that is, risen in stalk or podded in February, thus fixing the
particular month when the event took place. Barley ripens about a month
earlier than wheat. Flax and barley are generally ripe in March, wheat
and rye (properly, spelt) in April.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010)

</div>
