<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo032)  [Next](exo034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

[Exodus 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 33:1</span></span>

THE LORD REFUSES TO GO WITH THE PEOPLE. (Exo. 33:1-23)

the Lord said--rather "had" said unto Moses. The conference detailed in
this chapter must be considered as having occurred prior to the pathetic
intercession of Moses, recorded at the close of the preceding chapter;
and the historian, having mentioned the fact of his earnest and painful
anxiety, under the overwhelming pressure of which he poured forth that
intercessory prayer for his apostate countrymen, now enters on a
detailed account of the circumstances.

[Exodus 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 33:3</span></span>

I will not go up . . . lest I consume thee--Here the Lord is represented
as determined to do what He afterwards did not. (See on [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)).

[Exodus 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 33:4</span></span>

when the people heard these evil tidings--from Moses on his descent from
the mount.

[Exodus 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 33:5</span></span>

put off thy ornaments--In seasons of mourning, it is customary with
Eastern people to lay aside all gewgaws and divest themselves of their
jewels, their gold, and every thing rich and splendid in their dress.
This token of their sorrow the Lord required of His offending people.

that I may know what to do unto thee--The language is accommodated to
the feeble apprehensions of men. God judges the state of the heart by
the tenor of the conduct. In the case of the Israelites, He cherished a
design of mercy; and the moment He discerned the first symptoms of
contrition, by their stripping off their ornaments, as penitents
conscious of their error and sincerely sorrowful, this fact added its
weight to the fervency of Moses' prayers, and gave them prevalence with
God in behalf of the people.

[Exodus 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 33:7</span></span>

Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp--Not the
tabernacle, of which a pattern had been given him, for it was not yet
erected, but his own tent--conspicuous as that of the leader--in a part
of which he heard cases and communed with God about the people's
interests; hence called "the tabernacle of the congregation," and the
withdrawal of which, in abhorrence from a polluted camp, was regarded as
the first step in the total abandonment with which God had threatened
them.

[Exodus 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 33:8</span></span>

all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door--Its
removal produced deep and universal consternation; and it is easy to
conceive how anxiously all eyes would be directed towards it; how
rapidly the happy intelligence would spread, when a phenomenon was
witnessed from which an encouraging hope could be founded.

[Exodus 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 33:9</span></span>

the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the
tabernacle--How would the downcast hearts of the people revive--how
would the tide of joy swell in every bosom, when the symbolic cloud was
seen slowly and majestically to descend and stand at the entrance of the
tabernacle!

as Moses entered--It was when he appeared as their mediator, when he
repaired from day to day to intercede for them, that welcome token of
assurance was given that his advocacy prevailed, that Israel's sin was
forgiven, and that God would again be gracious.

[Exodus 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 33:18</span></span>

I beseech thee, show me thy glory--This is one of the most mysterious
scenes described in the Bible: he had, for his comfort and
encouragement, a splendid and full display of the divine majesty, not in
its unveiled effulgence, but as far as the weakness of humanity would
admit. The face, hand, back parts, are to be understood figuratively.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 34](exo034)

</div>
