<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo028)  [Next](exo030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001)

[Exodus 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 29:1</span></span>

CONSECRATING THE PRIESTS AND THE ALTAR. (Exo. 29:1-35)

hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest's office--The act of
inaugurating the priests was accompanied by ceremonial solemnities well
calculated not only to lead the people to entertain exalted views of the
office, but to impress those functionaries themselves with a profound
sense of its magnitude and importance. In short, they were taught to
know that the service was for them as well as for the people; and every
time they engaged in a new performance of their duties, they were
reminded of their personal interest in the worship, by being obliged to
offer for themselves, before they were qualified to offer as the
representatives of the people.

this is the thing that thou shalt do--Steps are taken at the beginning
of a society, which would not be repeated when the social machine was in
full motion; and Moses, at the opening of the tabernacle, was employed
to discharge functions which in later periods would have been regarded
as sacrilege and punished with instant death. But he acted under the
special directions of God.

[Exodus 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 29:4</span></span>

Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle--as
occupying the intermediate space between the court where the people
stood, and the dwelling-place of Israel's king, and therefore the
fittest spot for the priests being duly prepared for entrance, and the
people witnessing the ceremony of inauguration.

wash them with water. And . . . take the garments--The manner in which
these parts of the ceremonial were performed is minutely described, and
in discovering their symbolical import, which indeed, is sufficiently
plain and obvious, we have inspired authority to guide us. It signified
the necessity and importance of moral purity or holiness ([Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011); [Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010); [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001); [Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)). In like manner, the investiture
with the holy garments signified their being clothed with righteousness
([Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)) and equipped as men active
and well-prepared for the service of God; the anointing the high priest
with oil denoted that he was to be filled with the influences of the
Spirit, for the edification and delight of the church ([Lev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007); [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)), and as he was officially a type
of Christ ([Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026); [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034); also [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016); [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)).

[Exodus 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 29:10</span></span>

And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle--This
part of the ceremonial consisted of three sacrifices: (1) The sacrifice
of a bullock, as a sin offering; and in rendering it, the priest was
directed to put his hand upon the head of his sacrifice, expressing by
that act a consciousness of personal guilt, and a wish that it might be
accepted as a vicarious satisfaction. (2) The sacrifice of a ram as a
burnt offering ([Exo 29:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#015)). The
ram was to be wholly burnt, in token of the priest's dedication of
himself to God and His service. The sin offering was first to be
presented, and then the burnt offering; for until guilt be removed, no
acceptable service can be performed. (3) There was to be a peace
offering, called "the ram of consecration" ([Exo
29:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019)). And there was a marked
peculiarity in the manner in which this other ram was to be disposed of.
The former was for the glory of God--this was for the comfort of the
priest himself; and as a sign of a mutual covenant being ratified, the
blood of the sacrifice was divided--part sprinkled on the altar round
about, and part upon the persons and garments of the priests. Nay, the
blood was, by a singular act, directed to be put upon the extremities of
the body, thereby signifying that the benefits of the atonement would be
applied to the whole nature of man. Moreover, the flesh of this
sacrifice was to be divided, as it were, between God and the
priest--part of it to be put into his hand to be waved up and down, in
token of its being offered to God, and then it was to be burnt upon the
altar; the other part was to be eaten by the priests at the door of the
tabernacle--that feast being a symbol of communion or fellowship with
God. These ceremonies, performed in the order described, showed the
qualifications necessary for the priests. (See [Heb
7:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026); [Heb
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014)).

[Exodus 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 29:35</span></span>

seven days shalt thou consecrate them--The renewal of these ceremonies
on the return of every day in the seven, with the intervention of a
Sabbath, was a wise preparatory arrangement, in order to afford a
sufficient interval for calm and devout reflection ([Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)).

[Exodus 29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 29:36</span></span>

CONSECRATION OF THE ALTAR. ([Exo
29:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036))

and thou shalt cleanse the altar--The phrase, "when thou hast made an
atonement for it," should be, upon it; and the purport of the direction
is, that during all the time they were engaged as above from day to day
in offering the appointed sacrifices, the greatest care was to be taken
to keep the altar properly cleansed--to remove the ashes, and sprinkle
it with the prescribed unction that, at the conclusion of the whole
ceremonial, the altar itself should be consecrated as much as the
ministers who were to officiate at it ([Mat
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)). It was thenceforth associated
with the services of religion.

[Exodus 29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 29:38</span></span>

INSTITUTION OF DAILY SERVICE. ([Exo
29:38-46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038))

two lambs of the first year day by day continually--The sacred
preliminaries being completed, Moses was instructed in the end or design
to which these preparations were subservient, namely, the worship of
God; and hence the institution of the morning and evening sacrifice. The
institution was so imperative, that in no circumstances was this daily
oblation to be dispensed with; and the due observance of it would secure
the oft-promised grace and blessing of their heavenly King.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 30](exo030)

</div>
