<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo016)  [Next](exo018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

[Exodus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 17:1</span></span>

THE PEOPLE MURMUR FOR WATER. ([Exo
17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001))

the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin--In the
succinct annals of this book, those places only are selected for
particular notice by the inspired historian, which were scenes memorable
for their happy or painful interest in the history of the Israelites. A
more detailed itinerary is given in the later books of Moses, and we
find that here two stations are omitted (Num. 33:1-56).

according to the commandment of the Lord, &c.--not given in oracular
response, nor a vision of the night, but indicated by the movement of
the cloudy pillar. The same phraseology occurs elsewhere ([Num
9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#018)).

pitched in Rephidim--now believed, on good grounds, to be Wady Feiran,
which is exactly a day's march from Mount Sinai, and at the entrance of
the Horeb district. It is a long circuitous defile about forty feet in
breadth, with perpendicular granite rocks on both sides. The wilderness
of Sin through which they approached to this valley is very barren, has
an extremely dry and thirsty aspect, little or no water, scarcely even a
dwarfish shrub to be seen, and the only shelter to the panting pilgrims
is under the shadow of the great overhanging cliffs.

[Exodus 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 17:2</span></span>

the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may
drink, &c.--The want of water was a privation, the severity of which we
cannot estimate, and it was a great trial to the Israelites, but their
conduct on this new occasion was outrageous; it amounted even to "a
tempting of the Lord." It was an opposition to His minister, a distrust
of His care, an indifference to His kindness, an unbelief in His
providence, a trying of His patience and fatherly forbearance.

[Exodus 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 17:4</span></span>

Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What shall I do unto this
people?--His language, instead of betraying any signs of resentment or
vindictive imprecation on a people who had given him a cruel and
unmerited treatment, was the expression of an anxious wish to know what
was the best to be done in the circumstances (compare [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044); [Rom
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)).

[Exodus 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 17:5</span></span>

the Lord said unto Moses, &c.--not to smite the rebels, but the rock;
not to bring a stream of blood from the breast of the offenders, but a
stream of water from the granite cliffs. The cloud rested on a
particular rock, just as the star rested on the house where the infant
Saviour was lodged \[[Mat 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009)\]. And
from the rod-smitten rock there forthwith gushed a current of pure and
refreshing water. It was perhaps the greatest miracle performed by
Moses, and in many respects bore a resemblance to the greatest of
Christ's: being done without ostentation and in the presence of a few
chosen witnesses ([Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)).

[Exodus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 17:7</span></span>

called the name of the place--Massah ("temptation"); Meribah ("chiding,"
"strife"): the same word which is rendered "provocation" ([Heb
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#008)).

[Exodus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 17:8</span></span>

ATTACK OF AMALEK. ([Exo 17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008))

Then came Amalek--Some time probably elapsed before they were exposed to
this new evil; and the presumption of there being such an interval
affords the only ground on which we can satisfactorily account for the
altered, the better, and former spirit that animated the people in this
sudden contest. The miracles of the manna and the water from the rock
had produced a deep impression and permanent conviction that God was
indeed among them; and with feelings elevated by the conscious
experience of the Divine Presence and aid, they remained calm, resolute,
and courageous under the attack of their unexpected foe.

fought with Israel--The language implies that no occasion had been
furnished for this attack; but, as descendants of Esau, the Amalekites
entertained a deep-seated grudge against them, especially as the rapid
prosperity and marvellous experience of Israel showed that the blessing
contained in the birthright was taking effect. It seems to have been a
mean, dastardly, insidious surprise on the rear ([Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020); [Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017)), and an impious defiance of
God.

[Exodus 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 17:9</span></span>

Moses said unto Joshua--or, "Jesus" ([Act
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045); [Heb
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008)). This is the earliest notice of a
young warrior destined to act a prominent part in the history of Israel.
He went with a number of picked men. There is not here a wide open plain
on which the battle took place, as according to the rules of modern
warfare. The Amalekites were a nomadic tribe, making an irregular attack
on a multitude probably not better trained than themselves, and for such
a conflict the low hills and open country around this wady would afford
ample space \[ROBINSON\].

[Exodus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 17:10</span></span>

Moses . . . went up . . . the hill . . . held up his hand--with the
wonder-working rod; Moses acted as the standard bearer of Israel, and
also their intercessor, praying for success and victory to crown their
arms--the earnestness of his feelings being conspicuously evinced amid
the feebleness of nature.

[Exodus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 17:13</span></span>

Joshua discomfited Amalek--Victory at length decided in favor of Israel,
and the glory of the victory, by an act of national piety, was ascribed
to God (compare [Jo1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)).

[Exodus 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 17:14</span></span>

Write this for a memorial--If the bloody character of this statute seems
to be at variance with the mild and merciful character of God, the
reasons are to be sought in the deep and implacable vengeance they
meditated against Israel ([Psa 83:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#004)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 18](exo018)

</div>
