<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo001)  [Next](exo003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

[Exodus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 2:1</span></span>

BIRTH AND PRESERVATION OF MOSES. ([Exo
2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001))

there went a man of the house of Levi, &c. Amram was the husband and
Jochebed the wife (compare [Exo 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020);
[Num 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#059)). The marriage took place,
and two children, Miriam and Aaron, were born some years before the
infanticidal edict.

[Exodus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 2:2</span></span>

the woman . . . bare a son, &c.--Some extraordinary appearance of
remarkable comeliness led his parents to augur his future greatness.
Beauty was regarded by the ancients as a mark of the divine favor.

hid him three months--The parents were a pious couple, and the measures
they took were prompted not only by parental attachment, but by a strong
faith in the blessing of God prospering their endeavors to save the
infant.

[Exodus 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 2:3</span></span>

she took for him an ark of bulrushes--papyrus, a thick, strong, and
tough reed.

slime--the mud of the Nile, which, when hardened, is very tenacious.

pitch--mineral tar. Boats of this description are seen daily floating on
the surface of the river, with no other caulking than Nile mud (compare
[Isa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002)), and they are perfectly
watertight, unless the coating is forced off by stormy weather.

flags--a general term for sea or river weed. The chest was not, as is
often represented, committed to the bosom of the water but laid on the
bank, where it would naturally appear to have been drifted by the
current and arrested by the reedy thicket. The spot is traditionally
said to be the Isle of Rodah, near Old Cairo.

[Exodus 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 2:4</span></span>

his sister--Miriam would probably be a girl of ten or twelve years of
age at the time.

[Exodus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 2:5</span></span>

the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river--The
occasion is thought to have been a religious solemnity which the royal
family opened by bathing in the sacred stream. Peculiar sacredness was
attached to those portions of the Nile which flowed near the temples.
The water was there fenced off as a protection from the crocodiles; and
doubtless the princess had an enclosure reserved for her own use, the
road to which seems to have been well known to Jochebed.

walked along--in procession or in file.

she sent her maid--her immediate attendant. The term is different from
that rendered "maidens."

[Exodus 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 2:6</span></span>

when she had opened it, she saw the child--The narrative is picturesque.
No tale of romance ever described a plot more skilfully laid or more
full of interest in the development. The expedient of the ark, the slime
and pitch, the choice of the time and place, the appeal to the
sensibilities of the female breast, the stationing of the sister as a
watch of the proceedings, her timely suggestion of a nurse, and the
engagement of the mother herself--all bespeak a more than ordinary
measure of ingenuity as well as intense solicitude on the part of the
parents. But the origin of the scheme was most probably owing to a
divine suggestion, as its success was due to an overruling Providence,
who not only preserved the child's life, but provided for his being
trained in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Hence it is said to
have been done by faith ([Heb 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023)),
either in the general promise of deliverance, or some special revelation
made to Amram and Jochebed--and in this view, the pious couple gave a
beautiful example of a firm reliance on the word of God, united with an
active use of the most suitable means.

[Exodus 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 2:10</span></span>

she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter--Though it must have been nearly
as severe a trial for Jochebed to part with him the second time as the
first, she was doubtless reconciled to it by her belief in his high
destination as the future deliverer of Israel. His age when removed to
the palace is not stated; but he was old enough to be well instructed in
the principles of the true religion; and those early impressions,
deepened by the power of divine grace, were never forgotten or effaced.

he became her son--by adoption, and his high rank afforded him
advantages in education, which in the Providence of God were made
subservient to far different purposes from what his royal patroness
intended.

she called his name Moses--His parents might, as usual, at the time of
his circumcision, have given him a name, which is traditionally said to
have been Joachim. But the name chosen by the princess, whether of
Egyptian or Hebrew origin, is the only one by which he has ever been
known to the church; and it is a permanent memorial of the painful
incidents of his birth and infancy.

[Exodus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 2:11</span></span>

HIS SYMPATHY WITH THE HEBREWS. ([Exo
2:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011))

in those days, when Moses was grown--not in age and stature only, but in
power as well as in renown for accomplishments and military prowess
([Act 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)). There is a gap here in
the sacred history which, however, is supplied by the inspired
commentary of Paul, who has fully detailed the reasons as well as extent
of the change that took place in his worldly condition; and whether, as
some say, his royal mother had proposed to make him coregent and
successor to the crown, or some other circumstances, led to a
declaration of his mind, he determined to renounce the palace and
identify himself with the suffering people of God ([Heb
11:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024)). The descent of some great
sovereigns, like Diocletian and Charles V, from a throne into private
life, is nothing to the sacrifice which Moses made through the power of
faith.

he went out unto his brethren--to make a full and systematic inspection
of their condition in the various parts of the country where they were
dispersed ([Act 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)), and he adopted
this proceeding in pursuance of the patriotic purpose that the faith,
which is of the operation of God, was even then forming in his heart.

he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew--one of the taskmasters scourging
a Hebrew slave without any just cause ([Act
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024)), and in so cruel a manner, that
he seems to have died under the barbarous treatment--for the conditions
of the sacred story imply such a fatal issue. The sight was new and
strange to him, and though pre-eminent for meekness ([Num
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)), he was fired with indignation.

[Exodus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 2:12</span></span>

he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand--This act of Moses may
seem and indeed by some has been condemned as rash and unjustifiable--in
plain terms, a deed of assassination. But we must not judge of his
action in such a country and age by the standard of law and the notions
of right which prevail in our Christian land; and, besides, not only is
it not spoken of as a crime in Scripture or as distressing the
perpetrator with remorse, but according to existing customs among
nomadic tribes, he was bound to avenge the blood of a brother. The
person he slew, however, being a government officer, he had rendered
himself amenable to the laws of Egypt, and therefore he endeavored to
screen himself from the consequences by concealment of the corpse.

[Exodus 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 2:13</span></span>

two men of the Hebrews strove together--His benevolent mediation in this
strife, though made in the kindest and mildest manner, was resented, and
the taunt of the aggressor showing that Moses' conduct on the preceding
day had become generally known, he determined to consult his safety by
immediate flight ([Heb 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)). These
two incidents prove that neither were the Israelites yet ready to go out
of Egypt, nor Moses prepared to be their leader ([Jam
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)). It was by the staff and not the
sword--by the meekness, and not the wrath of Moses that God was to
accomplish that great work of deliverance. Both he and the people of
Israel were for forty years more to be cast into the furnace of
affliction, yet it was therein that He had chosen them ([Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)).

[Exodus 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 2:15</span></span>

Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh--His flight took place in the second
year of Thothmes I.

dwelt in the land of Midian--situated on the eastern shore of the gulf
of the Red Sea and occupied by the posterity of Midian the son of Cush.
The territory extended northward to the top of the gulf and westward far
across the desert of Sinai. And from their position near the sea, they
early combined trading with pastoral pursuits ([Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)). The headquarters of Jethro are
supposed to have been where Dahab-Madian now stands; and from Moses
coming direct to that place, he may have travelled with a caravan of
merchants. But another place is fixed by tradition in Wady Shuweib, or
Jethro's valley, on the east of the mountain of Moses.

sat down by a well--(See on [Gen
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#003)).

[Exodus 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 2:16</span></span>

the priest of Midian--or, "prince of Midian." As the officers were
usually conjoined, he was the ruler also of the people called Cushites
or Ethiopians, and like many other chiefs of pastoral people in that
early age, he still retained the faith and worship of the true God.

seven daughters--were shepherdesses to whom Moses was favorably
introduced by an act of courtesy and courage in protecting them from the
rude shepherds of some neighboring tribe at a well. He afterwards formed
a close and permanent alliance with this family by marrying one of the
daughters, Zipporah, "a little bird," called a Cushite or Ethiopian
([Num 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)), and whom Moses doubtless
obtained in the manner of Jacob by service \[see [Exo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)\]. He had by her two sons, whose
names were, according to common practice, commemorative of incidents in
the family history \[[Exo 18:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#003)\].

[Exodus 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 2:23</span></span>

the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of
the bondage--The language seems to imply that the Israelites had
experienced a partial relaxation, probably through the influence of
Moses' royal patroness; but in the reign of her father's successor the
persecution was renewed with increased severity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 3](exo003)

</div>
