<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

[Exodus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 7:1</span></span>

SECOND INTERVIEW WITH PHARAOH. (Exo. 7:1-25)

the Lord said unto Moses--He is here encouraged to wait again on the
king--not, however, as formerly, in the attitude of a humble suppliant,
but now armed with credentials as God's ambassador, and to make his
demand in a tone and manner which no earthly monarch or court ever
witnessed.

I have made thee a god--"made," that is, set, appointed; "a god"; that
is, he was to act in this business as God's representative, to act and
speak in His name and to perform things beyond the ordinary course of
nature. The Orientals familiarly say of a man who is eminently great or
wise, "he is a god" among men.

Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet--that is, "interpreter" or
"spokesman." The one was to be the vicegerent of God, and the other must
be considered the speaker throughout all the ensuing scenes, even though
his name is not expressly mentioned.

[Exodus 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 7:3</span></span>

I will harden Pharaoh's heart--This would be the result. But the divine
message would be the occasion, not the cause of the king's impenitent
obduracy.

[Exodus 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 7:4</span></span>

I may lay mine hand upon Egypt, &c.--The succession of terrible
judgments with which the country was about to be scourged would fully
demonstrate the supremacy of Israel's God.

[Exodus 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 7:7</span></span>

Moses was fourscore years old--This advanced age was a pledge that they
had not been readily betrayed into a rash or hazardous enterprise, and
that under its attendant infirmities they could not have carried through
the work on which they were entering had they not been supported by a
divine hand.

[Exodus 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 7:9</span></span>

When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, &c.--The king would naturally demand
some evidence of their having been sent from God; and as he would expect
the ministers of his own gods to do the same works, the contest, in the
nature of the case, would be one of miracles. Notice has already been
taken of the rod of Moses ([Exo 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002)),
but rods were carried also by all nobles and official persons in the
court of Pharaoh. It was an Egyptian custom, and the rods were symbols
of authority or rank. Hence God commanded His servants to use a rod.

[Exodus 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 7:10</span></span>

Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, &c.--It is to be presumed that
Pharaoh had demanded a proof of their divine mission.

[Exodus 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 7:11</span></span>

Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers, &c.--His object
in calling them was to ascertain whether this doing of Aaron's was
really a work of divine power or merely a feat of magical art. The
magicians of Egypt in modern times have been long celebrated adepts in
charming serpents, and particularly by pressing the nape of the neck,
they throw them into a kind of catalepsy, which renders them stiff and
immovable--thus seeming to change them into a rod. They conceal the
serpent about their persons, and by acts of legerdemain produce it from
their dress, stiff and straight as a rod. Just the same trick was played
off by their ancient predecessors, the most renowned of whom, Jannes and
Jambres ([Ti2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)), were called in on
this occasion. They had time after the summons to make suitable
preparations--and so it appears they succeeded by their "enchantments"
in practising an illusion on the senses.

[Exodus 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 7:12</span></span>

but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods--This was what they could not be
prepared for, and the discomfiture appeared in the loss of their rods,
which were probably real serpents.

[Exodus 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 7:14</span></span>

Pharaoh's heart is hardened--Whatever might have been his first
impressions, they were soon dispelled; and when he found his magicians
making similar attempts, he concluded that Aaron's affair was a magical
deception, the secret of which was not known to his wise men.

[Exodus 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 7:15</span></span>

Get thee unto Pharaoh--Now began those appalling miracles of judgment by
which the God of Israel, through His ambassadors, proved His sole and
unchallengeable supremacy over all the gods of Egypt, and which were the
natural phenomena of Egypt, at an unusual season, and in a miraculous
degree of intensity. The court of Egypt, whether held at Rameses, or
Memphis, or Tanis in the field of Zoan ([Psa
78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)), was the scene of those
extraordinary transactions, and Moses must have resided during that
terrible period in the immediate neighborhood.

in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water--for the purpose of
ablutions or devotions perhaps; for the Nile was an object of
superstitious reverence, the patron deity of the country. It might be
that Moses had been denied admission into the palace; but be that as it
may, the river was to be the subject of the first plague, and therefore,
he was ordered to repair to its banks with the miracle-working rod, now
to be raised, not in demonstration, but in judgment, if the refractory
spirit of the king should still refuse consent to Israel's departure for
their sacred rites.

[Exodus 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 7:17</span></span>

Aaron lifted up the rod and smote the waters, &c.--Whether the water was
changed into real blood, or only the appearance of it (and Omnipotence
could effect the one as easily as the other), this was a severe
calamity. How great must have been the disappointment and disgust
throughout the land when the river became of a blood red color, of which
they had a national abhorrence; their favorite beverage became a
nauseous draught, and the fish, which formed so large an article of
food, were destroyed. \[See on [Num
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005).\] The immense scale on which the
plague was inflicted is seen by its extending to "the streams," or
branches of the Nile--to the "rivers," the canals, the "ponds" and
"pools," that which is left after an overflow, the reservoirs, and the
many domestic vessels in which the Nile water was kept to filter. And
accordingly the sufferings of the people from thirst must have been
severe. Nothing could more humble the pride of Egypt than this dishonor
brought on their national god.

[Exodus 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 7:22</span></span>

And the magicians . . . did so with their enchantments, &c.--Little or
no pure water could be procured, and therefore their imitation must have
been on a small scale --the only drinkable water available being dug
among the sands. It must have been on a sample or specimen of water dyed
red with some coloring matter. But it was sufficient to serve as a
pretext or command for the king to turn unmoved and go to his house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
