<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo018)  [Next](exo020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

[Exodus 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 19:1</span></span>

ARRIVAL AT SINAI. (Exo. 19:1-25)

In the third month--according to Jewish usage, the first day of that
month--"same day."--It is added, to mark the time more explicitly, that
is, forty-five days after Egypt--one day spent on the mount ([Exo
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003)), one returning the people's
answer ([Exo 19:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007)), three days of
preparation, making the whole time fifty days from the first passover to
the promulgation of the law. Hence the feast of pentecost, that is, the
fiftieth day, was the inauguration of the Old Testament church, and the
divine wisdom is apparent in the selection of the same reason for the
institution of the New Testament church ([Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017); [Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)).

[Exodus 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 19:2</span></span>

were come to the desert of Sinai--The desert has its provinces, or
divisions, distinguished by a variety of names; and the "desert of
Sinai" is that wild and desolate region which occupies the very center
of the peninsula, comprising the lofty range to which the mount of God
belongs. It is a wilderness of shaggy rocks of porphyry and red granite,
and of valleys for the most part bare of verdure.

and there Israel camped before the mount--Sinai, so called from Seneh,
or acacia bush. It is now called Jebel Musa. Their way into the interior
of the gigantic cluster was by Wady Feiran, which would lead the bulk of
the hosts with their flocks and herds into the high valleys of Jebel
Musa, with their abundant springs, especially into the great
thoroughfare of the desert--the longest, widest, and most continuous of
all the valleys, the Wady-es-Sheikh, while many would be scattered among
the adjacent valleys; so that thus secluded from the world in a wild and
sublime amphitheatre of rocks, they "camped before the mount." "In this
valley--a long flat valley--about a quarter of a mile in breadth,
winding northwards, Israel would find ample room for their encampment.
Of all the wadys in that region, it seems the most suitable for a
prolonged sojourn. The 'goodly tents' of Israel could spread themselves
without limit" \[BONAR\].

[Exodus 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 19:3</span></span>

Moses went up unto God--the Shekinah--within the cloud ([Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020); [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)).

Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, &c.--The object for which
Moses went up was to receive and convey to the people the message
contained in these verses, and the purport of which was a general
announcement of the terms on which God was to take the Israelites into a
close and peculiar relation to Himself. In thus negotiating between God
and His people, the highest post of duty which any mortal man was ever
called to occupy, Moses was still but a servant. The only Mediator is
Jesus Christ \[[Ti1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005); [Heb
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#024)\].

[Exodus 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 19:6</span></span>

ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests--As the priestly order was set
apart from the common mass, so the Israelites, compared with other
people, were to sustain the same near relation to God; a community of
spiritual sovreigns.

an holy nation--set apart to preserve the knowledge and worship of God.

[Exodus 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 19:7</span></span>

Moses came and called for the elders of the people--The message was
conveyed to the mighty multitude through their elders, who, doubtless,
instructed them in the conditions required. Their unanimous acceptance
was conveyed through the same channel to Moses, and by him reported to
the Lord. Ah! how much self-confidence did their language betray! How
little did they know what spirit they were of!

[Exodus 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 19:9</span></span>

The Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come . . . in a thick cloud, &c.--The
deepest impressions are made on the mind through the medium of the
senses; and so He who knew what was in man signalized His descent at the
inauguration of the ancient church, by all the sensible tokens of august
majesty that were fitted to produce the conviction that He is the great
and terrible God. The whole multitude must have anticipated the event
with feelings of intense solemnity and awe. The extraordinary
preparations enjoined, the ablutions and rigid abstinence they were
required to observe, the barriers erected all round the base of the
mount, and the stern penalties annexed to the breach of any of the
conditions, all tended to create an earnest and solemn expectation which
increased as the appointed day drew near.

[Exodus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 19:16</span></span>

on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and
lightnings, &c.--The descent of God was signalized by every object
imagination can conceive connected with the ideas of grandeur and of
awe. But all was in keeping with the character of the law about to be
proclaimed. As the mountain burned with fire, God was exhibited as a
consuming fire to the transgressors of His law. The thunder and
lightning, more awful amid the deep stillness of the region and
reverberating with terrific peals among the mountains, would rouse the
universal attention; a thick cloud was an apt emblem of the dark and
shadowy dispensation (compare [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)).

the voice of a trumpet--This gave the scene the character of a
miraculous transaction, in which other elements than those of nature
were at work, and some other than material trumpet was blown by other
means than human breath.

[Exodus 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 19:17</span></span>

Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with
God--Wady-er-Raheh, where they stood, has a spacious sandy plain;
immediately in front of Es Suksafeh, considered by ROBINSON to be the
mount from which the law was given. "We measured it, and estimate the
whole plain at two geographical miles long, and ranging in breadth from
one-third to two-thirds of a mile, or as equivalent to a surface of one
square mile. This space is nearly doubled by the recess on the west, and
by the broad and level area of Wady-es-Sheikh on the east, which issues
at right angles to the plain, and is equally in view of the front and
summit of the mount. The examination convinced us that here was space
enough to satisfy all the requisitions of the Scripture narrative, so
far as it relates to the assembling of the congregation to receive the
law. Here, too, one can see the fitness of the injunction to set bounds
around the mount, that neither man nor beast might approach too near,
for it rises like a perpendicular wall." But Jebel Musa, the old
traditional Sinai, and the highest peak, has also a spacious valley,
Wady Sebaiyeh, capable of holding the people. It is not certain on which
of these two they stood.

[Exodus 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 19:21</span></span>

the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people--No sooner had
Moses proceeded a little up the mount, than he was suddenly ordered to
return, in order to keep the people from breaking through to gaze--a
course adopted to heighten the impressive solemnity of the scene. The
strict injunctions renewed to all, whatever their condition, at a time
and in circumstances when the whole multitude of Israel were standing at
the base of the mount, was calculated in the highest degree to solemnize
and awe every heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 20](exo020)

</div>
