<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](lam005)  [Next](eze001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 0:0</span></span>

The name Ezekiel means "(whom) God will strengthen" \[GESENIUS\]; or,
"God will prevail" \[ROSENMULLER\]. His father was Buzi ([Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)), a priest, and he probably
exercised the priestly office himself at Jerusalem, previous to his
captivity, as appears from the matured priestly character to be seen in
his prophecies, a circumstance which much increased his influence with
his captive fellow countrymen at Babylon. Tradition represents Sarera as
the land of his nativity. His call to prophesy was in the fifth year
from the date of his being carried away with Jehoiachin (see [Kg2
24:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#011)) by Nebuchadnezzar, 599 B.C.
The best portions of the people seem to have been among the first
carried away ([Eze 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016); [Jer
24:2-7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002), [Jer
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#010)). The ungodly were willing to do
anything to remain in their native land; whereas the godly believed the
prophets and obeyed the first summons to surrender, as the only path of
safety. These latter, as adhering to the theocratic principle, were
among the earliest to be removed by the Chaldeans, who believed that, if
they were out of the way, the nation would fall to pieces of itself.
They were despised by their brethren in the Holy Land not yet captives,
as having no share in the temple sacrifices. Thus Ezekiel's sphere of
labor was one happier and less impeded by his countrymen than that of
Jeremiah at home. The vicinity of the river Chebar, which flows into the
Euphrates near Circeslum, was the first scene of his prophecies ([Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)). Tel-Abib there (now Thallaba)
was his place of residence ([Eze
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)), whither the elders used to come
to inquire as to God's messages through him. They were eager to return
to Jerusalem, but he taught them that they must first return to their
God. He continued to prophesy for at least twenty-two years, that is, to
the twenty-seventh year of the captivity ([Eze
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017)), and probably remained with the
captives by the Chebar the rest of his life. A treatise, falsely
attributed to EPIPHANIUS, states a tradition that he was killed at
Babylon by a prince of his people whom he had reproved for idolatry.

He was contemporary with Jeremiah and Daniel. The former had prophesied
for thirty-four years before Ezekiel, and continued to do so for six or
seven years after him. The call of Ezekiel followed the very next year
after the communication of Jeremiah's predictions to Babylon ([Jer
51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)), and was divinely intended as a
sequel to them. Daniel's predictions are mostly later than Ezekiel's but
his piety and wisdom had become proverbial in the early part of
Ezekiel's ministry ([Eze 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014), [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016); [Eze
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)). They much resemble one another,
especially in the visions and grotesque images. It is a remarkable proof
of genuineness that in Ezekiel no prophecies against Babylon occur among
those directed against the enemies of the covenant-people. Probably he
desired not to give needless offence to the government under which he
lived. The effect of his labors is to be seen in the improved character
of the people towards the close of the captivity, and their general
cessation from idolatry and a return to the law. It was little more than
thirty years after the close of his labors when the decree of the Jews'
restoration was issued. His leading characteristic is realizing,
determined energy; this admirably adapted him for opposing the
"rebellious house" "of stubborn front and hard heart," and for
maintaining the cause of God's Church among his countrymen in a foreign
land, when the external framework had fallen to pieces. His style is
plain and simple. His conceptions are definite, and the details even of
the symbolical and enigmatical parts are given with lifelike minuteness.
The obscurity lies in the substance, not in the form, of his
communications. The priestly element predominates in his prophecies,
arising from his previous training as a priest. He delights to linger
about the temple and to find in its symbolical forms the imagery for
conveying his instructions. This was divinely ordered to satisfy the
spiritual want felt by the people in the absence of the outward temple
and its sacrifices. In his images he is magnificent, though austere and
somewhat harsh. He abounds in repetitions, not for ornament, but for
force and weight. Poetical parallelism is not found except in a few
portions, as in the seventh, twenty-first, twenty-seventh,
twenty-eighth, twenty-ninth through thirty-first chapters. His great aim
was to stimulate the dormant minds of the Jews. For this end nothing was
better suited than the use of mysterious symbols expressed in the
plainest words. The superficial, volatile, and wilfully unbelieving
would thereby be left to judicial blindness ([Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010); [Mat
13:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011), &c.); whereas the
better-disposed would be awakened to a deeper search into the things of
God by the very obscurity of the symbols. Inattention to this divine
purpose has led the modern Jews so to magnify this obscurity as to
ordain that no one shall read this book till he has passed his thirtieth
year.

RABBI HANANIAS is said to have satisfactorily solved the difficulties
(Mischna) which were alleged against its canonicity. Ecclesiasticus 49:8
refers to it, and JOSEPHUS \[Antiquities, 10.5.1\]. It is mentioned as
part of the canon in MELITO'S catalogue \[EUSEBIUS, Ecclesiastical
History, 4.26\]; also in ORIGEN, JEROME, and the Talmud. The oneness of
tone throughout and the repetition of favorite expressions exclude the
suspicion that separate portions are not genuine. The earlier portion,
the first through the thirty-second chapters, which mainly treats of sin
and judgment, is a key to interpret the latter portion, which is more
hopeful and joyous, but remote in date. Thus a unity and an orderly
progressive character are imparted to the whole. The destruction of
Jerusalem is the central point. Previous to this he calls to repentance
and warns against blind confidence in Egypt ([Eze
17:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015); compare [Jer
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#007)) or other human stay. After it he
consoles the captives by promising them future deliverance and
restoration. His prophecies against foreign nations stand between these
two great divisions, and were uttered in the interval between the
intimation that Nebuchadnezzar was besieging Jerusalem and the arrival
of the news that he had taken it ([Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021)). HAVERNICK marks out nine
sections:--(1) Ezekiel's call to prophesy (Eze. 1:1-3:15). (2)
Symbolical predictions of the destruction of Jerusalem (Eze. 3:16-7:27).
(3) A year and two months later a vision of the temple polluted by
Tammuz or Adonis worship; God's consequent scattering of fire over the
city and forsaking of the temple to reveal Himself to an inquiring
people in exile; happier and purer times to follow (Eze. 8:1-11:25). (4)
Exposure of the particular sins prevalent in the several
classes--priests, prophets, and princes (Eze. 12:1-19:14). (5) A year
later the warning of judgment for national guilt repeated with greater
distinctness as the time drew nearer (Eze. 20:1-23:49). (6) Two years
and five months later--the very day on which Ezekiel speaks--is
announced as the day of the beginning of the siege; Jerusalem shall be
overthrown (Eze. 24:1-27). (7) Predictions against foreign nations
during the interval of his silence towards his own people; if judgment
begins at the house of God, much more will it visit the ungodly world
(Eze. 25:1-32:32). Some of these were uttered much later than others,
but they all began to be given after the fall of Jerusalem. (8) In the
twelfth year of the captivity, when the fugitives from Jerusalem ([Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021)) had appeared in Chaldea, he
foretells better times and the re-establishment of Israel and the
triumph of God's kingdom on earth over its enemies, Seir, the heathen,
and Gog (Eze. 33:1-39:29). (9) After an interval of thirteen years the
closing vision of the order and beauty of the restored kingdom (Eze.
40:1-48:35). The particularity of details as to the temple and its
offerings rather discountenances the view of this vision being only
symbolical, and not at all literal. The event alone can clear it up. At
all events it has not yet been fulfilled; it must be future. Ezekiel was
the only prophet (in the strict sense) among the Jews at Babylon. Daniel
was rather a seer than a prophet, for the spirit of prophecy was given
him to qualify him, not for a spiritual office, but for disclosing
future events. His position in a heathen king's palace fitted him for
revelations of the outward relations of God's kingdom to the kingdoms of
the world, so that his book is ranked by the Jews among the Hagiographa
or "Sacred Writings," not among the prophetical Scriptures. On the other
hand, Ezekiel was distinctively a prophet, and one who had to do with
the inward concerns of the divine kingdom. As a priest, when sent into
exile, his service was but transferred from the visible temple at
Jerusalem to the spiritual temple in Chaldea.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 1](eze001)

</div>
