<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr005)  [Next](ezr007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

[Ezra 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 6:1</span></span>

DARIUS' DECREE FOR ADVANCING THE BUILDING. ([Ezr
6:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001))

Darius the king--This was Darius Hystaspes. Great and interesting light
has been thrown on the history of this monarch and the transaction of
his reign, by the decipherment of the cuneatic inscriptions on the rocks
at Behistun.

in the house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in
Babylon--An idea of the form of this Babylonian register house, as well
as the manner of preserving public records within its repositories, can
be obtained from the discoveries at Nineveh. Two small chambers were
discovered in the palace of Koyunjik, which, from the fragments found in
them, MR. LAYARD considers "as a house of the rolls." After reminding
his readers that the historical records and public documents of the
Assyrians were kept on tablets and cylinders of baked clay, many
specimens of which have been found, he goes on to say, "The chambers I
am describing appear to have been a depository in the palace of Nineveh
for such documents. To the height of a foot or more from the floor they
were entirely filled with them; some entire, but the greater part broken
into many fragments, probably by the falling in of the upper part of the
building. They were of different sizes; the largest tablets were flat,
and measured about nine inches by six and a half inches; the smaller
were slightly convex, and some were not more than an inch long, with but
one or two lines of writing. The cuneiform characters on most of them
were singularly sharp and well-defined, but so minute in some instances
as to be almost illegible without a magnifying glass. These documents
appear to be of various kinds. The documents that have thus been
discovered in the house of rolls' at Nineveh probably exceed all that
have yet been afforded by the monuments of Egypt, and when the
innumerable fragments are put together and transcribed, the publication
of these records will be of the greatest importance to the history of
the ancient world" \[Nineveh and Babylon\].

[Ezra 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 6:2</span></span>

Achmetha--long supposed to be the capital of Greater Media (the Ecbatana
of classical, the Hamadan of modern times), \[is\] at the foot of the
Elwund range of hills, where, for its coolness and salubrity, Cyrus and
his successors on the Persian throne established their summer residence.
There was another city, however, of this name, the Ecbatana of
Atropatene, and the most ancient capital of northern Media, and recently
identified by COLONEL RAWLINSON in the remarkable ruins of
Takht-i-Soleiman. Yet as everything tends to show the attachment of
Cyrus to his native city, the Atropatenian Ecbatana, rather than to the
stronger capital of Greater Media, COLONEL RAWLINSON is inclined to
think that he deposited there, in his fortress, the famous decree
relating to the Jews, along with the other records and treasures of his
empire \[Nineveh and Persepolis\].

[Ezra 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 6:8</span></span>

of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the river . . . expenses
be given unto these men--The decree granted them the privilege of
drawing from his provincial treasury of Syria, to the amount of whatever
they required for the furthering of the work and providing sacrifice for
the service of the temple, that the priests might daily pray for the
health of the king and the prosperity of the empire.

[Ezra 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 6:11</span></span>

whosoever shall alter this word--The warning was specially directed
against the turbulent and fanatical Samaritans. The extremely favorable
purport of this edict was no doubt owing in some measure to the
influence of Cyrus, of whom Darius entertained a high admiration, and
whose two daughters he had married. But it proceeded still more from the
deep impressions made even on the idolatrous people of that country and
that age, as to the being and providence of the God of Israel.

[Ezra 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 6:13</span></span>

THE TEMPLE FINISHED. ([Ezr 6:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013))

Then Tatnai . . . did speedily--A concurrence of favorable events is
mentioned as accelerating the restoration of the temple and infusing a
new spirit and energy into the workmen, who now labored with unabating
assiduity till it was brought to a completion. Its foundation was laid
in April, 536 B.C. ([Ezr 3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)), and
it was completed on February 21, 515 B.C., being twenty-one years after
it was begun \[LIGHTFOOT\].

[Ezra 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 6:16</span></span>

FEASTS OF THE DEDICATION. ([Ezr
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016))

the children of Israel . . . kept the dedication . . . with joy--The
ceremonial was gone through with demonstrations of the liveliest joy.
The aged who had wept at the laying of the foundation \[[Ezr
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012)\] were most, if not all of them,
now dead; and all rejoiced at the completion of this national
undertaking.

[Ezra 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 6:17</span></span>

twelve he-goats--as at the dedication of the tabernacle ([Num
7:87](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#087); [Num
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#017)).

[Ezra 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 6:18</span></span>

they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their
courses . . . as it is written in the book of Moses--Although David
arranged the priests and Levites in courses according to their families,
it was Moses who assigned to the priests and Levites their rights and
privileges, their stations and several duties.

[Ezra 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 6:21</span></span>

AND OF THE PASSOVER. ([Ezr 6:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019))

all such as had separated themselves . . . from the filthiness of the
heathen of the land--that is, who had given satisfactory evidence of
being true proselytes by not only renouncing the impure worship of
idolatry, but by undergoing the rite of circumcision, a condition
indispensable to a participation of the passover.

[Ezra 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 6:22</span></span>

kept the feast . . . with joy: for the Lord . . . turned the heart of
the king of Assyria unto them--that is, king of the Persian empire,
which now included the possessions, and had surpassed the glory, of
Assyria. The favorable disposition which Darius had evinced towards the
Jews secured them peace and prosperity and the privileges of their own
religion during the rest of his reign. The religious joy that so
remarkably characterized the celebration of this feast, was testified by
expressions of lively gratitude to God, whose overruling power and
converting grace had produced so marvellous a change in the hearts of
the mighty potentates, and disposed them, pagans though they were, to
aid the cause and provide for the worship of the true God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 7](ezr007)

</div>
