<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr000)  [Next](ezr002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

[Ezra 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 1:1</span></span>

PROCLAMATION OF CYRUS FOR BUILDING THE TEMPLE. ([Ezr
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001))

in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia--The Persian empire, including
Persia, Media, Babylonia, and Chaldea, with many smaller dependencies,
was founded by Cyrus, 536 B.C. \[HALES\].

that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
fulfilled--(See [Jer 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012); [Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)). This reference is a
parenthetic statement of the historian, and did not form part of the
proclamation.

[Ezra 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 1:2</span></span>

The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the
earth--Though this is in the Oriental style of hyperbole (see also [Dan
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)), it was literally true that the
Persian empire was the greatest ruling power in the world at that time.

he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem--The phraseology
of this proclamation, independently of the express testimony of
JOSEPHUS, affords indisputable evidence that Cyrus had seen (probably
through means of Daniel, his venerable prime minister and favorite)
those prophecies in which, two hundred years before he was born, his
name, his victorious career, and the important services he should render
to the Jews were distinctly foretold ([Isa
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028); [Isa
46:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)). The existence of predictions
so remarkable led him to acknowledge that all his kingdoms were gifts
bestowed on him by "the Lord God of heaven," and prompted him to fulfil
the duty which had been laid upon him long before his birth. This was
the source and origin of the great favor he showed to the Jews. The
proclamation, though issued "in the first year of Cyrus" \[[Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)\], did not take effect till the
year following.

[Ezra 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 1:3</span></span>

Who is there among you of all his people--The purport of the edict was
to grant full permission to those Jewish exiles, in every part of his
kingdom, who chose, to return to their own country, as well as to
recommend those of their countrymen who remained to aid the poor and
feeble on their way, and contribute liberally towards the rebuilding of
the temple.

[Ezra 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 1:5</span></span>

Then rose up the chief of the fathers, &c.--The paternal and
ecclesiastical chiefs of the later captivity, those of the tribes of
Judah and Benjamin, with some also from other tribes ([Ch1
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#003)), who retained their attachment to
the pure worship of God, naturally took the lead in this movement. Their
example was followed by all whose piety and patriotism were strong
enough to brave the various discouragements attending the enterprise.
They were liberally assisted by multitudes of their captive countrymen,
who, born in Babylonia or comfortably established in it by family
connections or the possession of property, chose to remain. It seems
that their Assyrian friends and neighbors, too, either from a favorable
disposition toward the Jewish faith, or from imitation of the court
policy, displayed hearty good will and great liberality in aiding and
promoting the views of the emigrants.

[Ezra 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 1:7</span></span>

CYRUS RESTORES THE VESSELS. ([Ezr
1:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007))

Cyrus . . . brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord--Though
it is said ([Kg2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013)) that these
were cut in pieces, that would not be done to the large and magnificent
vases; and, if they had been divided, the parts could be reunited. But
it may be doubted whether the Hebrew word rendered cut in pieces, does
not signify merely cut off, that is, from further use in the temple.

[Ezra 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 1:8</span></span>

Shesh-bazzar, the prince of Judah--that is, Zerubbabel, son of Salathiel
(compare [Ezr 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008); [Ezr
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016)). He was born in Babylon, and
called by his family Zerubbabel, that is, stranger or exile in Babylon.
Shesh-bazzar, signifying "fire-worshipper," was the name given him at
court, as other names were given to Daniel and his friends. He was
recognized among the exiles as hereditary prince of Judah.

[Ezra 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 1:11</span></span>

All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four
hundred--The vessels here specified amount only to the number of 2499.
Hence it is probable that the larger vases only are mentioned, while the
inventory of the whole, including great and small, came to the gross sum
stated in the text.

them of the captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto
Jerusalem--All the Jewish exiles did not embrace the privilege which the
Persian king granted them. The great proportion, born in Babylon,
preferred continuing in their comfortable homes to undertaking a
distant, expensive, and hazardous journey to a desolate land. Nor did
the returning exiles all go at once. The first band went with
Zerubbabel, others afterwards with Ezra, and a large number with
Nehemiah at a still later period.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 2](ezr002)

</div>
