<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

HIS CO-ORDINATE AUTHORITY AS APOSTLE OF THE CIRCUMCISION RECOGNIZED BY
THE APOSTLES. PROVED BY HIS REBUKING PETER FOR TEMPORIZING AT ANTIOCH:
HIS REASONING AS TO THE INCONSISTENCY OF JUDAIZING WITH JUSTIFICATION BY
FAITH. (Gal. 2:1-21)

Translate, "After fourteen years"; namely, from Paul's conversion
inclusive \[ALFORD\]. In the fourteenth year from his conversion
\[BIRKS\]. The same visit to Jerusalem as in [Act
15:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001) (A.D. 50), when the council of
the apostles and Church decided that Gentile Christians need not be
circumcised. His omitting allusion to that decree is; (1) Because his
design here is to show the Galatians his own independent apostolic
authority, whence he was not likely to support himself by their
decision. Thus we see that general councils are not above apostles. (2)
Because he argues the point upon principle, not authoritative decisions.
(3) The decree did not go the length of the position maintained here:
the council did not impose Mosaic ordinances; the apostle maintains that
the Mosaic institution itself is at an end. (4) The Galatians were
Judaizing, not because the Jewish law was imposed by authority of the
Church as necessary to Christianity, but because they thought it
necessary to be observed by those who aspired to higher perfection ([Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003); [Gal
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)). The decree would not at all
disprove their view, and therefore would have been useless to quote.
Paul meets them by a far more direct confutation, "Christ is of no
effect unto you whosoever are justified by the law" ([Gal
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)), \[PALEY\].

Titus . . . also--specified on account of what follows as to him, in
[Gal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003). Paul and Barnabas, and
others, were deputed by the Church of Antioch ([Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)) to consult the apostles and
elders at Jerusalem on the question of circumcision of Gentile
Christians.

[Galatians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 2:2</span></span>

by revelation--not from being absolutely dependent on the apostles at
Jerusalem, but by independent divine "revelation." Quite consistent with
his at the same time, being a deputy from the Church of Antioch, as [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002) states. He by this revelation was
led to suggest the sending of the deputation. Compare the case of Peter
being led by vision, and at the same time by Cornelius' messengers, to
go to CÃ&brvbr;sarea, Acts 10:1-22.

I . . . communicated unto them--namely, "to the apostles and elders"
([Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)): to the apostles in
particular ([Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)).

privately--that he and the apostles at Jerusalem might decide previously
on the principles to be adopted and set forward before the public
council (Acts 15:1-29). It was necessary that the Jerusalem apostles
should know beforehand that the Gospel Paul preached to the Gentiles was
the same as theirs, and had received divine confirmation in the results
it wrought on the Gentile converts. He and Barnabas related to the
multitude, not the nature of the doctrine they preached (as Paul did
privately to the apostles), but only the miracles vouchsafed in proof of
God's sanctioning their preaching to the Gentiles ([Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)).

to them . . . of reputation--James, Cephas, and John, and probably some
of the "elders"; [Gal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006), "those who
seemed to be somewhat."

lest, &c.--"lest I should be running, or have run, in vain"; that is,
that they might see that I am not running, and have not run, in vain.
Paul does not himself fear lest he be running, or had run, in vain; but
lest he should, if he gave them no explanation, seem so to them. His
race was the swift-running proclamation of the Gospel to the Gentiles
(compare "run," Margin, for "Word . . . have free course," [Th2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)). His running would have been in
vain, had circumcision been necessary, since he did not require it of
his converts.

[Galatians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 2:3</span></span>

But--So far were they from regarding me as running in vain, that "not
even Titus who was with me, who was a Greek (and therefore
uncircumcised), was compelled to be circumcised." So the Greek should be
translated. The "false brethren," [Gal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004) ("certain of the sect of the
Pharisees which believed," [Act 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)),
demanded his circumcision. The apostles, however, constrained by the
firmness of Paul and Barnabas ([Gal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)), did not compel or insist on his
being circumcised. Thus they virtually sanctioned Paul's course among
the Gentiles and admitted his independence as an apostle: the point he
desires to set forth to the Galatians. Timothy, on the other hand, as
being a proselyte of the gate, and son of a Jewess ([Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)), he circumcised ([Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)). Christianity did not interfere
with Jewish usages, regarded merely as social ordinances, though no
longer having their religious significance, in the case of Jews and
proselytes, while the Jewish polity and temple still stood; after the
overthrow of the latter, those usages naturally ceased. To have insisted
on Jewish usages for Gentile converts, would have been to make them
essential parts of Christianity. To have rudely violated them at first
in the case of Jews, would have been inconsistent with that charity
which (in matters indifferent) is made all things to all men, that by
all means it may win some ([Co1 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022);
compare [Rom 14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001), [Rom
14:13-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)). Paul brought Titus about
with him as a living example of the power of the Gospel upon the
uncircumcised heathen.

[Galatians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 2:4</span></span>

And that--that is, What I did concerning Titus (namely, by not
permitting him to be circumcised) was not from contempt of circumcision,
but "on account of the false brethren" ([Act
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001), [Act
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)) who, had I yielded to the
demand for his being circumcised, would have perverted the case into a
proof that I deemed circumcision necessary.

unawares--"in an underhand manner brought in."

privily--stealthily.

to spy out--as foes in the guise of friends, wishing to destroy and rob
us of

our liberty--from the yoke of the ceremonial law. If they had found that
we circumcised Titus through fear of the apostles, they would have made
that a ground for insisting on imposing the legal yoke on the Gentiles.

bring us into bondage--The Greek future implies the certainty and
continuance of the bondage as the result.

[Galatians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 2:5</span></span>

Greek, "To whom not even for an hour did we yield by subjection." ALFORD
renders the Greek article, "with THE subjection required of us." The
sense rather is, We would willingly have yielded for love \[BENGEL\] (if
no principle was at issue), but not in the way of subjection, where "the
truth of the Gospel" ([Gal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014); [Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005)) was at stake (namely, the
fundamental truth of justification by faith only, without the works of
the law, contrasted with another Gospel, [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)). Truth precise, unaccommodating,
abandons nothing that belongs to itself, admits nothing that is
inconsistent with it \[BENGEL\].

might continue with you--Gentiles. We defended for your sakes your true
faith and liberties, which you are now renouncing.

[Galatians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 2:6</span></span>

Greek, "From those who," &c. He meant to complete the sentence with "I
derived no special advantage"; but he alters it into "they . . . added
nothing to me."

accepteth--so as to show any partiality; "respecteth no man's person"
([Eph 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)).

seemed to be somewhat--that is, not that they seemed to be what they
were not, but "were reputed as persons of some consequence"; not
insinuating a doubt but that they were justly so reputed.

in conference added--or "imparted"; the same Greek as in [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016), "I conferred not with flesh and
blood." As I did not by conference impart to them aught at my
conversion, so they now did not impart aught additional to me, above
what I already knew. This proves to the Galatians his independence as an
apostle.

[Galatians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 2:7</span></span>

contrariwise--on the contrary. So far from adding any new light to ME,
THEY gave in THEIR adhesion to the new path on which Barnabas and I, by
independent revelation, had entered. So far from censuring, they gave a
hearty approval to my independent course, namely, the innovation of
preaching the Gospel without circumcision to the Gentiles.

when they saw--from the effects which I showed them, were "wrought"
([Gal 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008); [Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)).

was committed unto me--Greek, "I was entrusted with."

gospel of the uncircumcision--that is, of the Gentiles, who were to be
converted without circumcision being required.

circumcision . . . unto Peter--Peter had originally opened the door to
the Gentiles (Acts 10:1-48; [Act
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)). But in the ultimate
apportionment of the spheres of labor, the Jews were assigned to him
(compare [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)). So Paul on the
other hand wrote to the Hebrews (compare also [Col
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#011)), though his main work was among
the Gentiles. The non-mention of Peter in the list of names, presciently
through the Spirit, given in the sixteenth chapter of Romans, shows that
Peter's residence at Rome, much more primacy, was then unknown. The same
is palpable from the sphere here assigned to him.

[Galatians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 2:8</span></span>

he--God ([Co1 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)).

wrought effectually--that is, made the preached word efficacious to
conversion, not only by sensible miracles, but by the secret mighty
power of the Holy Ghost.

in Peter--ELLICOTT and others, translate, "For Peter." GROTIUS
translates as English Version.

to--with a view to.

was mighty--Translate as before, the Greek being the same, "wrought
effectually."

in me--"for (or 'in') me also."

[Galatians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 2:9</span></span>

James--placed first in the oldest manuscripts, even before Peter, as
being bishop of Jerusalem, and so presiding at the council (Acts
15:1-29). He was called "the Just," from his strict adherence to the
law, and so was especially popular among the Jewish party though he did
not fall into their extremes; whereas Peter was somewhat estranged from
them through his intercourse with the Gentile Christians. To each
apostle was assigned the sphere best suited to his temperament: to
James, who was tenacious of the law, the Jerusalem Jews; to Peter, who
had opened the door to the Gentiles but who was Judaically disposed, the
Jews of the dispersion; to Paul, who, by the miraculous and overwhelming
suddenness of his conversion, had the whole current of his early Jewish
prejudices turned into an utterly opposite direction, the Gentiles. Not
separately and individually, but collectively the apostles together
represented Christ, the One Head, in the apostleship. The twelve
foundation-stones of various colors are joined together to the one great
foundation-stone on which they rest ([Co1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011); [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014), [Rev
21:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)). John had got an intimation
in Jesus' lifetime of the admission of the Gentiles ([Joh
12:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)).

seemed--that is, were reputed to be (see on [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002) and [Gal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)) pillars, that is, weighty
supporters of the Church (compare [Pro
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001); [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)).

perceived the grace . . . given unto me-- ([Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015)).

gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship--recognizing me as
a colleague in the apostleship, and that the Gospel I preached by
special revelation to the Gentiles was the same as theirs. Compare the
phrase, [Lam 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#006); [Eze
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018).

heathen--the Gentiles.

[Galatians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 2:10</span></span>

remember the poor--of the Jewish Christians in Judea, then distressed.
Paul and Barnabas had already done so ([Act
11:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023)).

the same--the very thing.

I . . . was forward--or "zealous" ([Act
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017); [Rom
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025); [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); 2Co. 8:1-9:15). Paul was zealous
for good works, while denying justification by them.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

Peter--"Cephas" in the oldest manuscripts Paul's withstanding Peter is
the strongest proof that the former gives of the independence of his
apostleship in relation to the other apostles, and upsets the Romish
doctrine of Peter's supremacy. The apostles were not always inspired;
but were so always in writing the Scriptures. If then the inspired men
who wrote them were not invariably at other times infallible, much less
were the uninspired men who kept them. The Christian fathers may be
trusted generally as witnesses to facts, but not implicitly followed in
matters of opinion.

come to Antioch--then the citadel of the Gentile Church: where first the
Gospel was preached to idolatrous Gentiles, and where the name
"Christians" was first given ([Act
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020), [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)), and where Peter is said to
have been subsequently bishop. The question at Antioch was not whether
the Gentiles were admissible to the Christian covenant without becoming
circumcised--that was the question settled at the Jerusalem council just
before--but whether the Gentile Christians were to be admitted to social
intercourse with the Jewish Christians without conforming to the Jewish
institution. The Judaizers, soon after the council had passed the
resolutions recognizing the equal rights of the Gentile Christians,
repaired to Antioch, the scene of the gathering in of the Gentiles ([Act
11:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020)), to witness, what to Jews
would look so extraordinary, the receiving of men to communion of the
Church without circumcision. Regarding the proceeding with prejudice,
they explained away the force of the Jerusalem decision; and probably
also desired to watch whether the Jewish Christians among the Gentiles
violated the law, which that decision did not verbally sanction them in
doing, though giving the Gentiles latitude ([Act
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)).

to be blamed--rather, "(self)-condemned"; his act at one time condemning
his contrary acting at another time.

[Galatians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 2:12</span></span>

certain--men: perhaps James' view (in which he was not infallible, any
more than Peter) was that the Jewish converts were still to observe
Jewish ordinances, from which he had decided with the council the
Gentiles should be free ([Act 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)).
NEANDER, however, may be right in thinking these self-styled delegates
from James were not really from him. [Act
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024) favors this. "Certain from
James," may mean merely that they came from the Church at Jerusalem
under James' bishopric. Still James' leanings were to legalism, and this
gave him his influence with the Jewish party ([Act
21:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018)).

eat with . . . Gentiles--as in [Act
10:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010), [Act
10:48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048), according to the command of the
vision ([Act 11:3-17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003)). Yet after all,
this same Peter, through fear of man ([Pro
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025)), was faithless to his own so
distinctly avowed principles ([Act
15:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)). We recognize the same old
nature in him as led him, after faithfully witnessing for Christ, yet
for a brief space, to deny Him. "Ever the first to recognize, and the
first to draw back from great truths" \[ALFORD\]. An undesigned
coincidence between the Gospels and the Epistle in the consistency of
character as portrayed in both. It is beautiful to see how earthly
misunderstandings of Christians are lost in Christ. For in [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015), Peter praises the very Epistles
of Paul which he knew contained his own condemnation. Though apart from
one another and differing in characteristics, the two apostles were one
in Christ.

withdrew--Greek, "began to withdraw," &c. This implies a gradual drawing
back; "separated," entire severance.

[Galatians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 2:13</span></span>

the other--Greek, "the rest."

Jews--Jewish Christians.

dissembled likewise--Greek, "joined in hypocrisy," namely, in living as
though the law were necessary to justification, through fear of man,
though they knew from God their Christian liberty of eating with
Gentiles, and had availed themselves of it already (Acts 11:2-17). The
case was distinct from that in 1Co. 8:1-10:33; Rom. 14:1-23. It was not
a question of liberty, and of bearing with others' infirmities, but one
affecting the essence of the Gospel, whether the Gentiles are to be
virtually "compelled to live as do the Jews," in order to be justified
([Gal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)).

Barnabas also--"Even Barnabas": one least likely to be led into such an
error, being with Paul in first preaching to the idolatrous Gentiles:
showing the power of bad example and numbers. In Antioch, the capital of
Gentile Christianity and the central point of Christian missions, the
controversy first arose, and in the same spot it now broke out afresh;
and here Paul had first to encounter the party that afterwards
persecuted him in every scene of his labors ([Act
15:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)).

[Galatians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 2:14</span></span>

walked not uprightly--literally, "straight": "were not walking with
straightforward steps." Compare [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016).

truth of the gospel--which teaches that justification by legal works and
observances is inconsistent with redemption by Christ. Paul alone here
maintained the truth against Judaism, as afterwards against heathenism
([Ti2 4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)).

Peter--"Cephas" in the oldest manuscripts

before . . . all-- ([Ti1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)).

If thou, &c.--"If thou, although being a Jew (and therefore one who
might seem to be more bound to the law than the Gentiles), livest
(habitually, without scruple and from conviction, [Act
15:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010)) as a Gentile (freely eating
of every food, and living in other respects also as if legal ordinances
in no way justify, [Gal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)), and not
as a Jew, how (so the oldest manuscripts read, for 'why') is it that
thou art compelling (virtually, by thine example) the Gentiles to live
as do the Jews?" (literally, to Judaize, that is, to keep the ceremonial
customs of the Jews: What had been formerly obedience to the law, is now
mere Judaism). The high authority of Peter would constrain the Gentile
Christians to regard Judaizing as necessary to all, since Jewish
Christians could not consort with Gentile converts in communion without
it.

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

Connect these verses together, and read with most of the oldest
manuscripts "But" in the beginning of [Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016) : "We (I and thou, Peter) by
nature (not by proselytism), Jews, and not sinners as (Jewish language
termed the Gentiles) from among the Gentiles, YET (literally, 'BUT')
knowing that . . . even we (resuming the 'we' of [Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015), 'we also,' as well as the
Gentile sinners; casting away trust in the law), have believed," &c.

[Galatians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 2:16</span></span>

not justified by the works of the law--as the GROUND of justification.
"The works of the law" are those which have the law for their
object--which are wrought to fulfil the law \[ALFORD\].

but by--Translate, "But only (in no other way save) through faith in
Jesus Christ," as the MEAN and instrument of justification.

Jesus Christ--In the second case, read with the oldest manuscripts,
"Christ Jesus," the Messiahship coming into prominence in the case of
Jewish believers, as "Jesus" does in the first case, referring to the
general proposition.

justified by the faith of Christ--that is, by Christ, the object of
faith, as the ground of our justification.

for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified--He rests his
argument on this as an axiom in theology, referring to [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002), "Moses and Jesus Christ; The
law and the promise; Doing and believing; Works and faith; Wages and the
gift; The curse and the blessing--are represented as diametrically
opposed" \[BENGEL\]. The moral law is, in respect to justification, more
legal than the ceremonial, which was an elementary and preliminary
Gospel: So "Sinai" ([Gal 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)), which
is more famed for the Decalogue than for the ceremonial law, is made
pre-eminently the type of legal bondage. Thus, justification by the law,
whether the moral or ceremonial, is excluded ([Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)).

[Galatians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 2:17</span></span>

Greek, "But if, seeking to be justified IN (that is, in believing union
with) Christ (who has in the Gospel theory fulfilled the law for us), we
(you and I) ourselves also were found (in your and my former communion
with Gentiles) sinners (such as from the Jewish standpoint that now we
resume, we should be regarded, since we have cast aside the law, thus
having put ourselves in the same category as the Gentiles, who, being
without the law, are, in the Jewish view, "sinners," [Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)), is therefore Christ, the
minister of sin?" (Are we to admit the conclusion, in this case
inevitable, that Christ having failed to justify us by faith, so has
become to us the minister of sin, by putting us in the position of
"sinners," as the Judaic theory, if correct, would make us, along with
all others who are "without the law," [Rom
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014); [Co1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021); and with whom, by eating with
them, we have identified ourselves?) The Christian mind revolts from so
shocking a conclusion, and so, from the theory which would result in it.
The whole sin lies, not with Christ, but with him who would necessitate
such a blasphemous inference. But his false theory, though "seeking"
from Christ, we have not "found" salvation (in contradiction to Christ's
own words, [Mat 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)), but "have been
ourselves also (like the Gentiles) found" to be "sinners," by having
entered into communion with Gentiles ([Gal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)).

[Galatians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 2:18</span></span>

Greek, "For if the things which I overthrew (by the faith of Christ),
those very things I build up again (namely, legal righteousness, by
subjecting myself to the law), I prove myself (literally, 'I commend
myself') a transgressor." Instead of commending yourself as you sought
to do ([Gal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012), end), you merely
commend yourself as a transgressor. The "I" is intended by Paul for
Peter to take to himself, as it is his case, not Paul's own, that is
described. A "transgressor" is another word for "sinner" (in [Gal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)), for "sin is the transgression
of the law." You, Peter, by now asserting the law to be obligatory, are
proving yourself a "sinner," or "transgressor," in your having set it
aside by living as the Gentiles, and with them. Thus you are debarred by
transgression from justification by the law, and you debar yourself from
justification by Christ, since in your theory He becomes a minister of
sin.

[Galatians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 2:19</span></span>

Here Paul seems to pass from his exact words to Peter, to the general
purport of his argument on the question. However, his direct address to
the Galatians seems not to be resumed till [Gal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001), "O foolish Galatians," &c.

For--But I am not a "transgressor" by forsaking the law. "For," &c.
Proving his indignant denial of the consequence that "Christ is the
minister of sin" ([Gal 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)), and of
the premises from which it would follow. Christ, so far from being the
minister of sin and death, is the establisher of righteousness and life.
I am entirely in Him \[BENGEL\].

I--here emphatical. Paul himself, not Peter, as in the "I" ([Gal
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)).

through the law--which was my "schoolmaster to bring me to Christ" ([Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)); both by its terrors ([Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013); [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)) driving me to Christ, as the
refuge from God's wrath against sin, and, when spiritually understood,
teaching that itself is not permanent, but must give place to Christ,
whom it prefigures as its scope and end ([Rom
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)); and drawing me to Him by its
promises (in the prophecies which form part of the Old Testament law) of
a better righteousness, and of God's law written in the heart ([Deu
18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015); [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Act
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#043)).

am dead to the law--literally, "I died to the law," and so am dead to
it, that is, am passed from under its power, in respect to
non-justification or condemnation ([Col
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020); [Rom
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014); [Rom
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004), [Rom
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)); just as a woman, once married
and bound to a husband, ceases to be so bound to him when death
interposes, and may be lawfully married to another husband. So by
believing union to Christ in His death, we, being considered dead with
Him, are severed from the law's past power over us (compare [Gal
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014); [Co1
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039); [Rom
6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006); [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)).

live unto God-- ([Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011); [Co2
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015); [Pe1
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)).

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

I am crucified--literally, "I have been crucified with Christ." This
more particularizes the foregoing. "I am dead" ([Gal
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019); [Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)).

nevertheless I live; yet not I--Greek, "nevertheless I live, no longer
(indeed) I." Though crucified I live; (and this) no longer that old man
such as I once was (compare [Rom
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017)). No longer Saul the Jew ([Gal
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024); [Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011), but "another man"; compare [Sa1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)). ELLICOTT and others translate,
"And it is no longer I that live, but Christ that liveth in me." But the
plain antithesis between "crucified" and "live," requires the
translation, "nevertheless."

the life which I now live--as contrasted with my life before conversion.

in the flesh--My life seems to be a mere animal life "in the flesh," but
this is not my true life; "it is but the mask of life under which lives
another, namely, Christ, who is my true life" \[LUTHER\].

I live by the faith, &c.--Greek, "IN faith (namely), that of (that is,
which rests on) the Son of God." "In faith," answers by contrast to "in
the flesh." Faith, not the flesh, is the real element in which I live.
The phrase, "the Son of God," reminds us that His Divine Sonship is the
source of His life-giving power.

loved me--His eternal gratuitous love is the link that unites me to the
Son of God, and His "giving Himself for me," is the strongest proof of
that love.

[Galatians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 2:21</span></span>

I do not frustrate the grace of God--I do not make it void, as thou,
Peter, art doing by Judaizing.

for--justifying the strong expression "frustrate," or "make void."

is dead in vain--Greek, "Christ died needlessly," or "without just
cause." Christ's having died, shows that the law has no power to justify
us; for if the law can justify or make us righteous, the death of Christ
is superfluous \[CHRYSOSTOM\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003)

</div>
