<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal000)  [Next](gal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

[Galatians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 1:1</span></span>

SUPERSCRIPTION. GREETINGS. THE CAUSE OF HIS WRITING IS THEIR SPEEDY
FALLING AWAY FROM THE GOSPEL HE TAUGHT. DEFENSE OF HIS TEACHING: HIS
APOSTOLIC CALL INDEPENDENT OF MAN. (Gal. 1:1-24)

apostle--in the earliest Epistles, the two to the Thessalonians, through
humility, he uses no title of authority; but associates with him
"Silvanus and Timotheus"; yet here, though "brethren" ([Gal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)) are with him, he does not name
them but puts his own name and apostleship prominent: evidently because
his apostolic commission needs now to be vindicated against deniers of
it.

of--Greek, "from." Expressing the origin from which his mission came,
"not from men," but from Christ and the Father (understood) as the
source. "By" expresses the immediate operating agent in the call. Not
only was the call from God as its ultimate source, but by Christ and the
Father as the immediate agent in calling him ([Act
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#015); [Act
26:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016)). The laying on of Ananias'
hands ([Act 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)) is no objection to
this; for that was but a sign of the fact, not an assisting cause. So
the Holy Ghost calls him specially ([Act
13:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)); he was an apostle before this
special mission.

man--singular; to mark the contrast to "Jesus Christ." The opposition
between "Christ" and "man," and His name being put in closest connection
with God the Father, imply His Godhead.

raised him from the dead--implying that, though he had not seen Him in
His humiliation as the other apostles (which was made an objection
against him), he had seen and been constituted an apostle by Him in His
resurrection power ([Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Rom
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)). Compare as to the ascension,
the consequence of the resurrection, and the cause of His giving
"apostles," [Eph 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011). He rose again,
too, for our justification ([Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)); thus Paul prepares the way for
the prominent subject of the Epistle, justification in Christ, not by
the law.

[Galatians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 1:2</span></span>

all the brethren--I am not alone in my doctrine; all my colleagues in
the Gospel work, travelling with me ([Act
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029), Gaius and Aristarchus at
Ephesus: [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004), Sopater, Secundus,
Timotheus, Tychicus, Trophimus, some, or all of these), join with me.
Not that these were joint authors with Paul of the Epistle: but joined
him in the sentiments and salutations. The phrase, "all the brethren,"
accords with a date when he had many travelling companions, he and they
having to bear jointly the collection to Jerusalem \[CONYBEARE and
HOWSON\].

the churches--Pessinus and Ancyra were the principal cities; but
doubtless there were many other churches in Galatia ([Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023); [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)). He does not attach any
honorable title to the churches here, as elsewhere, being displeased at
their Judaizing. See First Corinthians; First Thessalonians, &c. The
first Epistle of Peter is addressed to Jewish Christians sojourning in
Galatia ([Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)), among other places
mentioned. It is interesting thus to find the apostle of the
circumcision, as well as the apostle of the uncircumcision, once at
issue ([Gal 2:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)), co-operating to
build up the same churches.

[Galatians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 1:3</span></span>

from . . . from--Omit the second "from." The Greek joins God the Father
and our Lord Jesus Christ in closet union, by there being but the one
preposition.

[Galatians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 1:4</span></span>

gave himself-- ([Gal 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)); unto
death, as an offering. Found only in this and the Pastoral Epistles. The
Greek is different in [Eph 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025) (see
on [Eph 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)).

for our sins--which enslaved us to the present evil world.

deliver us from this--Greek, "out of the," &c. The Father and Son are
each said to "deliver us," &c. ([Col
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)): but the Son, not the Father,
gave Himself for us in order to do so, and make us citizens of a better
world ([Phi 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)). The Galatians in
desiring to return to legal bondage are, he implies, renouncing the
deliverance which Christ wrought for us. This he more fully repeats in
[Gal 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013). "Deliver" is the very word
used by the Lord as to His deliverance of Paul himself ([Act
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#017)): an undesigned coincidence
between Paul and Luke.

world--Greek, "age"; system or course of the world, regarded from a
religious point of view. The present age opposes the "glory" ([Gal
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)) of God, and is under the
authority of the Evil One. The "ages of ages" (Greek, [Gal
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)) are opposed to "the present evil
age."

according to the will of God and our Father--Greek, "of Him who is at
once God \[the sovereign Creator\] and our Father" ([Joh
6:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038); [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018), end). Without merit of ours.
His sovereignty as "GOD," and our filial relation to Him as "OUR
FATHER," ought to keep us from blending our own legal notions (as the
Galatians were doing) with His will and plan. This paves the way for his
argument.

[Galatians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 1:5</span></span>

be glory--rather, as Greek, "be the glory"; the glory which is
peculiarly and exclusively His. Compare Note, see on [Eph
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#021).

[Galatians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 1:6</span></span>

Without the usual expressions of thanksgiving for their faith, &c., he
vehemently plunges into his subject, zealous for "the glory" of God
([Gal 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)), which was being disparaged
by the Galatians falling away from the pure Gospel of the "grace" of
God.

I marvel--implying that he had hoped better things from them, whence his
sorrowful surprise at their turning out so different from his
expectations.

so soon--after my last visit; when I hoped and thought you were
untainted by the Judaizing teachers. If this Epistle was written from
Corinth, the interval would be a little more than three years, which
would be "soon" to have fallen away, if they were apparently sound at
the time of his visit. [Gal 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018), [Gal
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020) may imply that he saw no symptom
of unsoundness then, such as he hears of in them now. But English
Version is probably not correct there. See see on [Gal
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018); [Gal
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020); also see Introduction. If from
Ephesus, the interval would be not more than one year. BIRKS holds the
Epistle to have been written from Corinth after his FIRST visit to
Galatia; for this agrees best with the "so soon" here: with [Gal
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018), "It is good to be zealously
affected always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with
you." If they had persevered in the faith during three years of his
first absence, and only turned aside after his second visit, they could
not be charged justly with adhering to the truth only when he was
present: for his first absence was longer than both his visits, and they
would have obeyed longer in his "absence" than in his "presence." But if
their decline had begun immediately after he left them, and before his
return to them, the reproof will be just. But see on [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013).

removed--Translate, "are being removed," that is, ye are suffering
yourselves so soon (whether from the time of my last visit, or from the
time of the first temptation held out to you) \[PARÃ†US\] to be removed
by Jewish seducers. Thus he softens the censure by implying that the
Galatians were tempted by seducers from without, with whom the chief
guilt lay: and the present, "ye are being removed," implies that their
seduction was only in process of being effected, not that it was
actually effected. WAHL, ALFORD, and others take the Greek as middle
voice. "ye are removing" or "passing over." "Shifting your ground"
\[CONYBEARE and HOWSON\]. But thus the point of Paul's oblique reference
to their misleaders is lost; and in [Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012) the Greek is used passively,
justifying its being taken so here. On the impulsiveness and fickleness
of the Gauls (another form of Kel-t-s, the progenitors of the Erse,
Gauls, Cymri, and Belgians), whence the Galatians sprang, see
Introduction and CÃ†SAR \[Commentaries on the Gallic War, 3.19\].

from him that called you--God the Father ([Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015); [Gal
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008); [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030); [Co1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009); [Th1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#012); [Th1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024)).

into--rather, as Greek, "IN the grace of Christ," as the element in
which, and the instrument by which, God calls us to salvation. Compare
Note, see on [Co1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015); [Rom
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015), "the gift by (Greek, 'in') grace
(Greek, 'the grace') of (the) one man." "The grace of Christ," is
Christ's gratuitously purchased and bestowed justification,
reconciliation, and eternal life.

another--rather, as Greek, "a second and different gospel," that is,
into a so-called gospel, different altogether from the only true Gospel.

[Galatians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 1:7</span></span>

another--A distinct Greek word from that in [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006). Though I called it a gospel ([Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)), it is not really so. There is
really but one Gospel, and no other gospel.

but--Translate, "Only that there are some that trouble you," &c. ([Gal
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010), [Gal
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)). All I meant by the "different
gospel" was nothing but a perversion by "some" of the one Gospel of
Christ.

would pervert--Greek, "wish to pervert"; they could not really pervert
the Gospel, though they could pervert Gospel professors (compare [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009), [Gal
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017), [Gal
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021); [Gal
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012); [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)). Though acknowledging Christ,
they insisted on circumcision and Jewish ordinances and professed to
rest on the authority of other apostles, namely, Peter and James. But
Paul recognizes no gospel, save the pure Gospel.

[Galatians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 1:8</span></span>

But--however weighty they may seem "who trouble you." Translate as
Greek, "Even though we," namely, I and the brethren with me, weighty and
many as we are ([Gal 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)). The Greek
implies a case supposed which never has occurred.

angel--in which light ye at first received me (compare [Gal
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014); [Co1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)), and whose authority is the
highest possible next to that of God and Christ. A new revelation, even
though seemingly accredited by miracles, is not to be received if it
contradict the already existing revelation. For God cannot contradict
Himself ([Deu 13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001); [Kg1
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#018); [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024); [Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)). The Judaizing teachers sheltered
themselves under the names of the great apostles, James, John, and
Peter: "Do not bring these names up to me, for even if an angel," &c.
Not that he means, the apostles really supported the Judaizers: but he
wishes to show, when the truth is in question, respect of persons is
inadmissible \[CHRYSOSTOM\].

preach--that is, "should preach."

any other gospel . . . than--The Greek expresses not so much "any other
gospel different from what we have preached," as, "any gospel BESIDE
that which we preached." This distinctly opposes the traditions of the
Church of Rome, which are at once besides and against (the Greek
includes both ideas) the written Word, our only "attested rule."

[Galatians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 1:9</span></span>

said before--when we were visiting you (so "before" means, [Co2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002)). Compare [Gal
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002), [Gal
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021). Translate, "If any man preacheth
unto you any gospel BESIDE that which," &c. Observe the indicative, not
the subjunctive or conditional mood, is used, "preacheth," literally,
"furnisheth you with any gospel." The fact is assumed, not merely
supposed as a contingency, as in [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008), "preach," or "should preach."
This implies that he had already observed (namely, during his last
visit) the machinations of the Judaizing teachers: but his surprise
([Gal 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)) now at the Galatians being
misled by them, implies that they had not apparently been so then. As in
[Gal 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008) he had said, "which we
preached," so here, with an augmentation of the force, "which ye
received"; acknowledging that they had truly accepted it.

accursed--The opposite appears in [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016).

[Galatians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 1:10</span></span>

For--accounting for the strong language he has just used.

do I now--resuming the "now" of [Gal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009). "Am I now persuading men?"
\[ALFORD\], that is, conciliating. Is what I have just now said a sample
of men-pleasing, of which I am accused? His adversaries accused him of
being an interested flatterer of men, "becoming all things to all men,"
to make a party for himself, and so observing the law among the Jews
(for instance, circumcising Timothy), yet persuading the Gentiles to
renounce it ([Gal 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)) (in order to
flatter those, really keeping them in a subordinate state, not admitted
to the full privileges which the circumcised alone enjoyed). NEANDER
explains the "now" thus: Once, when a Pharisee, I was actuated only by a
regard to human authority and to please men ([Luk
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015); [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)), but NOW I teach as responsible
to God alone ([Co1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003)).

or God?--Regard is to be had to God alone.

for if I yet pleased men--The oldest manuscripts omit "for." "If I were
still pleasing men," &c. ([Luk 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#026);
[Joh 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019); [Th1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#004); [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004); [Jo1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005)). On "yet," compare [Gal
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011).

servant of Christ--and so pleasing Him in all things ([Tit
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009); [Col
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#022)).

[Galatians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 1:11</span></span>

certify--I made known to you as to the Gospel which was preached by me,
that it is not after man, that is, not of, by, or from man ([Gal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001), [Gal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)). It is not according to man; not
influenced by mere human considerations, as it would be, if it were of
human origin.

brethren--He not till now calls them so.

[Galatians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 1:12</span></span>

Translate, "For not even did I myself (any more than the other apostles)
receive it from man, nor was I taught it (by man)." "Received it,"
implies the absence of labor in acquiring it. "Taught it," implies the
labor of learning.

by the revelation of Jesus Christ--Translate, "by revelation of \[that
is, from\] Jesus Christ." By His revealing it to me. Probably this took
place during the three years, in part of which he sojourned in Arabia
([Gal 1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)), in the vicinity of the
scene of the giving of the law; a fit place for such a revelation of the
Gospel of grace, which supersedes the ceremonial law ([Gal
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025)). He, like other Pharisees who
embraced Christianity, did not at first recognize its independence of
the Mosaic law, but combined both together. Ananias, his first
instructor, was universally esteemed for his legal piety and so was not
likely to have taught him to sever Christianity from the law. This
severance was partially recognized after the martyrdom of Stephen. But
Paul received it by special revelation ([Co1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023); [Co1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015)). A vision of the Lord Jesus is
mentioned ([Act 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#018)), at his first
visit to Jerusalem ([Gal 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)); but
this seems to have been subsequent to the revelation here meant (compare
[Gal 1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)), and to have been
confined to giving a particular command. The vision "fourteen years
before" ([Co2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)) was in A.D. 43,
still later, six years after his conversion. Thus Paul is an independent
witness to the Gospel. Though he had received no instruction from the
apostles, but from the Holy Ghost, yet when he met them his Gospel
exactly agreed with theirs.

[Galatians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 1:13</span></span>

heard--even before I came among you.

conversation--"my former way of life."

Jews' religion--The term, "Hebrew," expresses the language; "Jew," the
nationality, as distinguished from the Gentiles; "Israelite," the
highest title, the religious privileges, as a member of the theocracy.

the church--Here singular, marking its unity, though constituted of many
particular churches, under the one Head, Christ.

of God--added to mark the greatness of his sinful alienation from God
([Co1 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019)).

wasted--laid it waste: the opposite of "building it up."

[Galatians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 1:14</span></span>

profited--Greek, "I was becoming a proficient"; "I made progress."

above--beyond.

my equals--Greek, "Of mine own age, among my countrymen."

traditions of my fathers--namely, those of the Pharisees, Paul being "a
Pharisee, and son of a Pharisee" ([Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006); [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005)). "MY fathers," shows that it is
not to be understood generally of the traditions of the nation.

[Galatians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 1:15</span></span>

separated--"set me apart": in the purposes of His electing love (compare
[Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015); [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014)), in order to show in me His
"pleasure," which is the farthest point that any can reach in inquiring
the causes of his salvation. The actual "separating" or "setting apart"
to the work marked out for him, is mentioned in [Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002); [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001). There is an allusion, perhaps, in
the way of contrast, to the derivation of Pharisee from Hebrew,
"pharash," "separated." I was once a so-called Pharisee or Separatist,
but God had separated me to something far better.

from . . . womb--Thus merit in me was out of the question, in assigning
causes for His call from [Act 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011).
Grace is the sole cause ([Psa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009);
[Psa 71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006); [Isa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001), [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005); [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005); [Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015)).

called me--on the way to Damascus ([Act
9:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)).

[Galatians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 1:16</span></span>

reveal his Son in me--within me, in my inmost soul, by the Holy Spirit
([Gal 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)). Compare [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006), "shined in our hearts." The
revealing of His Son by me to the Gentiles (so translate for "heathen")
was impossible, unless He had first revealed His Son in me; at first on
my conversion, but especially at the subsequent revelation from Jesus
Christ ([Gal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)), whereby I learned
the Gospel's independence of the Mosaic law.

that I might preach--the present in the Greek, which includes the idea
"that I may preach Him," implying an office still continuing. This was
the main commission entrusted to him ([Gal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007), [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)).

immediately--connected chiefly with "I went into Arabia" ([Gal
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)). It denotes the sudden fitness
of the apostle. So [Act 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020),
"Straightway he preached Christ in the synagogue."

I conferred not--Greek, "I had not further (namely, in addition to
revelation) recourse to . . . for the purpose of consulting." The divine
revelation was sufficient for me \[BENGEL\].

flesh and blood-- ([Mat 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)).

[Galatians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 1:17</span></span>

went I up--Some of the oldest manuscripts read, "went away."

to Jerusalem--the seat of the apostles.

into Arabia--This journey (not recorded in Acts) was during the whole
period of his stay at Damascus, called by Luke ([Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)), "many \[Greek, a considerable
number of\] days." It is curiously confirmatory of the legitimacy of
taking "many days" to stand for "three years," that the same phrase
exactly occurs in the same sense in [Kg1
2:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#038). This was a country of the
Gentiles; here doubtless he preached as he did before and after ([Act
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020), [Act
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#022)) at Damascus: thus he shows the
independence of his apostolic commission. He also here had that
comparative retirement needed, after the first fervor of his conversion,
to prepare him for the great work before him. Compare Moses ([Act
7:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029)). His familiarity with the
scene of the giving of the law, and the meditations and revelations
which he had there, appear in [Gal
4:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024); [Heb
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018). See on [Gal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012). The Lord from heaven communed
with him, as He on earth in the days of His flesh communed with the
other apostles.

returned--Greek "returned back again."

[Galatians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 1:18</span></span>

after three years--dating from my conversion, as appears by the contrast
to "immediately" ([Gal 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)). This is
the same visit to Jerusalem as in [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026), and at this visit occurred the
vision ([Act 22:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)). The incident
which led to his leaving Damascus ([Act
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025); [Co2
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)) was not the main cause of his
going to Jerusalem. So that there is no discrepancy in the statement
here that he went "to see Peter"; or rather, as Greek, "to make the
acquaintance of"; "to become personally acquainted with." The two oldest
manuscripts read, "Cephas," the name given Peter elsewhere in the
Epistle, the Hebrew name; as Peter is the Greek ([Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)). Appropriate to the view of him
here as the apostle especially of the Hebrews. It is remarkable that
Peter himself, in his Epistles, uses the Greek name Peter, perhaps to
mark his antagonism to the Judaizers who would cling to the Hebraic
form. He was prominent among the apostles, though James, as bishop of
Jerusalem, had the chief authority there ([Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)).

abode--or "tarried" \[ELLICOTT\].

fifteen days--only fifteen days; contrasting with the long period of
three years, during which, previously, he had exercised an independent
commission in preaching: a fact proving on the face of it, how little he
owed to Peter in regard to his apostolical authority or instruction. The
Greek for "to see," at the same time implies visiting a person important
to know, such as Peter was. The plots of the Jews prevented him staying
longer ([Act 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)). Also, the vision
directing him to depart to the Gentiles, for that the people of
Jerusalem would not receive his testimony ([Act
22:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)).

[Galatians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 1:19</span></span>

Compare [Act 9:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027), wherein Luke, as
an historian, describes more generally what Paul, the subject of the
history, himself details more particularly. The history speaks of
"apostles"; and Paul's mention of a second apostle, besides Peter,
reconciles the Epistle and the history. At Stephen's martyrdom, and the
consequent persecution, the other ten apostles, agreeably to Christ's
directions, seem to have soon (though not immediately, [Act
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)) left Jerusalem to preach
elsewhere. James remained in charge of the mother church, as its bishop.
Peter, the apostle of the circumcision, was present during Paul's
fifteen days' stay; but he, too, presently after ([Act
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)), went on a circuit through
Judea.

James, the Lord's brother--This designation, to distinguish him from
James the son of Zebedee, was appropriate while that apostle was alive.
But before Paul's second visit to Jerusalem ([Gal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001); [Act
15:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)), he had been beheaded by Herod
([Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)). Accordingly, in the
subsequent mention of James here ([Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009), [Gal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)), he is not designated by this
distinctive epithet: a minute, undesigned coincidence, and proof of
genuineness. James was the Lord's brother, not in our strict sense, but
in the sense, "cousin," or "kinsman" ([Mat
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010); [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)). His brethren are never called
"sons of Joseph," which they would have been had they been the Lord's
brothers strictly. However, compare [Psa
69:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#008), "I am an alien to my mother's
children." In [Joh 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003), [Joh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005), the "brethren" who believed not
in Him may mean His near relations, not including the two of His
brethren, that is, relatives (James and Jude) who were among the Twelve
apostles. [Act 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014), "His brethren,"
refer to Simon and Joses, and others ([Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055)) of His kinsmen, who were not
apostles. It is not likely there would be two pairs of brothers named
alike, of such eminence as James and Jude; the likelihood is that the
apostles James and Jude are also the writers of the Epistles, and the
brethren of Jesus. James and Joses were sons of Alpheus and Mary, sister
of the Virgin Mary.

[Galatians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 1:20</span></span>

Solemn asseveration that his statement is true that his visit was but
for fifteen days and that he saw no apostle save Peter and James.
Probably it had been reported by Judaizers that he had received a long
course of instruction from the apostles in Jerusalem from the first;
hence his earnestness in asserting the contrary facts.

[Galatians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 1:21</span></span>

I came into . . . Syria and Cilicia--"preaching the faith" ([Gal
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)), and so, no doubt, founding the
churches in Syria and Cilicia, which he subsequently confirmed in the
faith ([Act 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023), [Act
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041)). He probably went first to
CÃ&brvbr;sarea, the main seaport, and thence by sea to Tarsus of
Cilicia, his native place ([Act 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)),
and thence to Syria; Cilicia having its geographical affinities with
Syria, rather than with Asia Minor, as the Tarsus mountains separate it
from the latter. His placing "Syria" in the order of words before
"Cilicia," is due to Antioch being a more important city than Tarsus, as
also to his longer stay in the former city. Also "Syria and Cilicia,"
from their close geographical connection, became a generic geographical
phrase, the more important district being placed first \[CONYBEARE and
HOWSON\]. This sea journey accounts for his being "unknown by face to
the churches of Judea" ([Gal 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)). He
passes by in silence his second visit, with alms, to Judea and Jerusalem
([Act 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030)); doubtless because it was
for a limited and special object, and would occupy but a few days ([Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025)), as there raged at Jerusalem at
the time a persecution in which James, the brother of John, was
martyred, and Peter was m prison, and James seems to have been the only
apostle present ([Act 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017)); so it
was needless to mention this visit, seeing that he could not at such a
time have received the instructions which the Galatians alleged he had
derived from the primary fountains of authority, the apostles.

[Galatians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 1:22</span></span>

So far was I from being a disciple of the apostles, that I was even
unknown in the churches of Judea (excepting Jerusalem, [Act
9:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)), which were the chief scene
of their labors.

[Galatians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 1:23</span></span>

Translate as Greek, "They were hearing": tidings were brought them from
time to time \[CONYBEARE and HOWSON\].

he which persecuted us in times past--"our former persecutor"
\[ALFORD\]. The designation by which he was known among Christians still
better than by his name "Saul."

destroyed--Greek, "was destroying."

[Galatians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 1:24</span></span>

in me--"in my case." "Having understood the entire change, and that the
former wolf is now acting the shepherd's part, they received occasion
for joyful thanksgiving to God in respect to me" \[THEODORET\]. How
different, he implies to the Galatians, their spirit from yours!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 2](gal002)

</div>
