<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen027)  [Next](gen029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001)

[Genesis 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 28:1</span></span>

JACOB'S DEPARTURE. (Gen. 28:1-19)

Isaac called Jacob and blessed him--He entered fully into Rebekah's
feelings, and the burden of his parting counsel to his son was to avoid
a marriage alliance with any but the Mesopotamian branch of the family.
At the same time he gave him a solemn blessing--pronounced before
unwittingly, now designedly, and with a cordial spirit. It is more
explicitly and fully given, and Jacob was thus acknowledged "the heir of
the promise."

[Genesis 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 28:6</span></span>

when Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, &c.--Desirous to humor his
parents and, if possible, get the last will revoked, he became wise when
too late (see [Mat 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)), and hoped
by gratifying his parents in one thing to atone for all his former
delinquencies. But he only made bad worse, and though he did not marry a
"wife of the daughters of Canaan," he married into a family which God
had rejected. It showed a partial reformation, but no repentance, for he
gave no proofs of abating his vindictive purposes against his brother,
nor cherishing that pious spirit that would have gratified his
father--he was like Micah (see [Jdg
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#013)).

[Genesis 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 28:10</span></span>

Jacob went out, &c.--His departure from his father's house was an
ignominious flight; and for fear of being pursued or waylaid by his
vindictive brother, he did not take the common road, but went by lonely
and unfrequented paths, which increased the length and dangers of the
journey.

[Genesis 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 28:11</span></span>

he lighted upon a certain place--By a forced march he had reached
Beth-el, about forty-eight miles from Beer-sheba, and had to spend the
night in the open field.

he took of the stones, etc.--"The nature of the soil is an existing
comment on the record of the stony territory where Jacob lay" \[CLARKE'S
Travels\].

[Genesis 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 28:12</span></span>

he dreamed . . . and behold a ladder--Some writers are of opinion that
it was not a literal ladder that is meant, as it is impossible to
conceive any imagery stranger and more unnatural than that of a ladder,
whose base was on earth, while its top reached heaven, without having
any thing on which to rest its upper extremity. They suppose that the
little heap of stones, on which his head reclined for a pillow, being
the miniature model of the object that appeared to his imagination, the
latter was a gigantic mountain pile, whose sides, indented in the rock,
gave it the appearance of a scaling ladder. There can be no doubt that
this use of the original term was common among the early Hebrews; as
JOSEPHUS, describing the town of Ptolemais (Acre), says it was bounded
by a mountain, which, from its projecting sides, was called "the
ladder," and the stairs that led down to the city are, in the original,
termed a ladder ([Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)) though
they were only a flight of steps cut in the side of the rock. But
whether the image presented to the mental eye of Jacob were a common
ladder, or such a mountain pile as has been described, the design of
this vision was to afford comfort, encouragement, and confidence to the
lonely fugitive, both in his present circumstances and as to his future
prospects. His thoughts during the day must have been painful--he would
be his own self-accuser that he had brought exile and privation upon
himself--and above all, that though he had obtained the forgiveness of
his father, he had much reason to fear lest God might have forsaken him.
Solitude affords time for reflection; and it was now that God began to
bring Jacob under a course of religious instruction and training. To
dispel his fears and allay the inward tumult of his mind, nothing was
better fitted than the vision of the gigantic ladder, which reached from
himself to heaven, and on which the angels were continually ascending
and descending from God Himself on their benevolent errands ([Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)).

[Genesis 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 28:13</span></span>

The Lord stood above it, and said--That Jacob might be at no loss to
know the purport of the vision, he heard the divine voice; and the
announcement of His name, together with a renewal of the covenant, and
an assurance of personal protection, produced at once the most
solemnizing and inspiriting effect on his mind.

[Genesis 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 28:16</span></span>

Jacob awaked out of his sleep--His language and his conduct were alike
that of a man whose mind was pervaded by sentiments of solemn awe, of
fervent piety, and lively gratitude ([Jer
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036)).

[Genesis 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 28:18</span></span>

Jacob set up a stone, etc.--The mere setting up of the stone might have
been as a future memorial to mark the spot; and this practice is still
common in the East, in memory of a religious vow or engagement. But the
pouring oil upon it was a consecration. Accordingly he gave it a new
name, Beth-el, "the house of God" ([Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)); and it will not appear a thing
forced or unnatural to call a stone a house, when one considers the
common practice in warm countries of sitting in the open air by or on a
stone, as are those of this place, "broad sheets of bare rock, some of
them standing like the cromlechs of Druidical monuments" \[STANLEY\].

[Genesis 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 28:20</span></span>

JACOB'S VOW. ([Gen 28:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020))

Jacob vowed a vow--His words are not to be considered as implying a
doubt, far less as stating the condition or terms on which he would
dedicate himself to God. Let "if" be changed into "since," and the
language will appear a proper expression of Jacob's faith--an evidence
of his having truly embraced the promise. How edifying often to meditate
on Jacob at Beth-el.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 29](gen029)

</div>
