<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen000)  [Next](gen002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 1:1</span></span>

THE CREATION OF HEAVEN AND EARTH. ([Gen
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001))

In the beginning--a period of remote and unknown antiquity, hid in the
depths of eternal ages; and so the phrase is used in [Pro
8:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022).

God--the name of the Supreme Being, signifying in Hebrew, "Strong,"
"Mighty." It is expressive of omnipotent power; and by its use here in
the plural form, is obscurely taught at the opening of the Bible, a
doctrine clearly revealed in other parts of it, namely, that though God
is one, there is a plurality of persons in the Godhead--Father, Son, and
Spirit, who were engaged in the creative work ([Pro
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027); [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010); [Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013)).

created--not formed from any pre-existing materials, but made out of
nothing.

the heaven and the earth--the universe. This first verse is a general
introduction to the inspired volume, declaring the great and important
truth that all things had a beginning; that nothing throughout the wide
extent of nature existed from eternity, originated by chance, or from
the skill of any inferior agent; but that the whole universe was
produced by the creative power of God ([Act
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024); [Rom
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)). After this preface, the
narrative is confined to the earth.

[Genesis 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 1:2</span></span>

the earth was without form and void--or in "confusion and emptiness," as
the words are rendered in [Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011).
This globe, at some undescribed period, having been convulsed and broken
up, was a dark and watery waste for ages perhaps, till out of this
chaotic state, the present fabric of the world was made to arise.

the Spirit of God moved--literally, continued brooding over it, as a
fowl does, when hatching eggs. The immediate agency of the Spirit, by
working on the dead and discordant elements, combined, arranged, and
ripened them into a state adapted for being the scene of a new creation.
The account of this new creation properly begins at the end of this
second verse; and the details of the process are described in the
natural way an onlooker would have done, who beheld the changes that
successively took place.

[Genesis 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 1:3</span></span>

THE FIRST DAY. ([Gen 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003))

God said--This phrase, which occurs so repeatedly in the account means:
willed, decreed, appointed; and the determining will of God was followed
in every instance by an immediate result. Whether the sun was created at
the same time with, or long before, the earth, the dense accumulation of
fogs and vapors which enveloped the chaos had covered the globe with a
settled gloom. But by the command of God, light was rendered visible;
the thick murky clouds were dispersed, broken, or rarefied, and light
diffused over the expanse of waters. The effect is described in the name
"day," which in Hebrew signifies "warmth," "heat"; while the name
"night" signifies a "rolling up," as night wraps all things in a shady
mantle.

[Genesis 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 1:4</span></span>

divided the light from darkness--refers to the alternation or succession
of the one to the other, produced by the daily revolution of the earth
round its axis.

[Genesis 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 1:5</span></span>

first day--a natural day, as the mention of its two parts clearly
determines; and Moses reckons, according to Oriental usage, from sunset
to sunset, saying not day and night as we do, but evening and morning.

[Genesis 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 1:6</span></span>

SECOND DAY. ([Gen 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006))

firmament--an expanse--a beating out as a plate of metal: a name given
to the atmosphere from its appearing to an observer to be the vault of
heaven, supporting the weight of the watery clouds. By the creation of
an atmosphere, the lighter parts of the waters which overspread the
earth's surface were drawn up and suspended in the visible heavens,
while the larger and heavier mass remained below. The air was thus "in
the midst of the waters," that is, separated them; and this being the
apparent use of it, is the only one mentioned, although the atmosphere
serves other uses, as a medium of life and light.

[Genesis 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 1:9</span></span>

THIRD DAY. ([Gen 1:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009))

let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place--The
world was to be rendered a terraqueous globe, and this was effected by a
volcanic convulsion on its surface, the upheaving of some parts, the
sinking of others, and the formation of vast hollows, into which the
waters impetuously rushed, as is graphically described ([Psa
104:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)) \[HITCHCOCK\]. Thus a large
part of the earth was left "dry land," and thus were formed oceans,
seas, lakes, and rivers which, though each having its own bed, or
channel, are all connected with the sea ([Job
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#010); [Ecc
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007)).

[Genesis 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 1:11</span></span>

let the earth bring forth--The bare soil was clothed with verdure, and
it is noticeable that the trees, plants, and grasses--the three great
divisions of the vegetable kingdom here mentioned--were not called into
existence in the same way as the light and the air; they were made to
grow, and they grew as they do still out of the ground--not, however, by
the slow process of vegetation, but through the divine power, without
rain, dew, or any process of labor--sprouting up and flourishing in a
single day.

[Genesis 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 1:14</span></span>

FOURTH DAY. ([Gen 1:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014))

let there be lights in the firmament--The atmosphere being completely
purified, the sun, moon, and stars were for the first time unveiled in
all their glory in the cloudless sky; and they are described as "in the
firmament" which to the eye they appear to be, though we know they are
really at vast distances from it.

[Genesis 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 1:16</span></span>

two great lights--In consequence of the day being reckoned as commencing
at sunset--the moon, which would be seen first in the horizon, would
appear "a great light," compared with the little twinkling stars; while
its pale benign radiance would be eclipsed by the dazzling splendor of
the sun; when his resplendent orb rose in the morning and gradually
attained its meridian blaze of glory, it would appear "the greater
light" that ruled the day. Both these lights may be said to be "made" on
the fourth day--not created, indeed, for it is a different word that is
here used, but constituted, appointed to the important and necessary
office of serving as luminaries to the world, and regulating by their
motions and their influence the progress and divisions of time.

[Genesis 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 1:20</span></span>

FIFTH DAY. The signs of animal life appeared in the waters and in the
air. ([Gen 1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020))

moving creature--all oviparous animals, both among the finny and the
feathery tribes--remarkable for their rapid and prodigious increase.

fowl--means every flying thing: The word rendered "whales," includes
also sharks, crocodiles, &c.; so that from the countless shoals of small
fish to the great sea monsters, from the tiny insect to the king of
birds, the waters and the air were suddenly made to swarm with creatures
formed to live and sport in their respective elements.

[Genesis 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 1:24</span></span>

SIXTH DAY. A farther advance was made by the creation of terrestrial
animals, all the various species of which are included in three classes:
(1) cattle, the herbivorous kind capable of labor or domestication.
([Gen 1:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024))

beasts of the earth--(2) wild animals, whose ravenous natures were then
kept in check, and (3) all the various forms of

creeping things--from the huge reptiles to the insignificant
caterpillars.

[Genesis 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 1:26</span></span>

The last stage in the progress of creation being now reached--God said,
Let us make man--words which show the peculiar importance of the work to
be done, the formation of a creature, who was to be God's
representative, clothed with authority and rule as visible head and
monarch of the world.

In our image, after our likeness--This was a peculiar distinction, the
value attached to which appears in the words being twice mentioned. And
in what did this image of God consist? Not in the erect form or features
of man, not in his intellect, for the devil and his angels are, in this
respect, far superior; not in his immortality, for he has not, like God,
a past as well as a future eternity of being; but in the moral
dispositions of his soul, commonly called original righteousness ([Ecc
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029)). As the new creation is only a
restoration of this image, the history of the one throws light on the
other; and we are informed that it is renewed after the image of God in
knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness ([Col
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010); [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)).

[Genesis 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 1:28</span></span>

Be fruitful, &c.--The human race in every country and age has been the
offspring of the first pair. Amid all the varieties found among men,
some black, some copper-colored, others white, the researches of modern
science lead to a conclusion, fully accordant with the sacred history,
that they are all of one species and of one family ([Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026)). What power in the word of God!
"He spake and it was done. He commanded and all things stood fast"
\[[Psa 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)\]. "Great and manifold are
thy works, Lord God Almighty! in wisdom hast thou made them all" \[[Psa
104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)\]. We admire that wisdom, not
only in the regular progress of creation, but in its perfect adaptation
to the end. God is represented as pausing at every stage to look at His
work. No wonder He contemplated it with complacency. Every object was in
its right place, every vegetable process going on in season, every
animal in its structure and instincts suited to its mode of life and its
use in the economy of the world. He saw everything that He had made
answering the plan which His eternal wisdom had conceived; and, "Behold
it was very good" \[[Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 2](gen002)

</div>
