<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen001)  [Next](gen003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

[Genesis 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 2:1</span></span>

THE NARRATIVE OF THE SIX DAYS' CREATION CONTINUED. The course of the
narrative is improperly broken by the division of the chapter. ([Gen
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001))

the heavens--the firmament or atmosphere.

host--a multitude, a numerous array, usually connected in Scripture with
heaven only, but here with the earth also, meaning all that they
contain.

were finished--brought to completion. No permanent change has ever since
been made in the course of the world, no new species of animals been
formed, no law of nature repealed or added to. They could have been
finished in a moment as well as in six days, but the work of creation
was gradual for the instruction of man, as well, perhaps, as of higher
creatures ([Job 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)).

[Genesis 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 2:2</span></span>

THE FIRST SABBATH. ([Gen 2:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002))

and he rested on the seventh day--not to repose from exhaustion with
labor (see [Isa 40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028)), but ceased
from working, an example equivalent to a command that we also should
cease from labor of every kind.

[Genesis 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 2:3</span></span>

blessed and sanctified the seventh day--a peculiar distinction put upon
it above the other six days, and showing it was devoted to sacred
purposes. The institution of the Sabbath is as old as creation, giving
rise to that weekly division of time which prevailed in the earliest
ages. It is a wise and beneficent law, affording that regular interval
of rest which the physical nature of man and the animals employed in his
service requires, and the neglect of which brings both to premature
decay. Moreover, it secures an appointed season for religious worship,
and if it was necessary in a state of primeval innocence, how much more
so now, when mankind has a strong tendency to forget God and His claims?

[Genesis 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 2:4</span></span>

These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth--the history
or account of their production. Whence did Moses obtain this account so
different from the puerile and absurd fictions of the heathen? Not from
any human source, for man was not in existence to witness it; not from
the light of nature or reason, for though they proclaim the eternal
power and Godhead by the things which are made, they cannot tell how
they were made. None but the Creator Himself could give this
information, and therefore it is through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God ([Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)).

[Genesis 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 2:5</span></span>

rain, mist--(See on [Gen 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)).

[Genesis 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 2:7</span></span>

Here the sacred writer supplies a few more particulars about the first
pair.

formed--had FORMED MAN OUT OF THE DUST OF THE GROUND. Science has proved
that the substance of his flesh, sinews, and bones, consists of the very
same elements as the soil which forms the crust of the earth and the
limestone that lies embedded in its bowels. But from that mean material
what an admirable structure has been reared in the human body ([Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014)).

the breath of life--literally, of lives, not only animal but spiritual
life. If the body is so admirable, how much more the soul with all its
varied faculties.

breathed into his nostrils the breath of life--not that the Creator
literally performed this act, but respiration being the medium and sign
of life, this phrase is used to show that man's life originated in a
different way from his body--being implanted directly by God ([Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)), and hence in the new creation
of the soul Christ breathed on His disciples ([Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)).

[Genesis 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 2:8</span></span>

THE GARDEN OF EDEN. ()

Eden--was probably a very extensive region in Mesopotamia, distinguished
for its natural beauty and the richness and variety of its produce.
Hence its name, signifying "pleasantness." God planted a garden
eastward, an extensive park, a paradise, in which the man was put to be
trained under the paternal care of his Maker to piety and usefulness.

[Genesis 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 2:9</span></span>

tree of life--so called from its symbolic character as a sign and seal
of immortal life. Its prominent position where it must have been an
object of daily observation and interest, was admirably fitted to keep
man habitually in mind of God and futurity.

tree of the knowledge of good and evil--so called because it was a test
of obedience by which our first parents were to be tried, whether they
would be good or bad, obey God or break His commands.

[Genesis 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 2:15</span></span>

put the man into the garden of Eden to dress it--not only to give him a
pleasant employment, but to place him on his probation, and as the title
of this garden, the garden of the Lord ([Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010); [Eze
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013)), indicates, it was in fact a
temple in which he worshipped God, and was daily employed in offering
the sacrifices of thanksgiving and praise.

[Genesis 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 2:17</span></span>

thou shalt not eat of it . . . thou shalt surely die--no reason assigned
for the prohibition, but death was to be the punishment of disobedience.
A positive command like this was not only the simplest and easiest, but
the only trial to which their fidelity could be exposed.

[Genesis 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 2:18</span></span>

THE MAKING OF WOMAN, AND INSTITUTION OF MARRIAGE. ([Gen
2:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018))

it is not good for the man to be alone--In the midst of plenty and
delights, he was conscious of feelings he could not gratify. To make him
sensible of his wants,

[Genesis 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 2:19</span></span>

God brought unto Adam--not all the animals in existence, but those
chiefly in his immediate neighborhood to be subservient to his use.

whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof--His powers of perception and intelligence were supernaturally
enlarged to know the characters, habits, and uses of each species that
was brought to him.

[Genesis 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 2:20</span></span>

but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him--The design of
this singular scene was to show him that none of the living creatures he
saw were on an equal footing with himself, and that while each class
came with its mate of the same nature, form, and habits, he alone had no
companion. Besides, in giving names to them he was led to exercise his
powers of speech and to prepare for social intercourse with his partner,
a creature yet to be formed.

[Genesis 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 2:21</span></span>

deep sleep--probably an ecstasy or trance like that of the prophets,
when they had visions and revelations of the Lord, for the whole scene
was probably visible to the mental eye of Adam, and hence his rapturous
exclamation.

took one of his ribs--"She was not made out of his head to surpass him,
nor from his feet to be trampled on, but from his side to be equal to
him, and near his heart to be dear to him."

[Genesis 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 2:23</span></span>

Woman--in Hebrew, "man-ess."

[Genesis 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 2:24</span></span>

one flesh--The human pair differed from all other pairs, that by
peculiar formation of Eve, they were one. And this passage is appealed
to by our Lord as the divine institution of marriage ([Mat
19:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004); [Eph
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028)). Thus Adam appears as a creature
formed after the image of God--showing his knowledge by giving names to
the animals, his righteousness by his approval of the marriage relation,
and his holiness by his principles and feelings, and finding
gratification in the service and enjoyment of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 3](gen003)

</div>
