<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 0:0</span></span>

GENESIS, the book of the origin or production of all things, consists of
two parts: the first, comprehended in the first through eleventh
chapters, gives a general history; the second, contained in the
subsequent chapters, gives a special history. The two parts are
essentially connected; the one, which sets out with an account of the
descent of the human race from a single pair, the introduction of sin
into the world, and the announcement of the scheme of divine mercy for
repairing the ruins of the fall, was necessary to pave the way for
relating the other, namely, the call of Abraham, and the selection of
his posterity for carrying out the gracious purpose of God. An evident
unity of method, therefore, pervades this book, and the information
contained in it was of the greatest importance to the Hebrew people, as
without it they could not have understood the frequent references made
in their law to the purposes and promises of God regarding themselves.
The arguments that have been already adduced as establishing the Mosaic
origin of the Pentateuch prove of course that Moses was the author of
Genesis. The few passages on which the rationalists grounded their
assertions that it was the composition of a later age have been
successfully shown to warrant no such conclusion; the use of Egyptian
words and the minute acquaintance with Egyptian life and manners,
displayed in the history of Joseph, harmonize with the education of
Moses, and whether he received his information by immediate revelation,
from tradition, or from written documents, it comes to us as the
authentic work of an author who wrote as he was inspired by the Holy
Ghost ([Pe2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 1](gen001)

</div>
