<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb006)  [Next](heb008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

[Hebrews 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 7:1</span></span>

CHRIST'S HIGH PRIESTHOOD AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC SUPERIOR TO
AARON'S. (Heb. 7:1-28)

this Melchisedec-- ([Heb 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020); [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)). The verb does not come till
[Heb 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003), "abideth."

king . . . priest--Christ unites these offices in their highest sense,
and so restores the patriarchal union of these offices.

Salem--Jerusalem, that is, seeing peace; others make Salem distinct, and
to be that mentioned ([Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018); [Joh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)).

the most high God--called also "Possessor of heaven and earth" ([Gen
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019), [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)). This title of God, "the Most
High," handed down by tradition from the primitive revelation, appears
in the PhÅ“nician god "Elion," that is, Most High. It is used to imply
that the God whom Melchisedec served is THE TRUE GOD, and not one of the
gods of the nations around. So it is used in the only other cases in
which it is found in the New Testament, namely in the address of the
demoniac, and the divining damsel constrained to confess that her own
gods were false, and God the only true God.

who met Abraham--in company with the king of Sodom ([Gen
14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)).

slaughter--perhaps defeat, as ALFORD translates. So [Gen
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017) (compare [Gen
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015)) may be translated. Arioch, king
of Ellasar, lived and reigned after the disaster \[BENGEL\]. However, if
Chedorlaomer and Amraphel and Tidal were slain, though Arioch survived,
"slaughter of the kings" would be correct.

blessed him--As priest he first blessed Abraham on God's part; next he
blessed God on Abraham's part: a reciprocal blessing. Not a mere wish,
but an authoritative and efficacious intercession as a priest. The Most
High God's prerogative as "Possessor of heaven and earth," is made over
to Abraham; and Abraham's glory, from his victory over the foe, is made
over to God. A blessed exchange for Abraham ([Gen
14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019)).

[Hebrews 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 7:2</span></span>

gave--Greek, "apportioned"; assigned as his portion.

tenth . . . of all--namely, the booty taken. The tithes given are
closely associated with the priesthood: the mediating priest received
them as a pledge of the giver's whole property being God's; and as he
conveyed God's gifts to man ([Heb 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001),
"blessed him"), so also man's gifts to God. Melchisedec is a sample of
how God preserves, amidst general apostasy, an elect remnant. The
meeting of Melchisedec and Abraham is the connecting link between to two
dispensations, the patriarchal, represented by Melchisedec, who seems to
have been specially consecrated by God as a KING-PRIEST, the highest
form of that primitive system in which each father of a household was
priest in it, and the Levitical, represented by Abraham, in which the
priesthood was to be limited to one family of one tribe and one nation.
The Levitical was parenthetical, and severed the kingdom and priesthood;
the patriarchal was the true forerunner of Christ's, which, like
Melchisedec's, unites the kingship and priesthood, and is not derived
from other man, or transmitted to other man; but derived from God, and
is transmitted in God to a never-ending perpetuity. Melchisedec's
priesthood continueth in Christ for ever. For other points of
superiority, see [Heb 7:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016).
Melchisedec must have had some special consecration above the other
patriarchs, as Abraham, who also exercised the priesthood; else Abraham
would not have paid tithe to him as to a superior. His peculiar function
seems to have been, by God's special call, KING-priest whereas no other
"patriarch-priest" was also a God-consecrated king.

first being--Paul begins the mystical explanation of the historical fact
(allegorical explanations being familiar to JEWS), by mentioning the
significancy of the name.

righteousness--not merely righteous: so Christ. Hebrew "Malchi" means
king: "Tzedek," righteousness.

King of Salem--not only his own name, but that of the city which he
ruled, had a typical significance, namely, peace. Christ is the true
Prince of peace. The peace which He brings is the fruit of
righteousness.

[Hebrews 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 7:3</span></span>

Without father, &c.--explained by "without genealogy" (so the Greek is
for "without descent); compare [Heb
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006), that is, his genealogy is not
known, whereas a Levitical priest could not dispense with the proof of
his descent.

having neither beginning of days nor end of life--namely, history not
having recorded his beginning nor end, as it has the beginning and end
of Aaron. The Greek idiom expressed by "without father," &c., one whose
parentage was humble or unknown. "Days" mean his time of discharging his
function. So the eternity spoken of in [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004) is that of the priestly office
chiefly.

made like--It is not said that he was asbsolutely "like." Made like,
namely, in the particulars here specified. Nothing is said in Genesis of
the end of his priesthood, or of his having had in his priesthood either
predecessor or successor, which, in a typical point of view, represents
Christ's eternal priesthood, without beginning or end. Aaron's end is
recorded; Melchisedec's not: typically significant. "The Son of God" is
not said to be made like unto Melchisedec, but Melchisedec to be "made
like the Son of God." When ALFORD denies that Melchisedec was made like
the Son of God in respect of his priesthood, on the ground that
Melchisedec was prior in time to our Lord, he forgets that Christ's
eternal priesthood was an archetypal reality in God's purpose from
everlasting, to which Melchisedec's priesthood was "made like" in due
time. The Son of God is the more ancient, and is the archetype: compare
[Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005), where the heavenly things
are represented as the primary archetype of the Levitical ordinances.
The epithets, "without father," &c. "beginning of days, "nor end,"
"abideth continually," belong to Melchisedec only in respect to his
priesthood, and in so far as he is the type of the Son of God, and are
strictly true of Him alone. Melchisedec was, in his priesthood, "made
like" Christ, as far as the imperfect type could represent the
lineaments of the perfect archetype. "The portrait of a living man can
be seen on the canvas, yet the man is very different from his picture."
There is nothing in the account, [Gen
14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018), to mark Melchisedec as a
superhuman being: he is classed with the other kings in the chapter as a
living historic personage: not as ORIGEN thought, an angel; nor as the
Jews thought, Shem, son of Noah; nor as CALMET, Enoch; nor as the
Melchisedekites, that he was the Holy Ghost; nor as others, the Divine
Word. He was probably of Shemitic, not Canaanite origin: the last
independent representative of the original Shemitic population, which
had been vanquished by the Canaanites, Ham's descendants. The greatness
of Abraham then lay in hopes; of Melchisedec, in present possession.
Melchisedec was the highest and last representative of the Noahic
covenant, as Christ was the highest and ever enduring representative of
the Abrahamic. Melchisedec, like Christ, unites in himself the kingly
and priestly offices, which Abraham does not. ALFORD thinks the epithets
are, in some sense, strictly true of Melchisedec himself; not merely in
the typical sense given above; but that he had not, as mortal men have,
a beginning or end of life (?). A very improbable theory, and only to be
resorted to in the last extremity, which has no place here. With
Melchisedec, whose priesthood probably lasted a long period, the
priesthood and worship of the true God in Canaan ceased. He was first
and last king-priest there, till Christ, the antitype; and therefore his
priesthood is said to last for ever, because it both lasts a long time,
and lasts as long as the nature of the thing itself (namely, his life,
and the continuance of God's worship in Canaan) admits. If Melchisedec
were high priest for ever in a literal sense, then Christ and he would
now still be high priests, and we should have two instead of one (!).
THOLUCK remarks, "Melchisedec remains in so far as the type remains in
the antitype, in so far as his priesthood remains in Christ." The father
and mother of Melchisedec, as also his children, are not descended from
Levi, as the Levitical priests ([Heb
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006)) were required to be, and are not
even mentioned by Moses. The wife of Aaron, Elisheba, the mother from
whom the Levitical priests spring, is mentioned: as also Sarah, the
original mother of the Jewish nation itself. As man, Christ had no
father; as God, no mother.

[Hebrews 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 7:4</span></span>

consider--not merely see, but weigh with attentive contemplation, the
fact.

even--"to whom (as his superior) Abraham even paid tithe (went so far as
to pay tithe) of (consisting of, literally, 'from') the best of the
spoils (literally, 'the top of the heap"; whether of corn, the
first-fruits of which, taken from the top, used to be consecrated to
God; or of spoils, from the top of which the general used to take some
portion for consecration to God, or for his own use)." He paid "tithes
of ALL," and those tithes were taken out of the topmost and best portion
of the whole spoils.

the patriarch--in the Greek emphatically standing at the end of the
whole sentence: And this payer of tithe being no less a personage than
"the patriarch," the first forefather and head of our Jewish race and
nation See on [Heb 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003), on
Melchisedec's superiority as specially consecrated king-priest, above
the other patriarch-priests.

[Hebrews 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 7:5</span></span>

sons of Levi--namely, those alone who belonged to the family of Aaron,
to whom the priesthood was restricted. Tithes originally paid to the
whole tribe of Levi, became at length attached to the priesthood.

according to the law--sanctioned by Jehovah ([Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)).

of their brethren--with whom, in point of natural descent, they are on a
level.

though, &c.--Though thus on a level by common descent from Abraham, they
yet pay tithe to the Levites, whose brethren they are. Now the Levites
are subordinate to the priests; and these again to Abraham, their common
progenitor; and Abraham to Melchisedec. "How great" ([Heb
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)) then, must this Melchisedec be in
respect to his priesthood, as compared with the Levitical, though the
latter received tithes! and now unspeakably great must "the Son of God"
be, to whom, as the sacerdotal archetype (in God's purpose), Melchisedec
was made like! Thus compare the "consider," [Heb
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004), in the case of Melchisedec, the
type, with the "consider" (Greek, "contemplate attentively," see on [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001), a stronger word than here) in the
case of Christ, the archetype.

[Hebrews 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 7:6</span></span>

he whose descent is not counted from them--not from "the sons of Levi,"
as those "who receive the priesthood." This verse explains "without
descent" (Greek, "genealogy" in both verses, [Heb
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)). He who needs not, as the
Levitical priests, to be able to trace his genealogy back to Levi.

received--Greek, "hath received tithes."

blessed--Greek, "hath blessed." The perfect tense implies that the
significance of the fact endures to the present time.

him that had--"the possessor of the promises," Abraham's peculiar
distinction and designation. Paul exalts Abraham in order still more to
exalt Melchisedec. When Christ is the subject, the singular "promise" is
used. "The promises" in the plural, refer to God's promise of greatness
to himself and his seed, and of the possession of Canaan, twice repeated
before the blessing of Melchisedec. As the priests, though above the
people ([Heb 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)) whom it was their
duty to "bless," were yet subordinate to Abraham; and as Abraham was
subordinate to Melchisedec, who blessed him, Melchisedec must be much
above the Levitical priests.

[Hebrews 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 7:7</span></span>

The principle that the blesser is superior to him whom he blesses, holds
good only in a blessing given with divine authority; not merely a
prayerful wish, but one that is divinely efficient in working its
purport, as that of the patriarchs on their children: so Christ's
blessing, [Luk 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051); [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026).

[Hebrews 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 7:8</span></span>

Second point of superiority: Melchisedec's is an enduring, the Levitical
a transitory, priesthood. As the law was a parenthesis between Abraham's
dispensation of promise of grace, and its enduring fulfilment at
Christ's coming ([Rom 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020), Greek,
"The law entered as something adscititious and by the way"): so the
Levitical priesthood was parenthetical and temporary, between
Melchisedec's typically enduring priesthood, and its antitypical
realization in our ever continuing High Priest, Christ.

here--in the Levitical priesthood.

there--in the priesthood after the order of Melchisedec. In order to
bring out the typical parallel more strongly, Paul substitutes, "He of
whom it is witnessed that he liveth," for the more untypical, "He who is
made like to Him that liveth." Melchisedec "liveth" merely in his
official capacity, his priesthood being continued in Christ. Christ, on
the other hand, is, in His own person, "ever living after the power of
an endless life" ([Heb 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016), [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)). Melchisedec's death not being
recorded, is expressed by the positive term "liveth," for the sake of
bringing into prominence the antitype, Christ, of whom alone it is
strictly and perfectly true, "that He liveth."

[Hebrews 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 7:9</span></span>

as I may so say--to preclude what he is about to say being taken in the
mere literal sense; I may say that, virtually, Levi, in the person of
his father Abraham, acknowledged Melchisedec's superiority, and paid
tithes to him.

who receiveth tithes--(Compare [Heb
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#005)).

in Abraham--Greek, "by means of (by the hand of) Abraham"; through
Abraham. "Paid tithes," literally, "hath been tithed," that is, been
taken tithes of.

[Hebrews 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 7:10</span></span>

in the loins of his father--that is, forefather Abraham. Christ did not,
in this sense, pay tithes in Abraham, for He never was in the loins of
an earthly father \[ALFORD\]. Though, in respect to His mother, He was
"of the fruit of (David's, and so of) Abraham's loins," yet, being
supernaturally, without human father, conceived, as He is above the
natural law of birth, so is he above the law of tithes. Only those born
in the natural way, and so in sin, being under the curse, needed to pay
tithe to the priest, that he might make propitiation for their sin. Not
so Christ, who derived only His flesh, not also the taint of the flesh,
from Abraham. BENGEL remarks, The blessings which Abraham had before
meeting Melchisedec were the general promises, and the special one of a
natural seed, and so of Levi; but the promises under which Christ was
comprehended, and the faith for which Abraham was so commended, followed
after Abraham's meeting Melchisedec, and being blessed by him: to which
fact. [Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001), "After these things,"
calls our attention. This explains why Christ, the supernatural seed, is
not included as paying tithes through Abraham to Melchisedec.

[Hebrews 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 7:11</span></span>

perfection--absolute: "the bringing of man to his highest state, namely,
that of salvation and sanctification."

under it--The reading in the oldest manuscripts is, "Upon it (that is,
on the ground of it as the basis, the priest having to administer the
law, [Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007) : it being presupposed)
the people ([Heb 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019), 'all the
people') have received the law (the Greek is perfect, not aorist tense;
implying the people were still observing the law)."

what further need-- ([Heb 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007)). For
God does nothing needless.

another--rather as Greek, "that a different priest (one of a different
order) should arise (anew, [Heb 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#015)).

not be called--Greek, "not be said (to be) after the order of Aaron,"
that is, that, when spoken of in the [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), "He is not said to be (as we
should expect, if the Aaronic priesthood was perfect) after the order of
Aaron."

[Hebrews 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 7:12</span></span>

For--the reason why Paul presses the words "after the order of
Melchisedec" in [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), namely,
because these presuppose a change or transference of the priesthood, and
this carries with it a change also of the law (which is inseparably
bound up with the priesthood, both stand and fall together, [Heb
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)). This is his answer to those who
might object, What need was there of a new covenant?

[Hebrews 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 7:13</span></span>

Confirming the truth that a change is made of the law ([Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)), by another fact showing the
distinctness of the new priesthood from the Aaronic.

these things-- ([Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)).

pertaineth--Greek, "hath partaken of" (the perfect tense implies the
continuance still of His manhood).

another--"a different tribe" from that of Levi.

[Hebrews 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 7:14</span></span>

evident--literally, "manifest before the eyes" as a thing indisputable;
a proof that whatever difficulties may now appear, then Jesus Christ's
genealogy labored under none.

our Lord--the only place where this now common title occurs without
"Jesus," or "Christ," except [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015).

sprang--as a plant, and a branch.

Judah-- [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); [Luk
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027), [Luk
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039) (Hebron of Judah, where LIGHTFOOT
thinks Jesus was conceived) [Luk
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004); [Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005).

of which tribe . . . priesthood--"in respect to which tribe Moses spake
nothing concerning priests" (so the oldest manuscripts read, nothing to
imply that priests were to be taken from it).

[Hebrews 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 7:15</span></span>

Another proof that the law, or economy, is changed, namely, forasmuch as
Christ is appointed Priest, "not according to the law of a carnal (that
is, a mere outward) commandment," but "according to the power of an
indissoluble (so the Greek) life." The hundred tenth Psalm appoints Him
"for ever" ([Heb 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017)). The Levitical
law required a definite carnal descent. In contrast stands "the power";
Christ's spiritual, inward, living power of overcoming death. Not
agreeably to a statute is Christ appointed, but according to an inward
living power.

it--the change of the law or economy, the statement ([Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012), [Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018)).

far more--Greek, "more abundantly."

for that--"seeing that," literally, "if"; so [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010).

after the similitude of Melchisedec--answering to "after the order of
Melchisedec" ([Heb 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)). The "order"
cannot mean a series of priests, for Melchisedec neither received his
priesthood from, nor transmitted it to, any other mere man; it must mean
"answering to the office of Melchisedec." Christ's priesthood is similar
to Melchisedec's in that it is "for ever" ([Heb
7:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)).

another--rather as Greek, "a different."

[Hebrews 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 7:16</span></span>

carnal . . . endless--mutually contrasted. As "form" and "power" are
opposed, [Ti2 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005); so here "the law"
and "power," compare [Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003), "The
law was weak through the flesh"; and [Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018), "weakness." "The law" is here
not the law in general, but the statute as to the priesthood. "Carnal,"
as being only outward and temporary, is contrasted with "endless," or,
as Greek, "indissoluble." Commandments is contrasted with "life." The
law can give a commandment, but it cannot give life ([Heb
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019)). But our High Priest's inherent
"power," now in heaven, has in Him "life for ever"; [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014), "through the eternal Spirit";
[Heb 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025), "able . . . ever liveth"
([Joh 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)). It is in the power of His
resurrection life, not of His earthly life, that Christ officiates as a
Priest.

[Hebrews 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 7:17</span></span>

For--proving His life to be "endless" or indissoluble ([Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)). The emphasis is on "for ever."
The oldest manuscripts read, "He is testified of, that Thou art," &c.

[Hebrews 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 7:18</span></span>

there is--Greek, "there takes place," according to [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004).

disannuling--a repealing.

of the commandment--ordaining the Levitical priesthood. And, as the
Levitical priesthood and the law are inseparably joined, since the
former is repealed, the latter is so also (see on [Heb
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)).

going before--the legal ordinance introducing and giving place to the
Christian, the antitypical and permanent end of the former.

weakness and unprofitableness--The opposite of "power" ([Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)).

[Hebrews 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 7:19</span></span>

For, &c.--justifying his calling the law weak and unprofitable ([Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018)). The law could not bring men to:
true justification or sanctification before God, which is the
"perfection" that we all need in order to be accepted of Him, and which
we have in Christ.

nothing--not merely "no one," but "nothing." The law brought nothing to
its perfected end; everything in it was introductory to its antitype in
the Christian economy, which realizes the perfection contemplated;
compare "unprofitableness," [Heb 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018).

did--rather connect with [Heb 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018),
thus, "There takes place (by virtue of [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)) a repealing of the commandment
(on the one hand), but (on the other) a bringing in afterwards (the
Greek expresses that there is a bringing in of something over and above
the law; a superinducing, or accession of something new, namely,
something better than the good things which the pre-existing law
promised \[WAHL\]) of a better hope," not one weak and unprofitable,
but, as elsewhere the Christian dispensation is called, "everlasting,"
"true," "the second," "more excellent," "different," "living," "new,"
"to come," "perfect." Compare [Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006), bringing us near to God, now in
spirit, hereafter both in spirit and in body.

we draw nigh unto God--the sure token of "perfection." Weakness is the
opposite of this filial confidence of access. The access through the
legal sacrifices was only symbolical and through the medium of a priest;
that through Christ is immediate, perfect, and spiritual.

[Hebrews 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 7:20</span></span>

Another proof of the superiority of Christ's Melchisedec-like
priesthood; the oath of God gave a solemn weight to it which was not in
the law-priesthood, which was not so confirmed.

he was made priest--rather supply from [Heb
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022), which completes the sentence
begun in this verse, [Heb 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021) being a
parenthesis, "inasmuch as not without an oath He was made surety of the
testament (for, &c.), of so much better a testament hath Jesus been made
the surety."

[Hebrews 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 7:21</span></span>

Translate in the Greek order, "For they indeed (the existing legal
priests) without the (solemn) promise on oath (so the Greek
\[TITTMANN\]) are made priests."

by him--God.

unto him--the Lord, the Son of God ([Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)).

not repent--never change His purpose.

after the order of Melchisedec--omitted in some oldest manuscripts,
contained in others.

[Hebrews 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 7:22</span></span>

surety--ensuring in His own person the certainty of the covenant to us.
This He did by becoming responsible for our guilt, by sealing the
covenant with His blood, and by being openly acknowledged as our
triumphant Saviour by the Father, who raised Him from the dead. Thus He
is at once God's surety for man, and man's surety for God, and so
Mediator between God and man ([Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006)).

better-- [Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006); [Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020), "everlasting."

testament--sometimes translated, "covenant." The Greek term implies that
it is appointed by God, and comprises the relations and bearings partly
of a covenant, partly of a testament: (1) the appointment made without
the concurrence of a second party, of somewhat concerning that second
party; a last will or testament, so in [Heb
9:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016); (2) a mutual agreement in
which both parties consent.

[Hebrews 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 7:23</span></span>

Another proof of superiority; the Levitical priests were many, as death
caused the need of continually new ones being appointed in succession.
Christ dies not, and so hath a priesthood which passes not from one to
another.

were--Greek, "are made."

many--one after another; opposed to His "unchangeable (that does not
pass from one to another) priesthood" ([Heb
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024)).

not suffered to continue--Greek, "hindered from permanently continuing,"
namely, in the priesthood.

[Hebrews 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 7:24</span></span>

he--emphatic; Greek, "Himself." So in [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), "THOU art a priest"; singular,
not priests, "many."

continueth--Greek, simple verb, not the compound as in [Heb
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023). "Remaineth," namely, in life.

unchangeable--Greek, "hath His priesthood unchangeable"; not passing
from one to another, intransmissible. Therefore no earthly so-called
apostolic succession of priests are His vicegerents. The Jewish priests
had successors in office, because "they could not continue by reason of
death." But this Man, because He liveth ever, hath no successor in
office, not even Peter ([Pe1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)).

[Hebrews 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 7:25</span></span>

Wherefore--Greek, "Whence"; inasmuch as "He remaineth for ever."

also--as a natural consequence flowing from the last, at the same time a
new and higher thing \[ALFORD\].

save--His very name JESUS ([Heb 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022))
meaning Saviour.

to the uttermost--altogether, perfectly, so that nothing should be
wanting afterwards for ever \[TITTMANN\]. It means "in any wise,"
"utterly," in [Luk 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011).

come unto God--by faith.

by him--through Him as their mediating Priest, instead of through the
Levitical priests.

seeing he ever liveth--resuming "He continueth ever," [Heb
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024); therefore "He is able to the
uttermost"; He is not, like the Levitical priest, prevented by death,
for "He ever liveth" ([Heb 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023)).

to make intercession--There was but the one offering on earth once for
all. But the intercession for us in the heavens ([Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)) is ever continuing, whence the
result follows, that we can never be separated from the love of God in
Christ. He intercedes only for those who come unto God through Him, not
for the unbelieving world ([Joh 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009)).
As samples of His intercession, compare the prophetical descriptions in
the Old Testament. "By an humble omnipotency (for it was by His
humiliation that He obtained all power), or omnipotent humility,
appearing in the presence, and presenting His postulations at the throne
of God" \[BISHOP PEARSON\]. He was not only the offering, but the priest
who offered it. Therefore, He has become not only a sacrifice, but an
intercessor; His intercession being founded on His voluntary offering of
Himself without spot to God. We are not only then in virtue of His
sacrifice forgiven, but in virtue of the intercession admitted to favor
and grace \[ARCHBISHOP MAGEE\].

[Hebrews 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 7:26</span></span>

such--as is above described. The oldest manuscripts read, "also." "For
to US (as sinners; emphatical) there was also becoming (besides the
other excellencies of our High Priest) such an High Priest."

holy--"pious" (a distinct Greek word from that for holy, which latter
implies consecration) towards God; perfectly answering God's will in
reverent piety ([Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)).

harmless--literally, "free from evil" and guile, in relation to Himself.

undefiled--not defiled by stain contracted from others, in relation to
men. Temptation, to which He was exposed, left no trace of evil in Him.

separate--rather, "separated from sinners," namely, in His heavenly
state as our High Priest above, after He had been parted from the earth,
as the Levitical high priest was separated from the people in the
sanctuary (whence he was not to go out), [Lev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012). Though justifying through faith
the ungodly, He hath no contact with them as such. He is lifted above
our sinful community, being "made higher than the heavens," at the same
time that He makes believers as such (not as sinners), "to sit together
(with Him) in heavenly places" ([Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)). Just as Moses on the mount was
separated from and above the people, and alone with God. This proves
Jesus is GOD. "Though innumerable lies have been forged against the
venerable Jesus, none dared to charge Him with any intemperance"
\[ORIGEN\].

made--Jesus was higher before ([Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)), and as the God-MAN was made so
by the Father after His humiliation (compare [Heb
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)).

higher than the heavens--for "He passed through \[so the Greek\] the
heavens" ([Heb 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)).

[Hebrews 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 7:27</span></span>

daily--"day by day." The priests daily offered sacrifices ([Heb
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006); [Heb
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011); [Exo
29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)). The high priests took part
in these daily-offered sacrifices only on festival days; but as they
represented the whole priesthood, the daily offerings are here
attributed to them; their exclusive function was to offer the atonement
"once every year" ([Heb 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)), and
"year by year continually" ([Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)). The "daily" strictly belongs to
Christ, not to the high priests, "who needeth not daily, as those high
priests (year by year, and their subordinate priests daily), to offer,"
&c.

offer up--The Greek term is peculiarly used of sacrifices for sin. The
high priest's double offering on the day of atonement, the bullock for
himself, and the goat for the people's sins, had its counterpart in the
TWO lambs offered daily by the ordinary priests.

this he did--not "died first for His own sins and then the people's,"
but for the people's only. The negation is twofold: He needeth not to
offer (1) daily; nor (2) to offer for His own sins also; for He offered
Himself a spotless sacrifice ([Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026); [Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)). The sinless alone could offer
for the sinful.

once--rather as Greek, "once for all." The sufficiency of the one
sacrifice to atone for all sins for ever, resulted from its absolute
spotlessness.

[Hebrews 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 7:28</span></span>

For--reason for the difference stated in [Heb
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027), between His one sacrifice and
their oft repeated sacrifices, namely, because of His entire freedom
from the sinful infirmity to which they are subject. He needed not, as
they, to offer FOR HIS OWN SIN; and being now exempt from death and
"perfected for evermore," He needs not to REPEAT His sacrifice.

the word--"the word" confirmed by "the oath."

which--which oath was after the law, namely, in [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), abrogating the preceding
law-priesthood.

the Son--contrasted with "men."

consecrated--Greek, "made perfect" once for all, as in [Heb
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010); [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009); see on [Heb
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010); [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009). Opposed to "having infirmity."
Consecrated as a perfected priest by His perfected sacrifice, and
consequent anointing and exaltation to the right hand of the Father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 8](heb008)

</div>
