<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg017)  [Next](jdg019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)

[Judges 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 18:1</span></span>

THE DANITES SEEK OUT AN INHERITANCE. (Jdg. 18:1-26)

In those days . . . the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell
in--The Danites had a territory assigned them as well as the other
tribes. But either through indolence, or a lack of energy, they did not
acquire the full possession of their allotment, but suffered a
considerable portion of it to be wrested out of their hands by the
encroachments of their powerful neighbors, the Philistines. In
consequence, being straitened for room, a considerable number resolved
on trying to effect a new and additional settlement in a remote part of
the land. A small deputation, being despatched to reconnoitre the
country, arrived on their progress northward at the residence of Micah.
Recognizing his priest as one of their former acquaintances, or perhaps
by his provincial dialect, they eagerly enlisted his services in
ascertaining the result of their present expedition. His answer, though
apparently promising, was delusive, and really as ambiguous as those of
the heathen oracles. This application brings out still more clearly and
fully than the schism of Micah the woeful degeneracy of the times. The
Danites expressed no emotions either of surprise or of indignation at a
Levite daring to assume the priestly functions, and at the existence of
a rival establishment to that of Shiloh. They were ready to seek,
through means of the teraphim, the information that could only be
lawfully applied for through the high priest's Urim. Being thus equally
erroneous in their views and habits as Micah, they show the low state of
religion, and how much superstition prevailed in all parts of the land.

[Judges 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 18:7</span></span>

the five men departed, and came to Laish--or, "Leshem" ([Jos
19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047)), supposed to have been peopled
by a colony of Zidonians. The place was very secluded--the soil rich in
the abundance and variety of its produce, and the inhabitants, following
the peaceful pursuits of agriculture, lived in their fertile and
sequestered valley, according to the Zidonian style of ease and
security, happy among themselves, and maintaining little or no
communication with the rest of the world. The discovery of this northern
paradise seemed, to the delight of the Danite spies, an accomplishment
of the priest's prediction. They hastened back to inform their brethren
in the south both of the value of their prize, and how easily it could
be made their prey.

[Judges 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 18:11</span></span>

there went from thence of the family of the Danites . . . six hundred
men--This was the collective number of the men who were equipped with
arms to carry out this expeditionary enterprise, without including the
families and furniture of the emigrants ([Jdg
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#021)). Their journey led them through
the territory of Judah, and their first halting place was "behind," that
is, on the west of Kirjath-jearim, on a spot called afterwards "the camp
of Dan." Prosecuting the northern route, they skirted the base of the
Ephraimite hills. On approaching the neighborhood of Micah's residence,
the spies having given information that a private sanctuary was kept
there, the priest of which had rendered them important service when on
their exploring expedition, it was unanimously agreed that both he and
the furniture of the establishment would be a valuable acquisition to
their proposed settlement. A plan of spoliation was immediately formed.
While the armed men stood sentinels at the gates, the five spies broke
into the chapel, pillaged the images and vestments, and succeeded in
bribing the priest also by a tempting offer to transfer his services to
their new colony. Taking charge of the ephod, the teraphim, and the
graven image, he "went in the midst of the people"--a central position
assigned him in the march, perhaps for his personal security; but more
probably in imitation of the place appointed for the priests and the
ark, in the middle of the congregated tribes, on the marches through the
wilderness. This theft presents a curious medley of low morality and
strong religious feeling. The Danites exemplified a deep-seated
principle of our nature--that men have religious affections, which must
have an object on which these may be exercised, while they are often not
very discriminating in the choice of the objects. In proportion to the
slender influence religion wields over the heart, the greater is the
importance attached to external rites; and in the exact observance of
these, the conscience is fully satisfied, and seldom or never molested
by reflections on the breach of minor morals.

[Judges 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 18:22</span></span>

the men that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered
together--The robbers of the chapel being soon detected, a hot pursuit
was forthwith commenced by Micah, at the head of a considerable body of
followers. The readiness with which they joined in the attempt to
recover the stolen articles affords a presumption that the advantages of
the chapel had been open to all in the neighborhood; and the importance
which Micah, like Laban, attached to his teraphim, is seen by the
urgency with which he pursued the thieves, and the risk of his life in
attempting to procure their restoration. Finding his party, however, not
a match for the Danites, he thought it prudent to desist, well knowing
the rule which was then prevalent in the land, that

"They should take who had the power,

And they should keep who could."

[Judges 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 18:27</span></span>

THEY WIN LAISH. ([Jdg 18:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027))

they . . . came unto Laish . . . smote them--the inhabitants.

and burnt the city--"We are revolted by this inroad and massacre of a
quiet and secure people. Nevertheless, if the original grant of Canaan
to the Israelites gave them the warrant of a divine commission and
command for this enterprise, that sanctifies all and legalizes all"
\[CHALMERS\]. This place seems to have been a dependency of Zidon, the
distance of which, however, rendered it impossible to obtain aid thence
in the sudden emergency.

[Judges 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 18:28</span></span>

they built a city, and . . . call the name of that city Dan--It was in
the northern extremity of the land, and hence the origin of the phrase,
"from Dan to Beer-sheba."

[Judges 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 18:30</span></span>

THEY SET UP IDOLATRY. ([Jdg 18:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030))

the children of Dan set up the graven image--Their distance secluded
them from the rest of the Israelites, and doubtless this, which was
their apology for not going to Shiloh, was the cause of perpetuating
idolatry among them for many generations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 19](jdg019)

</div>
