<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg019)  [Next](jdg021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)

[Judges 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 20:1</span></span>

THE LEVITE, IN A GENERAL ASSEMBLY, DECLARES HIS WRONG. ([Jdg
20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001))

all . . . the congregation was gathered as one man--In consequence of
the immense sensation the horrid tragedy of Gibeah had produced, a
national assembly was convened, at which "the chief of all the people"
from all parts of the land, including the eastern tribes, appeared as
delegates.

Mizpeh--the place of convention (for there were other Mizpehs), was in a
town situated on the confines of Judah and Benjamin ([Jos
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038); [Jos
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026)). Assemblies were frequently
held there afterwards ([Sa1 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#011); [Sa1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)); and it was but a short
distance from Shiloh. The phrase, "unto the Lord," may be taken in its
usual sense, as denoting consultation of the oracle. This circumstance,
together with the convention being called "the assembly of the people of
God," seems to indicate, that amid the excited passions of the nation,
those present felt the profound gravity of the occasion and adopted the
best means of maintaining a becoming deportment.

[Judges 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 20:3</span></span>

Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone
up to Mizpeh--Some suppose that Benjamin had been passed over, the crime
having been perpetrated within the territory of that tribe \[[Jdg
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#016)\]; and that, as the concubine's
corpse had been divided into twelve pieces \[[Jdg
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)\] --two had been sent to
Manasseh, one respectively to the western and eastern divisions. It is
more probable that Benjamin had received a formal summons like the other
tribes, but chose to treat it with indifference, or haughty disdain.

[Judges 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 20:4</span></span>

the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and
said--The injured husband gave a brief and unvarnished recital of the
tragic outrage, from which it appears that force was used, which he
could not resist. His testimony was doubtless corroborated by those of
his servant and the old Ephraimite. There was no need of strong or
highly colored description to work upon the feelings of the audience.
The facts spoke for themselves and produced one common sentiment of
detestation and vengeance.

[Judges 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 20:8</span></span>

THEIR DECREE. ([Jdg 20:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008))

all the people arose as one man--The extraordinary unanimity that
prevailed shows, that notwithstanding great disorders had broken out in
many parts, the people were sound at the core; and remembering their
national covenant with God, they now felt the necessity of wiping out so
foul a stain on their character as a people. It was resolved that the
inhabitants of Gibeah should be subjected to condign punishment. But the
resolutions were conditional. For as the common law of nature and
nations requires that an inquiry should be made and satisfaction
demanded, before committing an act of hostility or vengeance, messengers
were despatched through the whole territory of Benjamin, demanding the
immediate surrender or execution of the delinquents. The request was
just and reasonable; and by refusing it the Benjamites virtually made
themselves a party in the quarrel. It must not be supposed that the
people of this tribe were insensible or indifferent to the atrocious
character of the crime that had been committed on their soil. But their
patriotism or their pride was offended by the hostile demonstration of
the other tribes. The passions were inflamed on both sides; but
certainly the Benjamites incurred an awful responsibility by the
attitude of resistance they assumed.

[Judges 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 20:14</span></span>

the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities
unto Gibeah--Allowing their valor to be ever so great, nothing but blind
passion and unbending obstinacy could have impelled them to take the
field against their brethren with such a disparity of numbers.

[Judges 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 20:16</span></span>

left-handed; every one could sling stones at an hair-breadth, and not
miss--The sling was one of the earliest weapons used in war. The Hebrew
sling was probably similar to that of the Egyptian, consisting of a
leather thong, broad in the middle, with a loop at one end, by which it
was firmly held with the hand; the other end terminated in a lash, which
was let slip when the stone was thrown. Those skilled in the use of it,
as the Benjamites were, could hit the mark with unerring certainty. A
good sling could carry its full force to the distance of two hundred
yards.

[Judges 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 20:18</span></span>

THE ISRAELITES LOSE FORTY THOUSAND. ([Jdg
20:18-28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018))

the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God--This
consultation at Shiloh was right. But they ought to have done it at the
commencement of their proceedings. Instead of this, all their plans were
formed, and never doubting, it would seem, that the war was just and
inevitable, the only subject of their inquiry related to the precedency
of the tribes--a point which it is likely was discussed in the assembly.
Had they asked counsel of God sooner, their expedition would have been
conducted on a different principle--most probably by reducing the number
of fighting men, as in the case of Gideon's army. As it was, the vast
number of volunteers formed an excessive and unwieldy force, unfit for
strenuous and united action against a small, compact, and well-directed
army. A panic ensued, and the confederate tribes, in two successive
engagements, sustained great losses. These repeated disasters
(notwithstanding their attack on Benjamin had been divinely authorized)
overwhelmed them with shame and sorrow. Led to reflection, they became
sensible of their guilt in not repressing their national idolatries, as
well as in too proudly relying on their superior numbers and the
precipitate rashness of this expedition. Having humbled themselves by
prayer and fasting, as well as observed the appointed method of
expiating their sins, they were assured of acceptance as well as of
victory. The presence and services of Phinehas on this occasion help us
to ascertain the chronology thus far, that the date of the occurrence
must be fixed shortly after the death of Joshua.

[Judges 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 20:29</span></span>

THEY DESTROY ALL THE BENJAMITES, EXCEPT SIX HUNDRED. (Jdg. 20:29-48)

And Israel set liers-in-wait round about Gibeah--A plan was formed of
taking that city by stratagem, similar to that employed in the capture
of Ai \[[Jos 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#009)\].

[Judges 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 20:33</span></span>

Baal-tamar--a palm-grove, where Baal was worshipped. The main army of
the confederate tribes was drawn up there.

out of the meadows of Gibeah--Hebrew, "the caves of Gibeah"; a hill in
which the ambuscades lay hid.

[Judges 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 20:34</span></span>

there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men--This was a third
division, different both from the ambuscade and the army, who were
fighting at Baal-tamar. The general account stated in [Jdg
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035) is followed by a detailed
narrative of the battle, which is continued to the end of the chapter.

[Judges 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jdg 20:45</span></span>

they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon--Many
of the fugitives found refuge in the caves of this rocky mountain, which
is situated to the northeast of Beth-el. Such places are still sought as
secure retreats in times of danger; and until the method of blowing up
rocks by gunpowder became known, a few men could in such caves sustain a
siege for months.

[Judges 20:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jdg 20:46</span></span>

all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand
men--On comparing this with [Jdg
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035), it will be seen that the loss
is stated here in round numbers and is confined only to that of the
third day. We must conclude that a thousand had fallen during the two
previous engagements, in order to make the aggregate amount given ([Jdg
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#015)).

[Judges 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jdg 20:48</span></span>

the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote
them with the edge of the sword--This frightful vengeance, extending
from Gibeah to the whole territory of Benjamin, was executed under the
impetuous impulse of highly excited passions. But doubtless the
Israelites were only the agents of inflicting the righteous retributions
of God; and the memory of this terrible crisis, which led almost to the
extermination of a whole tribe, was conducive to the future good of the
whole nation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 21](jdg021)

</div>
