<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](pe2003)  [Next](jo1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 0:0</span></span>

AUTHORSHIP.--POLYCARP, the disciple of John \[Epistle to the
Philippians, 7\], quotes [Jo1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003).
EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History, 3.39\] says of PAPIAS, a hearer of
John, and a friend of POLYCARP, "He used testimonies from the First
Epistle of John." IRENÃ†US, according to EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical
History, 5.8\], often quoted this Epistle. So in his work Against
Heresies \[3.15; 5, 8\] he quotes from John by name, [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018), &c.; and in \[3.16,7\], he
quotes [Jo1 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001); [Jo1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001), and [Jo2
1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007). CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA
\[Miscellanies, 2.66, p. 464\] refers to [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016), as in John's larger Epistle. See
other quotations \[Miscellanies, 3.32,42; 4.102\]. TERTULLIAN \[Against
Marcion, 5.16\] refers to [Jo1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001),
&c.; \[Against Praxeas, 15\], to [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001). See his other quotations
\[Against Praxeas, 28; Against the Gnostics, 12\]. CYPRIAN \[Epistles,
28 (24)\], quotes as John's, [Jo1
2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003); and \[On the Lord's Prayer, 5\]
quotes [Jo1 2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015); and \[On Works
and Alms, 3\], [Jo1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008); and \[On the
Advantage of Patience, 2\] quotes [Jo1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006). MURATORI'S Fragment on the Canon
of Scripture states, "There are two of John (the Gospel and Epistle?)
esteemed Catholic," and quotes [Jo1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003). The Peschito Syriac contains it.
ORIGEN (in EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical History, 6.25\]) speaks of the
First Epistle as genuine, and "probably the second and third, though all
do not recognize the latter two"; on the Gospel of John, \[Commentary on
John, 13.2\], he quotes [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005).
DIONYSIUS OF ALEXANDRIA, ORIGEN'S scholar, cites the words of this
Epistle as those of the Evangelist John. EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical
History, 3.24\], says, John's first Epistle and Gospel are acknowledged
without question by those of the present day, as well as by the
ancients. So also JEROME \[On Illustrious Men\]. The opposition of
COSMAS INDICOPLEUSTES, in the sixth century, and that of MARCION because
our Epistle was inconsistent with his views, are of no weight against
such irrefragable testimony.

The internal evidence is equally strong. Neither the Gospel, nor this
Epistle, can be pronounced an imitation; yet both, in style and modes of
thought, are evidently of the same mind. The individual notices are not
so numerous or obvious as in Paul's writings, as was to be expected in a
Catholic Epistle; but such as there are accord with John's position. He
implies his apostleship, and perhaps alludes to his Gospel, and the
affectionate tie which bound him as an aged pastor to his spiritual
"children"; and in [Jo1 2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018); [Jo1
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001), he alludes to the false
teachers as known to his readers; and in [Jo1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021) he warns them against the idols
of the surrounding world. It is no objection against its authenticity
that the doctrine of the Word, or divine second Person, existing from
everlasting, and in due time made flesh, appears in it, as also in the
Gospel, as opposed to the heresy of the DocetÃ&brvbr; in the second
century, who denied that our Lord is come in the flesh, and maintained
He came only in outward semblance; for the same doctrine appears in [Col
1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015); [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016); [Heb
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001); and the germs of Docetism,
though not fully developed till the second century, were in existence in
the first. The Spirit, presciently through John, puts the Church
beforehand on its guard against the coming heresy.

TO WHOM ADDRESSED.--AUGUSTINE \[The Question of the Gospels, 2.39\],
says this Epistle was written to the Parthians. BEDE, in a prologue to
the seven Catholic Epistles, says that ATHANASIUS attests the same. By
the Parthians may be meant the Christians living beyond the Euphrates in
the Parthian territory, outside the Roman empire, "the Church at Babylon
elected together with (you)," the churches in the Ephesian region, the
quarter to which Peter addressed his Epistles ([Pe1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)). As Peter addressed the flock
which John subsequently tended (and in which Paul had formerly
ministered), so John, Peter's close companion after the ascension,
addresses the flock among whom Peter had been when he wrote. Thus "the
elect lady" ([Jo2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)) answers "to the
Church elected together" ([Pe1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)).
See further confirmation of this view in Introduction to Second John. It
is not necessarily an objection to this view that John never is known to
have personally ministered in the Parthian territory. For neither did
Peter personally minister to the churches in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, though he wrote his Epistles to them.
Moreover, in John's prolonged life, we cannot dogmatically assert that
he did not visit the Parthian Christians, after Peter had ceased to
minister to them, on the mere ground of absence of extant testimony to
that effect. This is as probable a view as ALFORD'S, that in the passage
of AUGUSTINE, "to the Parthians," is to be altered by conjectural
emendation; and that the Epistle is addressed to the churches at and
around Ephesus, on the ground of the fatherly tone of affectionate
address in it, implying his personal ministry among his readers. But his
position, as probably the only surviving apostle, accords very well with
his addressing, in a Catholic Epistle, a cycle of churches which he may
not have specially ministered to in person, with affectionate fatherly
counsel, by virtue of his general apostolic superintendence of all the
churches.

TIME AND PLACE OF WRITING.--This Epistle seems to have been written
subsequently to his Gospel as it assumes the reader's acquaintance with
the Gospel facts and Christ's speeches, and also with the special aspect
of the incarnate Word, as God manifest in the flesh ([Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)), set forth more fully in his
Gospel. The tone of address, as a father addressing his "little
children" (the continually recurring term, [Jo1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001), [Jo1
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012), [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018), [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028); [Jo1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007), [Jo1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018); [Jo1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004); [Jo1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021)), accords with the view that this
Epistle was written in John's old age, perhaps about A.D. 90. In [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018), "it is the last time," probably
does not refer to any particular event (as the destruction of Jerusalem,
which was now many years past) but refers to the nearness of the Lord's
coming as proved by the rise of Antichristian teachers, the mark of the
last time. It was the Spirit's purpose to keep the Church always
expecting Christ as ready to come at any moment. The whole Christian age
is the last time in the sense that no other dispensation is to arise
till Christ comes. Compare "these last days," [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002). Ephesus may be conjectured to be
the place whence it was written. The controversial allusion to the germs
of Gnostic heresy accord with Asia Minor being the place, and the last
part of the apostolic age the time, of writing this Epistle.

CONTENTS.--The leading subject of the whole is, fellowship with the
Father and the Son ([Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)). Two
principal divisions may be noted: (1) 1Jo. 1:5-2:28: the theme of this
portion is stated at the outset, "God is light, and in Him is no
darkness at all"; consequently, in order to have fellowship with Him, we
must walk in light ([Jo1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007));
connected with which in the confession and subsequent forgiveness of our
sins through Christ's propitiation and advocacy, without which
forgiveness there could be no light or fellowship with God: a farther
step in thus walking in the light is, positively keeping God's
commandments, the sum of which is love, as opposed to hatred, the acme
of disobedience to God's word: negatively, he exhorts them according to
their several stages of spiritual growth, children, fathers, young men,
in consonance with their privileges as forgiven, knowing the Father, and
having overcome the wicked one, not to love the world, which is
incompatible with the indwelling of the love of the Father, and to be on
their guard against the Antichristian teachers already in the world, who
were not of the Church, but of the world, against whom the true defense
is, that his believing readers who have the anointing of God, should
continue to abide in the Son and in the Father. (2) The second division
(1Jo. 2:29-5:5) discusses the theme with which it opens, He is
righteous; consequently (as in the first division), "every one that
doeth righteousness is born of Him." Sonship in us involves our
purifying ourselves as He is pure, even as we hope to see, and therefore
to be made like our Lord when He shall appear; in this second, as in the
first division, both a positive and a negative side are presented of
"doing righteousness as He is righteous," involving a contrast between
the children of God and the children of the devil. Hatred marks the
latter; love, the former: this love gives assurance of acceptance with
God for ourselves and our prayers, accompanied as they are ([Jo1
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023)) with obedience to His great
commandment, to "believe on Jesus, and love one another"; the seal ([Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024)) of His dwelling in us and
assuring our hearts, is the Spirit which He hath given us. In contrast
to this (as in the first division), he warns against false spirits, the
notes of which are, denial of Christ, and adherence to the world.
Sonship, or birth of God, is then more fully described: its essential
feature is unslavish, free love to God, because God first loved us, and
gave His Son to die for us, and consequent love to the brethren,
grounded on their being sons of God also like ourselves, and so victory
over the world; this victory being gained only by the man who believes
in Jesus as the Son of God. (3) The conclusion establishes this last
central truth, on which rests our fellowship with God, Christ's having
come by the water of baptism, the blood of atonement, and the witnessing
Spirit, which is truth. As in the opening he rested this cardinal truth
on the apostles' witness of the eye, the ear, and the touch, so now at
the close he rests it on God's witness, which is accepted by the
believer, in contrast with the unbeliever, who makes God a liar. Then
follows his closing statement of his reason for writing ([Jo1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013); compare the corresponding [Jo1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004), at the beginning), namely, that
believers in Christ the Son of God may know that they have (now already)
eternal life (the source of "joy," [Jo1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004); compare similarly his object in
writing the Gospel, [Joh 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)), and
so have confidence as to their prayers being answered (corresponding to
[Jo1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022) in the second part); for
instance, their intercessions for a sinning brother (unless his sin be a
sin unto death). He closes with a brief summing up of the instruction of
the Epistle, the high dignity, sanctity, and safety from evil of the
children of God in contrast to the sinful world, and a warning against
idolatry, literal and spiritual: "Keep yourselves from idols."

Though the Epistle is not directly polemical, the occasion which
suggested his writing was probably the rise of Antichristian teachers;
and, because he knew the spiritual character of the several classes whom
he addresses, children, youths, fathers, he feels it necessary to write
to confirm them in the faith and joyful fellowship of the Father and
Son, and to assure them of the reality of the things they believe, that
so they may have the full privileges of believing.

STYLE.--His peculiarity is fondness for aphorism and repetition. His
tendency to repeat his own phrase, arises partly from the affectionate,
hortatory character of the Epistle; partly, also, from its Hebraistic
forms abounding in parallel clauses, as distinguished from the Grecian
and more logical style of Paul; also, from his childlike simplicity of
spirit, which, full of his one grand theme, repeats, and dwells on it
with fond delight and enthusiasm. Moreover as ALFORD well says, the
appearance of uniformity is often produced by want of deep enough
exegesis to discover the real differences in passages which seem to
express the same. Contemplative, rather than argumentative, he dwells
more on the general, than on the particular, on the inner, than on the
outer, Christian life. Certain fundamental truths he recurs to again and
again, at one time enlarging on, and applying them, at another time
repeating them in their condensed simplicity. The thoughts do not march
onward by successive steps, as in the logical style of Paul, but rather
in circle drawn round one central thought which he reiterates, ever
reverting to it, and viewing it, now under its positive, now under its
negative, aspect. Many terms which in the Gospel are given as Christ's,
in the Epistle appear as the favorite expressions of John, naturally
adopted from the Lord. Thus the contrasted terms, "flesh" and "spirit,"
"light" and "darkness," "life" and "death," "abide in Him": fellowship
with the Father and Son, and with one another," is a favorite phrase
also, not found in the Gospel, but in Acts and Paul's Epistles. In him
appears the harmonious union of opposites, adapting him for his high
functions in the kingdom of God, contemplative repose of character, and
at the same time ardent zeal, combined with burning, all-absorbing love:
less adapted for active outward work, such as Paul's, than for spiritual
service. He handles Christian verities not as abstract dogmas, but as
living realities, personally enjoyed in fellowship with God in Christ,
and with the brethren. Simple, and at the same time profound, his
writing is in consonance with his spirit, unrhetorical and undialectic,
gentle, consolatory, and loving: the reflection of the Spirit of Him on
whose breast he lay at the last supper, and whose beloved disciple he
was. EWALD in ALFORD, speaking of the "unruffled and heavenly repose"
which characterizes this Epistle, says, "It appears to be the tone, not
so much of a father talking with his beloved children, as of a glorified
saint addressing mankind from a higher world. Never in any writing has
the doctrine of heavenly love--a love working in stillness, ever
unwearied, never exhausted--so thoroughly approved itself as in this
Epistle."

JOHN'S PLACE IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE CHURCH.--As Peter founded and
Paul propagated, so John completed the spiritual building. As the Old
Testament puts prominently forward the fear of God, so John, the last
writer of the New Testament, gives prominence to the love of God. Yet,
as the Old Testament is not all limited to presenting the fear of God,
but sets forth also His love, so John, as a representative of the New
Testament, while breathing so continually the spirit of love, gives also
the plainest and most awful warnings against sin, in accordance with his
original character as Boanerges, "son of thunder." His mother was
Salome, mother of the sons of Zebedee, probably sister to Jesus' mother
(compare [Joh 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025), "His mother's
sister," with [Mat 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056); [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040)), so that he was cousin to our
Lord; to his mother, under God, he may have owed his first serious
impressions. Expecting as she did the Messianic kingdom in glory, as
appears from her petition ([Mat
20:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)), she doubtless tried to fill
his young and ardent mind with the same hope. NEANDER distinguishes
three leading tendencies in the development of the Christian doctrine,
the Pauline, the Jacobean (between which the Petrine forms an
intermediate link), and the Johannean. John, in common with James, was
less disposed to the intellectual and dialectic cast of thought which
distinguishes Paul. He had not, like the apostle of the Gentiles, been
brought to faith and peace through severe conflict; but, like James, had
reached his Christian individuality through a quiet development: James,
however, had passed through a moulding in Judaism previously, which,
under the Spirit, caused him to present Christian truth in connection
with the law, in so far as the latter in its spirit, though not letter,
is permanent, and not abolished, but established under the Gospel. But
John, from the first, had drawn his whole spiritual development from the
personal view of Christ, the model man, and from intercourse with Him.
Hence, in his writings, everything turns on one simple contrast: divine
life in communion with Christ; death in separation from Him, as appears
from his characteristic phrases, "life, light, truth; death, darkness,
lie." "As James and Peter mark the gradual transition from spiritualized
Judaism to the independent development of Christianity, and as Paul
represents the independent development of Christianity in opposition to
the Jewish standpoint, so the contemplative element of John reconciles
the two, and forms the closing point in the training of the apostolic
Church" \[NEANDER\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 1](jo1001)

</div>
