<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh011)  [Next](joh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

[John 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 12:1</span></span>

THE ANOINTING AT BETHANY. ([Joh
12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001))

six days before the passover--that is, on the sixth day before it;
probably after sunset on Friday evening, or the commencement of the
Jewish sabbath preceding the passover.

[John 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 12:2</span></span>

Martha served--This, with what is afterwards said of Mary's way of
honoring her Lord, is so true to the character in which those two women
appear in [Luk 10:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038), as to
constitute one of the strongest and most delightful confirmations of the
truth of both narratives. (See also on [Joh
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#020)).

Lazarus . . . sat at the table--"Between the raised Lazarus and the
healed leper (Simon, [Mar 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)), the
Lord probably sits as between two trophies of His glory" \[STIER\].

[John 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 12:3</span></span>

spikenard--or pure nard, a celebrated aromatic ([Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012)).

anointed the feet of Jesus--and "poured it on His head" ([Mat
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007); [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)). The only use of this was to
refresh and exhilarate--a grateful compliment in the East, amidst the
closeness of a heated atmosphere, with many guests at a feast. Such was
the form in which Mary's love to Christ, at so much cost to herself,
poured itself out.

[John 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 12:4</span></span>

Judas . . . who should betray him--For the reason why this is here
mentioned, see on [Mar 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#011).

[John 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 12:5</span></span>

three hundred pence--between nine and ten pounds sterling.

[John 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 12:6</span></span>

had the bag--the purse.

bare what was put therein--not, bare it off by theft, though that he
did; but simply, had charge of its contents, was treasurer to Jesus and
the Twelve. How worthy of notice is this arrangement, by which an
avaricious and dishonest person was not only taken into the number of
the Twelve, but entrusted with the custody of their little property! The
purposes which this served are obvious enough; but it is further
noticeable, that the remotest hint was never given to the eleven of His
true character, nor did the disciples most favored with the intimacy of
Jesus ever suspect him, till a few minutes before he voluntarily
separated himself from their company--for ever!

[John 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 12:7</span></span>

said Jesus, Let her alone, against the day of my burying hath she done
this--not that she thought of His burial, much less reserved any of her
nard to anoint her dead Lord. But as the time was so near at hand when
that office would have to be performed, and she was not to have that
privilege even alter the spices were brought for the purpose ([Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)), He lovingly regards it as done
now.

[John 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 12:8</span></span>

the poor always . . . with you--referring to [Deu
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#011).

but me . . . not always--a gentle hint of His approaching departure. He
adds ([Mar 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008)), "She hath done what
she could," a noble testimony, embodying a principle of immense
importance. "Verily, I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath
done, be told for a memorial of her" ([Mat
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#013); [Mar
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#009)). "In the act of love done to Him
she had erected to herself an eternal monument, as lasting as the
Gospel, the eternal word of God. From generation to generation this
remarkable prophecy of the Lord has been fulfilled; and even we, in
explaining this saying of the Redeemer, of necessity contribute to its
accomplishment" \[OLSHAUSEN\]. "Who but Himself had the power to ensure
to any work of man, even if resounding in his own time through the whole
earth, an imperishable remembrance in the stream of history? Behold once
more here, the majesty of His royal judicial supremacy in the government
of the world, in this, Verily I say unto you" \[STIER\]. Beautiful are
the lessons here: (1) Love to Christ transfigures the humblest services.
All, indeed, who have themselves a heart value its least outgoings
beyond the most costly mechanical performances; but how does it endear
the Saviour to us to find Him endorsing the principle as His own
standard in judging of character and deeds!

What though in poor and humble guise

Thou here didst sojourn, cottage-born,

Yet from Thy glory in the skies

Our earthly gold Thou didst not scorn.

For Love delights to bring her best,

And where Love is, that offering evermore is blest.

Love on the Saviour's dying head

Her spikenard drops unblam'd may pour,

May mount His cross, and wrap Him dead

In spices from the golden shore.

KEBLE.

\(2\) Works of utility should never be set in opposition to the
promptings of self-sacrificing love, and the sincerity of those who do
so is to be suspected. Under the mask of concern for the poor at home,
how many excuse themselves from all care of the perishing heathen
abroad. (3) Amidst conflicting duties, that which our "hand (presently)
findeth to do" is to be preferred, and even a less duty only to be done
now to a greater that can be done at any time. (4) "If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not
according to that he hath not" ([Co2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012)). --"She hath done what she
could" ([Mar 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008)). (5) As Jesus
beheld in spirit the universal diffusion of His Gospel, while His lowest
depth of humiliation was only approaching, so He regards the facts of
His earthly history as constituting the substance of this Gospel, and
the relation of them as just the "preaching of this Gospel." Not that
preachers are to confine themselves to a bare narration of these facts,
but that they are to make their whole preaching turn upon them as its
grand center, and derive from them its proper vitality; all that goes
before this in the Bible being but the preparation for them, and all
that follows but the sequel.

[John 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 12:9</span></span>

Crowds of the Jerusalem Jews hastened to Bethany, not so much to see
Jesus, whom they knew to be there, as to see dead Lazarus alive; and
this, issuing in their accession to Christ, led to a plot against the
life of Lazarus also, as the only means of arresting the triumphs of
Jesus (see [Joh 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)) --to such a
pitch had these chief priests come of diabolical determination to shut
out the light from themselves, and quench it from the earth!

[John 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 12:12</span></span>

CHRIST'S TRIUMPHAL ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM. ([Joh
12:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012))

On the next day--the Lord's day, or Sunday (see on [Joh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)); the tenth day of the Jewish
month Nisan, on which the paschal lamb was set apart to be "kept up
until the fourteenth day of the same month, when the whole assembly of
the congregation of Israel were to kill it in the evening" ([Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003), [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)). Even so, from the day of this
solemn entry into Jerusalem, "Christ our Passover" was virtually set
apart to be "sacrificed for us" ([Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)).

[John 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 12:16</span></span>

when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were
written of him, &c.--The Spirit, descending on them from the glorified
Saviour at Pentecost, opened their eyes suddenly to the true sense of
the Old Testament, brought vividly to their recollection this and other
Messianic predictions, and to their unspeakable astonishment showed them
that they, and all the actors in these scenes, had been unconsciously
fulfilling those predictions.

[John 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 12:20</span></span>

SOME GREEKS DESIRE TO SEE JESUS--THE DISCOURSE AND SCENE THEREUPON.
(John 12:20-36)

Greeks--Not Grecian Jews, but Greek proselytes to the Jewish faith, who
were wont to attend the annual festivals, particularly this primary one,
the Passover.

The same came therefore to Philip . . . of Bethsaida--possibly as being
from the same quarter.

saying, Sir, we would see Jesus--certainly in a far better sense than
Zaccheus ([Luk 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003)). Perhaps He was
then in that part of the temple court to which Gentile proselytes had no
access. "These men from the west represent, at the end of Christ's life,
what the wise men from the east represented at its beginning; but those
come to the cross of the King, even as these to His manger" \[STIER\].

[John 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 12:22</span></span>

Philip . . . telleth Andrew--As follow townsmen of Bethsaida ([Joh
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044)), these two seem to have drawn to
each other.

Andrew and Philip tell Jesus--The minuteness of these details, while
they add to the graphic force of the narrative, serves to prepare us for
something important to come out of this introduction.

[John 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 12:23</span></span>

Jesus answered them, The hour is come that the Son of man should be
glorified--that is, They would see Jesus, would they? Yet a little
moment, and they shall see Him so as now they dream not of. The middle
wall of partition that keeps them out from the commonwealth of Israel is
on the eve of breaking down, "and I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
shall draw all men unto Me"; I see them "flying as a cloud, and as doves
to their cotes"--a glorious event that will be for the Son of man, by
which this is to be brought about. It is His death He thus sublimely and
delicately alluded to. Lost in the scenes of triumph which this desire
of the Greeks to see Him called up before His view, He gives no direct
answer to their petition for an interview, but sees the cross which was
to bring them gilded with glory.

[John 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 12:24</span></span>

Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone;
but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit--The necessity of His death
is here brightly expressed, and its proper operation and fruit--life
springing forth out of death--imaged forth by a beautiful and deeply
significant law of the vegetable kingdom. For a double reason, no doubt,
this was uttered--to explain what he had said of His death, as the hour
of His own glorification, and to sustain His own Spirit under the
agitation which was mysteriously coming over it in the view of that
death.

[John 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 12:25</span></span>

He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in
this world shall keep it unto life eternal--(See on [Luk
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#024)). Did our Lord mean to exclude
Himself from the operation of the great principle here
expressed--self-renunciation, the law of self-preservation; and its
converse, self-preservation, the law of self-destruction? On the
contrary, as He became Man to exemplify this fundamental law of the
Kingdom of God in its most sublime form, so the very utterance of it on
this occasion served to sustain His own Spirit in the double prospect to
which He had just alluded.

[John 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 12:26</span></span>

If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also
my servant be: If any man serve me, him will my Father honour--Jesus
here claims the same absolute subjection to Himself, as the law of men's
exaltation to honor, as He yielded to the Father.

[John 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 12:27</span></span>

Now is my soul troubled--He means at the prospect of His death, just
alluded to. Strange view of the Cross this, immediately after
representing it as the hour of His glory! ([Joh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)). But the two views naturally
meet, and blend into one. It was the Greeks, one might say, that
troubled Him. Ah! they shall see Jesus, but to Him it shall be a costly
sight.

and what shall I say?--He is in a strait betwixt two. The death of the
cross was, and could not but be, appalling to His spirit. But to shrink
from absolute subjection to the Father, was worse still. In asking
Himself, "What shall I say?" He seems as if thinking aloud, feeling His
way between two dread alternatives, looking both of them sternly in the
face, measuring, weighing them, in order that the choice actually made
might be seen, and even by himself the more vividly felt, to be a
profound, deliberate, spontaneous election.

Father, save me from this hour--To take this as a question--"Shall I
say, Father, save me," &c.--as some eminent editors and interpreters do,
is unnatural and jejune. It is a real petition, like that in Gethsemane,
"Let this cup pass from Me"; only whereas there He prefaces the prayer
with an "If it be possible," here He follows it up with what is
tantamount to that--"Nevertheless for this cause came I unto this hour."
The sentiment conveyed, then, by the prayer, in both cases, is twofold:
(1) that only one thing could reconcile Him to the death of the
cross--its being His Father's will He should endure it--and (2) that in
this view of it He yielded Himself freely to it. What He recoils from is
not subjection to His Father's will: but to show how tremendous a
self-sacrifice that obedience involved, He first asks the Father to save
Him from it, and then signifies how perfectly He knows that He is there
for the very purpose of enduring it. Only by letting these mysterious
words speak their full meaning do they become intelligible and
consistent. As for those who see no bitter elements in the death of
Christ--nothing beyond mere dying--what can they make of such a scene?
and when they place it over against the feelings with which thousands of
His adoring followers have welcomed death for His sake, how can they
hold Him up to the admiration of men?

[John 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 12:28</span></span>

Father, glorify thy name--by a present testimony.

I have both glorified it--referring specially to the voice from heaven
at His baptism, and again at His transfiguration.

and will glorify it again--that is, in the yet future scenes of His
still deeper necessity; although this promise was a present and sublime
testimony, which would irradiate the clouded spirit of the Son of man.

[John 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 12:29</span></span>

The people therefore that stood by, said, It thundered; others, An angel
spake to him--some hearing only a sound, others an articulate, but to
them unintelligible voice.

[John 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 12:30</span></span>

Jesus . . . said, This voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes--that is, probably, to correct the unfavorable impressions which
His momentary agitation and mysterious prayer for deliverance may have
produced on the by-standers.

[John 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 12:31</span></span>

Now is the judgment of this world--the world that "crucified the Lord of
glory" ([Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)), considered as a
vast and complicated kingdom of Satan, breathing his spirit, doing his
work, and involved in his doom, which Christ's death by its hands
irrevocably sealed.

now shall the prince of this world be cast out--How differently is that
fast-approaching "hour" regarded in the kingdoms of darkness and of
light! "The hour of relief; from the dread Troubler of our peace--how
near it is! Yet a little moment, and the day is ours!" So it was
calculated and felt in the one region. "Now shall the prince of this
world be cast out," is a somewhat different view of the same event. We
know who was right. Though yet under a veil, He sees the triumphs of the
Cross in unclouded and transporting light.

[John 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 12:32</span></span>

And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me--The
"I" here is emphatic--I, taking the place of the world's ejected prince.
"If lifted up," means not only after that I have been lifted up, but,
through the virtue of that uplifting. And truly, the death of the Cross,
in all its significance, revealed in the light, and borne in upon the
heart, by the power of the Holy Ghost, possesses an attraction over the
wide world--to civilized and savage, learned and illiterate,
alike--which breaks down all opposition, assimilates all to itself, and
forms out of the most heterogeneous and discordant materials a kingdom
of surpassing glory, whose uniting principle is adoring subjection "to
Him that loved them." "Will draw all men 'UNTO ME,'" says He. What lips
could venture to utter such a word but His, which "dropt as an
honeycomb," whose manner of speaking was evermore in the same spirit of
conscious equality with the Father?

[John 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 12:33</span></span>

This he said, signifying what death he should die--that is, "by being
lifted up from the earth" on "the accursed tree" ([Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014); [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)).

[John 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 12:34</span></span>

We have heard out of the law--the scriptures of the Old Testament
(referring to such places as [Psa
89:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028); [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004); [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044); [Dan
7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)).

that Christ--the Christ "endureth for ever."

and how sayest thou, The Son of Man must be lifted up, &c.--How can that
consist with this "uplifting?" They saw very well both that He was
holding Himself up as the Christ and a Christ to die a violent death;
and as that ran counter to all their ideas of the Messianic prophecies,
they were glad to get this seeming advantage to justify their unyielding
attitude.

[John 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 12:35</span></span>

Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light,
&c.--Instead of answering their question, He warns them, with mingled
majesty and tenderness, against trifling with their last brief
opportunity, and entreats them to let in the Light while they have it in
the midst of them, that they themselves might be "light in the Lord." In
this case, all the clouds which hung around His Person and Mission would
speedily be dispelled, while if they continued to hate the light,
bootless were all His answers to their merely speculative or captious
questions. (See on [Luk 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#023)).

[John 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 12:36</span></span>

These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from
them--He who spake as never man spake, and immediately after words
fraught with unspeakable dignity and love, had to "hide Himself" from
His auditors! What then must they have been? He retired, probably to
Bethany. (The parallels are: [Mat
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#017); [Luk
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037)).

[John 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 12:37</span></span>

It is the manner of this Evangelist alone to record his own reflections
on the scenes he describes; but here, having arrived at what was
virtually the close of our Lord's public ministry, he casts an affecting
glance over the fruitlessness of His whole ministry on the bulk of the
now doomed people.

though he had done so many miracles--The word used suggests their nature
as well as number.

[John 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 12:38</span></span>

That the saying of Esaias . . . might be fulfilled--This unbelief did
not at all set aside the purposes of God, but, on the contrary,
fulfilled them.

[John 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 12:39</span></span>

Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias said again, He hath
blinded their eyes, that they should not see, &c.--That this expresses a
positive divine act, by which those who wilfully close their eyes and
harden their hearts against the truth are judicially shut up in their
unbelief and impenitence, is admitted by all candid critics \[as
OLSHAUSEN\], though many of them think it necessary to contend that this
is in no way inconsistent with the liberty of the human will, which of
course it is not.

[John 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 12:41</span></span>

These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him--a key
of immense importance to the opening of Isaiah's vision ([Isa
6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)), and all similar Old Testament
representations. "THE SON is the King Jehovah who rules in the Old
Testament and appears to the elect, as in the New Testament THE SPIRIT,
the invisible Minister of the Son, is the Director of the Church and the
Revealer in the sanctuary of the heart" \[OLSHAUSEN\].

[John 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 12:42</span></span>

among the chief rulers also--rather, "even of the rulers"; such as
Nicodemus and Joseph.

because of the Pharisees--that is, the leaders of the sects; for they
were of it themselves.

put out of the synagogue--See [Joh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022), [Joh
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034).

[John 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 12:43</span></span>

they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God--"a severe
remark, considering that several at least of these persons afterwards
boldly confessed Christ. It indicates the displeasure with which God
regarded their conduct at this time, and with which He continues to
regard similar conduct" \[WEBSTER and WILKINSON\].

[John 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 12:44</span></span>

Jesus cried--in a loud tone, and with peculiar solemnity. (Compare [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)).

and said, He that believeth on me, &c.--This seems to be a supplementary
record of some weighty proclamations, for which there had been found no
natural place before, and introduced here as a sort of summary and
winding up of His whole testimony.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 13](joh013)

</div>
