<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos003)  [Next](jos005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001)

[Joshua 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 4:1</span></span>

TWELVE STONES TAKEN FOR A MEMORIAL OUT OF JORDAN. ([Jos
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001))

the Lord spake unto Joshua, Take you twelve men--each representing a
tribe. They had been previously chosen for this service ([Jos
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012)), and the repetition of the
command is made here solely to introduce the account of its execution.
Though Joshua had been divinely instructed to erect a commemorative
pile, the representatives were not apprised of the work they were to do
till the time of the passage.

[Joshua 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 4:4</span></span>

Joshua called the twelve men--They had probably, from a feeling of
reverence, kept back, and were standing on the eastern bank. They were
now ordered to advance. Picking up each a stone, probably as large as he
could carry, from around the spot "where the priests stood," they pass
over before the ark and deposit the stones in the place of next
encampment ([Jos 4:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019)), namely,
Gilgal.

[Joshua 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 4:6</span></span>

That this may be a sign among you--The erection of cairns, or huge piles
of stones, as monuments of remarkable incidents has been common among
all people, especially in the early and rude periods of their history.
They are the established means of perpetuating the memory of important
transactions, especially among the nomadic people of the East. Although
there be no inscription engraved on them, the history and object of such
simple monuments are traditionally preserved from age to age. Similar
was the purpose contemplated by the conveyance of the twelve stones to
Gilgal: it was that they might be a standing record to posterity of the
miraculous passage of the Jordan.

[Joshua 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 4:8</span></span>

the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded--that is, it was done
by their twelve representatives.

[Joshua 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 4:9</span></span>

TWELVE STONES SET UP IN THE MIDST OF JORDAN. ([Jos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009))

Joshua set up twelve stones . . . in the place where the feet of the
priests . . . stood--In addition to the memorial just described, there
was another memento of the miraculous event, a duplicate of the former,
set up in the river itself, on the very spot where the ark had rested.
This heap of stones might have been a large and compactly built one and
visible in the ordinary state of the river. As nothing is said where
these stones were obtained, some have imagined that they might have been
gathered in the adjoining fields and deposited by the people as they
passed the appointed spot.

they are there unto this day--at least twenty years after the event, if
we reckon by the date of this history ([Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)), and much later, if the words
in the latter clause were inserted by Samuel or Ezra.

[Joshua 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 4:10</span></span>

THE PEOPLE PASS OVER. ([Jos 4:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010))

the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan--This
position was well calculated to animate the people, who probably crossed
below the ark, as well as to facilitate Joshua's execution of the
minutest instructions respecting the passage ([Num
27:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)). The unfaltering confidence
of the priests contrasts strikingly with the conduct of the people, who
"hasted and passed over." Their faith, like that of many of God's
people, was, through the weakness of nature, blended with fears. But
perhaps their "haste" may be viewed in a more favorable light, as
indicating the alacrity of their obedience, or it might have been
enjoined in order that the the whole multitude might pass in one day.

[Joshua 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 4:11</span></span>

the ark of the Lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the
people--The ark is mentioned as the efficient cause; it had been the
first to move--it was the last to leave--and its movements arrested the
deep attention of the people, who probably stood on the opposite bank,
wrapt in admiration and awe of this closing scene. It was a great
miracle, greater even than the passage of the Red Sea in this respect:
that, admitting the fact, there is no possibility of rationalistic
insinuations as to the influence of natural causes in producing it, as
have been made in the former case.

[Joshua 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 4:12</span></span>

the children of Reuben . . . passed over armed before the children of
Israel--There is no precedency to the other tribes indicated here; for
there is no reason to suppose that the usual order of march was departed
from; but these are honorably mentioned to show that, in pursuance of
their promise ([Jos 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016)), they had
sent a complement of fighting men to accompany their brethren in the war
of invasion.

[Joshua 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 4:13</span></span>

to the plains of Jericho--That part of the Arabah or Ghor, on the west,
is about seven miles broad from the Jordan to the mountain entrance at
Wady-Kelt. Though now desert, this valley was in ancient times richly
covered with wood. An immense palm forest, seven miles long, surrounded
Jericho.

[Joshua 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 4:14</span></span>

GOD MAGNIFIES JOSHUA. ([Jos 4:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014))

On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel--It
appeared clear from the chief part he acted, that he was the divinely
appointed leader; for even the priests did not enter the river or quit
their position, except at his command; and thenceforward his authority
was as firmly established as that of his predecessor.

[Joshua 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 4:18</span></span>

it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark . . . were come out
of the midst of Jordan . . . that the waters of Jordan returned unto
their place--Their crossing, which was the final act, completed the
evidence of the miracle; for then, and not till then, the suspended laws
of nature were restored, the waters returned to their place, and the
river flowed with as full a current as before.

[Joshua 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 4:19</span></span>

the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first
month--that is, the month Nisan, four days before the passover, and the
very day when the paschal lamb required to be set apart, the providence
of God having arranged that the entrance into the promised land should
be at the feast.

and encamped in Gilgal--The name is here given by anticipation (see on
[Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009)). It was a tract of land,
according to JOSEPHUS, fifty stadia (six and one-half miles) from
Jordan, and ten stadia (one and one-fourth miles) from Jericho, at the
eastern outskirts of the palm forest, now supposed to be the spot
occupied by the village Riha.

[Joshua 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 4:20</span></span>

those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in
Gilgal--Probably to render them more conspicuous, they might be raised
on a foundation of earth or turf. The pile was designed to serve a
double purpose--that of impressing the heathen with a sense of the
omnipotence of God, while at the same time it would teach an important
lesson in religion to the young and rising Israelites in after ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 5](jos005)

</div>
