<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

[Joshua 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 7:1</span></span>

ACHAN'S TRESPASS. ([Jos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001))

the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing--There
was one transgressor against the cherem, or ban, on Jericho, and his
transgression brought the guilt and disgrace of sin upon the whole
nation.

Achan--called afterwards "Achar" ("trouble") ([Ch1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#007)).

Zabdi--or Zimri ([Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006)).

Zerah--or Zarah, son of Judah and Tamar ([Gen
38:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#030)). His genealogy is given
probably to show that from a parentage so infamous the descendants would
not be carefully trained in the fear of God.

[Joshua 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 7:2</span></span>

THE ISRAELITES SMITTEN AT AI. (Jos. 7:2-26)

Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai--After the sacking of Jericho, the
next step was to penetrate into the hills above. Accordingly, spies went
up the mountain pass to view the country. The precise site of Ai, or
Hai, is indicated with sufficient clearness ([Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008); [Gen
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003)) and has been recently discovered
in an isolated tell, called by the natives Tell-el-Hajar, "the mount of
stones," at two miles', or thirty-five minutes' distance, east southeast
from Beth-el \[VAN DE VELDE\].

Beth-aven--("house of vanity")--a name afterwards given derisively ([Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015); [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008); [Hos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005)), on account of its idolatries,
to Beth-el, "house of God," but here referred to another place, about
six miles east of Beth-el and three north of Ai.

[Joshua 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 7:3</span></span>

Let not all the people go up, . . . for they are but few--As the
population of Ai amounted to twelve thousand ([Jos
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#025)), it was a considerable town;
though in the hasty and distant reconnoitre made by the spies, it
probably appeared small in comparison to Jericho; and this may have been
the reason for their proposing so small a detachment to capture it.

[Joshua 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 7:4</span></span>

they fled before the men of Ai--An unexpected resistance, and the loss
of thirty-six of their number diffused a panic, which ended in an
ignominious rout.

[Joshua 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 7:5</span></span>

chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim--that is, unto the
"breakings" or "fissures" at the opening of the passes.

and smote them in the going down--that is, the declivity or slope of the
deep, rugged, adjoining wady.

wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water--It is
evident that the troops engaged were a tumultuary, undisciplined band,
no better skilled in military affairs than the Bedouin Arabs, who become
disheartened and flee on the loss of ten or fifteen men. But the
consternation of the Israelites arose from another cause--the evident
displeasure of God, who withheld that aid on which they had confidently
reckoned.

[Joshua 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 7:6</span></span>

Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth . . . before the ark . .
. he and the elders--It is evident, from those tokens of humiliation and
sorrow, that a solemn fast was observed on this occasion. The language
of Joshua's prayer is thought by many to savor of human infirmity and to
be wanting in that reverence and submission he owed to God. But,
although apparently breathing a spirit of bold remonstrance and
complaint, it was in reality the effusion of a deeply humbled and
afflicted mind, expressing his belief that God could not, after having
so miraculously brought His people over Jordan into the promised land,
intend to destroy them, to expose them to the insults of their
triumphant enemies, and bring reproach upon His own name for inconstancy
or unkindness to His people, or inability to resist their enemies.
Unable to understand the cause of the present calamity, he owned the
hand of God.

[Joshua 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 7:10</span></span>

the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up--The answer of the divine oracle
was to this effect: the crisis is owing not to unfaithfulness in Me, but
sin in the people. The conditions of the covenant have been violated by
the reservation of spoil from the doomed city; wickedness, emphatically
called folly, has been committed in Israel ([Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)), and dissimulation, with other
aggravations of the crime, continues to be practised. The people are
liable to destruction equally with the accursed nations of Canaan ([Deu
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#026)). Means must, without delay, be
taken to discover and punish the perpetrator of this trespass that
Israel may be released from the ban, and things be restored to their
former state of prosperity.

[Joshua 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 7:16</span></span>

So Joshua rose up early, and brought Israel by their tribes--that is,
before the tabernacle. The lot being appealed to ([Pro
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)), he proceeded in the inquiry
from heads of tribes to heads of families, and from heads of households
in succession to one family, and to particular persons in that family,
until the criminal was found to be Achan, who, on Joshua's admonition,
confessed the fact of having secreted for his own use, in the floor of
his tent, spoil both in garments and money \[[Jos
7:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)\]. How dreadful must have been
his feelings when he saw the slow but certain process of discovery!
([Num 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#023)).

[Joshua 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 7:19</span></span>

Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give . . . glory to God--a form of
adjuration to tell the truth.

[Joshua 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 7:21</span></span>

a goodly Babylonish garment--literally, "a mantle of Shinar." The plain
of Shinar was in early times celebrated for its gorgeous robes, which
were of brilliant and various colors, generally arranged in figured
patterns, probably resembling those of modern Turkish carpets, and the
colors were either interwoven in the loom or embroidered with the
needle.

two hundred shekels of silver--equivalent to Â£22 10s. sterling,
according to the old Mosaic shekel, or the half of that sum, reckoning
by the common shekel.

a wedge of gold--literally, an ingot or bar in the shape of a tongue.

[Joshua 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 7:22</span></span>

Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent--from impatient
eagerness not only to test the truth of the story, but to clear Israel
from the imputation of guilt. Having discovered the stolen articles,
they laid them out before the Lord, "as a token of their belonging to
Him" on account of the ban.

[Joshua 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 7:24</span></span>

Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan--He with his children and
all his property, cattle as well as movables, were brought into one of
the long broad ravines that open into the Ghor, and after being stoned
to death ([Num 15:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)), his corpse,
with all belonging to him, was consumed to ashes by fire. "All Israel"
was present, not only as spectators, but active agents, as many as
possible, in inflicting the punishment--thus testifying their abhorrence
of the sacrilege, and their intense solicitude to regain the divine
favor. As the divine law expressly forbade the children to be put to
death for their father's sins ([Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016)), the conveyance of Achan's
"sons and daughters" to the place of execution might be only as
spectators, that they might take warning by the parental fate; or, if
they shared his punishment ([Jos
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020)), they had probably been
accomplices in his crime, and, indeed, he could scarcely have dug a hole
within his tent without his family being aware of it.

[Joshua 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 7:26</span></span>

they raised over him a great heap of stones--It is customary to raise
cairns over the graves of criminals or infamous persons in the East
still.

the name of that place was called, The valley of Achor--("trouble"),

unto this day--So painful an episode would give notoriety to the spot,
and it is more than once noted by the sacred writers of a later age
([Isa 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010); [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
