<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 13:1</span></span>

JEROBOAM'S HAND WITHERS. (1Ki. 13:1-22)

there came a man of God out of Judah--Who this prophet was cannot be
ascertained, He came by divine authority. It could not be either Iddo or
Ahijah, for both were alive after the events here related.

Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense--It was at one of the annual
festivals. The king, to give interest to the new ritual, was himself the
officiating priest. The altar and its accompaniments would, of course,
exhibit all the splendor of a new and gorgeously decorated temple. But
the prophet foretold its utter destruction \[[Kg1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#003)\].

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 13:2</span></span>

he cried against the altar--which is put for the whole system of worship
organized in Israel.

Behold, a child shall be born . . . Josiah by name--This is one of the
most remarkable prophecies recorded in the Scriptures; and, in its
clearness, circumstantial minuteness, and exact prediction of an event
that took place three hundred sixty years later, it stands in striking
contrast to the obscure and ambiguous oracles of the heathen. Being
publicly uttered, it must have been well known to the people; and every
Jew who lived at the accomplishment of the event must have been
convinced of the truth of a religion connected with such a prophecy as
this. A present sign was given of the remote event predicted, in a
visible fissure being miraculously made on the altar. Incensed at the
man's license of speech, Jeroboam stretched out his hand and ordered his
attendants to seize the bold intruder. That moment the king's arm became
stiff and motionless, and the altar split asunder, so that the fire and
ashes fell on the floor. Overawed by the effects of his impiety,
Jeroboam besought the prophet's prayer. His request was acceded to, and
the hand was restored to its healthy state. Jeroboam was artful, and
invited the prophet to the royal table, not to do him honor or show his
gratitude for the restoration of his hand, but to win, by his courtesy
and liberal hospitality, a person whom he could not crush by his power.
But the prophet informed him of a divine injunction expressly
prohibiting him from all social intercourse with any in the place, as
well as from returning the same way. The prohibition not to eat or drink
in Beth-el was because all the people had become apostates from the true
religion, and the reason he was not allowed to return the same way was
lest he should be recognized by any whom he had seen in going.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 13:11</span></span>

Now there dwelt an old prophet in Beth-el--If this were a true prophet,
he was a bad man.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 13:18</span></span>

an angel spake unto me by the word of the Lord--This circuitous mode of
speaking, instead of simply saying, "the LORD spake to me," was adopted
to hide an equivocation, to conceal a double meaning--an inferior sense
given to the word "angel"--to offer a seemingly superior authority to
persuade the prophet, while really the authority was secretly known to
the speaker to be inferior. The "angel," that is, "messenger," was his
own sons, who were worshippers, perhaps priests, at Beth-el. As this man
was governed by self-interest, and wished to curry favor with the king
(whose purpose to adhere to his religious polity, he feared, might be
shaken by the portents that had occurred), his hastening after the
prophet of Judah, the deception he practised, and the urgent invitation
by which, on the ground of a falsehood, he prevailed on the too facile
man of God to accompany him back to his house in Beth-el, were to create
an impression in the king's mind that he was an impostor, who acted in
opposition to his own statement.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 13:21</span></span>

he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah--rather, "it cried,"
that is, the word of the Lord.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 13:24</span></span>

THE DISOBEDIENT PROPHET SLAIN BY A LION. ([Kg1
13:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023))

a lion met him by the way, and slew him--There was a wood near Beth-el
infested with lions ([Kg2 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024)). This
sad catastrophe was a severe but necessary judgment of God, to attest
the truth of the message with which the prophet had been charged. All
the circumstances of this tragic occurrence (the undevoured carcass, the
untouched ass, the passengers unmolested by the lion, though standing
there) were calculated to produce an irresistible impression that the
hand of God was in it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 13:31</span></span>

bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried--His motive in
making this request was either that his remains might not be disturbed
when the predicted events took place (see [Kg2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#018)), or he had some superstitious
hope of being benefited at the resurrection by being in the same cave
with a man of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
