<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1019)  [Next](kg1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 20:1</span></span>

BEN-HADAD BESIEGES SAMARIA. ([Kg1
20:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001))

Ben-hadad the king of Syria--This monarch was the son of that Ben-hadad
who, in the reign of Baasha, made a raid on the northern towns of
Galilee ([Kg1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#020)). The thirty-two
kings that were confederate with him were probably tributary princes.
The ancient kings of Syria and PhÅ“nicia ruled only over a single city,
and were independent of each other, except when one great city, as
Damascus, acquired the ascendency, and even then they were allied only
in time of war. The Syrian army encamped at the gates and besieged the
town of Samaria.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 20:2</span></span>

Thus said Ben-hadad, Thy silver and thy gold is mine--To this message
sent him during the siege, Ahab returned a tame and submissive answer,
probably thinking it meant no more than an exaction of tribute. But the
demand was repeated with greater insolence; and yet, from the abject
character of Ahab, there is reason to believe he would have yielded to
this arrogant claim also, had not the voice of his subjects been raised
against it. Ben-hadad's object in these and other boastful menaces was
to intimidate Ahab. But the weak sovereign began to show a little more
spirit, as appears in his abandoning "my lord the king" for the single
"tell him," and giving him a dry but sarcastic hint to glory no more
till the victory is won. Kindling into a rage at the cool defiance,
Ben-hadad gave orders for the immediate sack of the city.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 20:12</span></span>

as he was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions--booths made of
branches of trees and brushwood; which were reared for kings in the
camp, as they still are for Turkish pashas or agas in their expeditions
\[KEIL\].

Set yourselves in array--Invest the city.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 20:13</span></span>

THE SYRIANS ARE SLAIN. ([Kg1 20:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013))

behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab--Though the king and people of
Israel had highly offended Him, God had not utterly cast them off. He
still cherished designs of mercy towards them, and here, though unasked,
gave them a signal proof of His interest in them, by a prophet's
animating announcement that the Lord would that day deliver the mighty
hosts of the enemy into his hand by means of a small, feeble, inadequate
band. Conformably to the prophet's instructions, two hundred thirty-two
young men went boldly out towards the camp of the enemy, while seven
thousand more, apparently volunteers, followed at some little distance,
or posted themselves at the gate, to be ready to reinforce those in
front if occasion required it. Ben-hadad and his vassals and princes
were already, at that early hour--scarcely midday--deep in their cups;
and though informed of this advancing company, yet confiding in his
numbers, or it may be, excited with wine, he ordered with indifference
the proud intruders to be taken alive, whether they came with peaceful
or hostile intentions. It was more easily said than done; the young men
smote right and left, making terrible havoc among their intended
captors; and their attack, together with the sight of the seven
thousand, who soon rushed forward to mingle in the fray, created a panic
in the Syrian army, who immediately took up flight. Ben-hadad himself
escaped the pursuit of the victors on a fleet horse, surrounded by a
squadron of horse guards. This glorious victory, won so easily, and with
such a paltry force opposed to overwhelming numbers, was granted that
Ahab and his people might know ([Kg1
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013)) that God is the Lord. But we do
not read of this acknowledgment being made, or of any sacrifices being
offered in token of their national gratitude.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 20:22</span></span>

the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said--The same prophet who
had predicted the victory shortly reappeared, admonishing the king to
take every precaution against a renewal of hostilities in the following
campaign.

at the return of the year--that is, in spring, when, on the cessation of
the rainy season, military campaigns ([Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)), were anciently begun. It
happened as the prophet had forewarned. Brooding over their late
disastrous defeat, the attendants of Ben-hadad ascribed the misfortune
to two causes--the one arose from the principles of heathenism which led
them to consider the gods of Israel as "gods of the hills"; whereas
their power to aid the Israelites would be gone if the battle was
maintained on the plains. The other cause to which the Syrian courtiers
traced their defeat at Samaria, was the presence of the tributary kings,
who had probably been the first to take flight; and they recommended
"captains to be put in their rooms." Approving of these recommendations,
Ben-hadad renewed his invasion of Israel the next spring by the siege of
Aphek in the valley of Jezreel (compare [Sa1
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001), with [Sa1
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004)), not far from En-dor.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 20:27</span></span>

like two little flocks of kids--Goats are never seen in large flocks, or
scattered, like sheep; and hence the two small but compact divisions of
the Israelite force are compared to goats, not sheep. Humanly speaking,
that little handful of men would have been overpowered by numbers. But a
prophet was sent to the small Israelite army to announce the victory, in
order to convince the Syrians that the God of Israel was omnipotent
everywhere, in the valley as well as on the hills. And, accordingly,
after the two armies had pitched opposite each other for seven days,
they came to an open battle. One hundred thousand Syrians lay dead on
the field, while the fugitives took refuge in Aphek, and there, crowding
on the city walls, they endeavored to make a stand against their
pursuers; but the old walls giving way under the incumbent weight, fell
and buried twenty-seven thousand in the ruins. Ben-hadad succeeded in
extricating himself, and, with his attendants, sought concealment in the
city, fleeing from chamber to chamber; or, as some think it, an inner
chamber, that is, a harem; but seeing no ultimate means of escape, he
was advised to throw himself on the tender mercies of the Israelitish
monarch.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 20:32</span></span>

put ropes on their heads--Captives were dragged by ropes round their
necks in companies, as is depicted on the monuments of Egypt. Their
voluntary attitude and language of submission flattered the pride of
Ahab, who, little concerned about the dishonor done to the God of Israel
by the Syrian king, and thinking of nothing but victory, paraded his
clemency, called the vanquished king "his brother," invited him to sit
in the royal chariot, and dismissed him with a covenant of peace.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 20:34</span></span>

streets for thee in Damascus--implying that a quarter of that city was
to be assigned to Jews, with the free exercise of their religion and
laws, under a judge of their own. This misplaced kindness to a proud and
impious idolater, so unbecoming a theocratic monarch, exposed Ahab to
the same censure and fate as Saul ([Sa1
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#009), &c.). It was in opposition to
God's purpose in giving him the victory.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 20:35</span></span>

A PROPHET REPROVES HIM. ([Kg1
20:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035))

Smite me--This prophet is supposed ([Kg1
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#008)) to have been Micaiah. The
refusal of his neighbor to smite the prophet was manifestly wrong, as it
was a withholding of necessary aid to a prophet in the discharge of a
duty to which he had been called by God, and it was severely punished
\[[Kg1 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#036)\], as a beacon to warn
others (see on 1Ki. 13:2-24). The prophet found a willing assistant, and
then, waiting for Ahab, leads the king unconsciously, in the parabolic
manner of Nathan ([Sa2 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)), to
pronounce his own doom; and this consequent punishment was forthwith
announced by a prophet (see on [Kg1
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#017)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 20:39</span></span>

a talent of silver--Â£342.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 21](kg1021)

</div>
