<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

ELIJAH MEETS OBADIAH. (1Ki. 18:1-16)

the third year--In the New Testament, it is said there was no rain "for
the space of three years and six months" \[[Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)\]. The early rain fell in our
March, the latter rain in our October. Though Ahab might have at first
ridiculed Elijah's announcement, yet when neither of these rains fell in
their season, he was incensed against the prophet as the cause of the
national judgment, and compelled him, with God's direction, to consult
his safety in flight. This was six months after the king was told there
would be neither dew nor rain, and from this period the three years in
this passage are computed.

Go, show thyself unto Ahab--The king had remained obdurate and
impenitent. Another opportunity was to be given him of repentance, and
Elijah was sent in order to declare to him the cause of the national
judgment, and to promise him, on condition of his removing it, the
immediate blessing of rain.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 18:2</span></span>

Elijah went--a marvellous proof of the natural intrepidity of this
prophet, of his moral courage, and his unfaltering confidence in the
protecting care of God, that he ventured to approach the presence of the
raging lion.

there was a sore famine in Samaria--Elijah found that the famine was
pressing with intense severity in the capital. Corn must have been
obtained for the people from Egypt or the adjoining countries, else life
could not have been sustained for three years; but Ahab, with the
chamberlain of his royal household, is represented as giving a personal
search for pasture to his cattle. On the banks of the rivulets, grass,
tender shoots of grass, might naturally be expected; but the water being
dried up, the verdure would disappear. In the pastoral districts of the
East it would be reckoned a most suitable occupation still for a king or
chief to go at the head of such an expedition. Ranging over a large
tract of country, Ahab had gone through one district, Obadiah through
another.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 18:3</span></span>

Obadiah feared the Lord greatly--Although he did not follow the course
taken by the Levites and the majority of pious Israelites at that time
of emigration into Judah ([Ch2
11:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013)), he was a secret and sincere
worshipper. He probably considered the violent character of the
government, and his power of doing some good to the persecuted people of
God as a sufficient excuse for his not going to worship in Jerusalem.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 18:4</span></span>

an hundred prophets--not men endowed with the extraordinary gifts of the
prophetic office, but who were devoted to the service of God, preaching,
praying, praising, &c. ([Sa1
10:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)).

fed them with bread and water--These articles are often used to include
sustenance of any kind. As this succor must have been given them at the
hazard, not only of his place, but his life, it was a strong proof of
his attachment to the true religion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 18:7</span></span>

Obadiah was in the way . . . Elijah met him--Deeming it imprudent to
rush without previous intimation into Ahab's presence, the prophet
solicited Obadiah to announce his return to Ahab. The commission, with a
delicate allusion to the perils he had already encountered in securing
others of God's servants, was, in very touching terms, declined, as
unkind and peculiarly hazardous. But Elijah having dispelled all the
apprehensions entertained about the Spirit's carrying him away, Obadiah
undertook to convey the prophet's message to Ahab and solicit an
interview. But Ahab, bent on revenge, or impatient for the appearance of
rain, went himself to meet Elijah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 18:17</span></span>

Art thou he that troubleth Israel--A violent altercation took place.
Ahab thought to awe him into submission, but the prophet boldly and
undisguisedly told the king that the national calamity was traceable
chiefly to his own and his family's patronage and practice of idolatry.
But, while rebuking the sins, Elijah paid all due respect to the high
rank of the offender. He urged the king to convene, by virtue of his
royal mandate, a public assembly, in whose presence it might be solemnly
decided which was the troubler of Israel. The appeal could not well be
resisted, and Ahab, from whatever motives, consented to the proposal.
God directed and overruled the issue.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 18:19</span></span>

gather . . . the prophets of Baal . . . the prophets of the groves--From
the sequel it appears that the former only came. The latter,
anticipating some evil, evaded the king's command.

which eat at Jezebel's table--that is, not at the royal table where she
herself dined, but they were maintained from her kitchen establishment
(see on [Sa1 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#025) and [Kg1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022)). They were the priests of
Astarte, the Zidonian goddess.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 18:20</span></span>

mount Carmel--is a bold, bluff promontory, which extends from the
western coast of Palestine, at the bay of Acre, for many miles eastward,
to the central hills of Samaria. It is a long range, presenting many
summits, and intersected by a number of small ravines. The spot where
the contest took place is situated at the eastern extremity, which is
also the highest point of the whole ridge. It is called El-Mohhraka,
"the Burning," or "the Burnt Place." No spot could have been better
adapted for the thousands of Israel to have stood drawn up on those
gentle slopes. The rock shoots up in an almost perpendicular wall of
more than two hundred feet in height, on the side of the vale of
Esdraelon. This wall made it visible over the whole plain, and from all
the surrounding heights, where gazing multitudes would be stationed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 18:21</span></span>

Elijah said unto all the people, How long halt ye?--They had long been
attempting to conjoin the service of God with that of Baal. It was an
impracticable union and the people were so struck with a sense of their
own folly, or dread of the king's displeasure, that they "answered not a
word." Elijah proposed to decide for them the controversy between God
and Baal by an appeal, not to the authority of the law, for that would
have no weight, but by a visible token from Heaven. As fire was the
element over which Baal was supposed to preside, Elijah proposed that
two bullocks should be slain and placed on separate altars of wood, the
one for Baal, and the other for God. On whichever the fire should
descend to consume it, the event should determine the true God, whom it
was their duty to serve. The proposal, appearing every way reasonable,
was received by the people with unanimous approval. The priests of Baal
commenced the ceremony by calling on their god. In vain did they
continue invoking their senseless deity from morning till noon, and from
noon till evening, uttering the most piercing cries, using the most
frantic gesticulations, and mingling their blood with the sacrifice. No
response was heard. No fire descended. Elijah exposed their folly and
imposture with the severest irony and, as the day was far advanced,
commenced his operations. Inviting the people to approach and see the
entire proceeding, he first repaired an old altar of God, which Jezebel
had demolished. Then, having arranged the cut pieces of the bullock, he
caused four barrels or jars of water to be dashed all over the altar and
round in the trench. Once, twice, a third time this precaution was
taken, and then, when he had offered an earnest prayer, the miraculous
fire descended ([Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024); [Jdg
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021); [Jdg
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#020); [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)), and consumed not only the
sacrifice, but the very stones of the altar. The impression on the minds
of the people was that of admiration mingled with awe; and with one
voice they acknowledged the supremacy of Jehovah as the true God. Taking
advantage of their excited feelings, Elijah called on them to seize the
priestly impostors, and by their blood fill the channel of the river
(Kishon), which, in consequence of their idolatries, the drought had
dried up--a direction, which, severe and relentless as it seems, it was
his duty as God's minister to give ([Deu
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#005); [Deu
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020)). The natural features of the
mount exactly correspond with the details of this narrative. The
conspicuous summit, 1635 feet above the sea, on which the altars were
placed, presents an esplanade spacious enough for the king and the
priests of Baal to stand on the one side, and Elijah on the other. It is
a rocky soil, on which there is abundance of loose stones, to furnish
the twelve stones of which the altar was built--a bed of thick earth, in
which a trench could be dug; and yet the earth not so loose that the
water poured into it would be absorbed; two hundred fifty feet beneath
the altar plateau, there is a perennial fountain, which, being close to
the altar of the Lord, might not have been accessible to the people; and
whence, therefore, even in that season of severe drought, Elijah could
procure those copious supplies of water which he poured over the altar.
The distance between this spring and the site of the altar is so short,
as to make it perfectly possible to go thrice thither and back again,
whereas it would have been impossible once in an afternoon to fetch
water from the sea \[VAN DE VELDE\]. The summit is one thousand feet
above the Kishon, which nowhere runs from the sea so close to the base
of the mount as just beneath El-Mohhraka; so that the priests of Baal
could, in a few minutes, be taken down to the brook (torrent), and slain
there.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 18:42</span></span>

ELIJAH, BY PRAYER, OBTAINS RAIN. ([Kg1
18:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041))

Ahab went up to eat and to drink--Ahab, kept in painful excitement by
the agonizing scene, had eaten nothing all the day. He was recommended
to refresh himself without a moment's delay; and, while the king was
thus occupied, the prophet, far from taking rest, was absorbed in prayer
for the fulfilment of the promise ([Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)).

put his face between his knees--a posture of earnest supplication still
used.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 18:43</span></span>

Go up now, look toward the sea--From the place of worship there is a
small eminence, which, on the west and northwest side, intercepts the
view of the sea \[STANLEY; VAN DE VELDE\]. It can be ascended in a few
minutes, and presents a wide prospect of the Mediterranean. Six times
the servant went up, but the sky was clear--the sea tranquil. On the
seventh he described the sign of approaching rain \[[Kg1
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)\].

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">kg1 18:44</span></span>

Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's
hand--The clearness of the sky renders the smallest speck distinctly
visible; and this is in Palestine the uniform precursor of rain. It
rises higher and higher, and becomes larger and larger with astonishing
celerity, till the whole heaven is black, and the cloud bursts in a
deluge of rain.

Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee
not--either by the river Kishon being suddenly so swollen as to be
impassable, or from the deep layer of dust in the arid plain being
turned into thick mud, so as to impede the wheels.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">kg1 18:45</span></span>

Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel--now Zerin, a distance of about ten
miles. This race was performed in the midst of a tempest of rain. But
all rejoiced at it, as diffusing a sudden refreshment over all the land
of Jezreel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">kg1 18:46</span></span>

Elijah . . . girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab--It was anciently,
and still is in some countries of the East, customary for kings and
nobles to have runners before their chariots, who are tightly girt for
the purpose. The prophet, like the Bedouins of his native Gilead, had
been trained to run; and, as the Lord was with him, he continued with
unabated agility and strength. It was, in the circumstances, a most
proper service for Elijah to render. It tended to strengthen the
favorable impression made on the heart of Ahab and furnished an answer
to the cavils of Jezebel for it showed that he who was so zealous in the
service of God, was, at the same time, devotedly loyal to his king. The
result of this solemn and decisive contest was a heavy blow and great
discouragement to the cause of idolatry. But subsequent events seem to
prove that the impressions, though deep, were but partial and temporary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
