<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1010)  [Next](kg1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 11:1</span></span>

SOLOMON'S WIVES AND CONCUBINES IN HIS OLD AGE. ([Kg1
11:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001))

But King Solomon loved many strange women--Solomon's extraordinary gift
of wisdom was not sufficient to preserve him from falling into grievous
and fatal errors. A fairer promise of true greatness, a more beautiful
picture of juvenile piety, never was seen than that which he exhibited
at the commencement of his reign. No sadder, more humiliating, or awful
spectacle can be imagined than the besotted apostasy of his old age; and
to him may be applied the words of Paul ([Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003)), of John ([Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)), and of Isaiah ([Isa
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#021)). A love of the world, a
ceaseless round of pleasure, had insensibly corrupted his heart, and
produced, for a while at least, a state of mental darkness. The grace of
God deserted him; and the son of the pious David--the religiously
trained child of Bath-sheba ([Pro
31:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001)), and pupil of Nathan, instead
of showing the stability of sound principle and mature experience became
at last an old and foolish king ([Ecc
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013)). His fall is traced to his "love
of many strange women." Polygamy was tolerated among the ancient
Hebrews; and, although in most countries of the East, the generality of
men, from convenience and economy, confine themselves to one woman, yet
a number of wives is reckoned as an indication of wealth and importance,
just as a numerous stud of horses and a grand equipage are among us. The
sovereign, of course, wishes to have a more numerous harem than any of
his subjects; and the female establishments of many Oriental princes
have, both in ancient and modern times, equalled or exceeded that of
Solomon's. It is probable, therefore, that, in conformity with Oriental
notions, he resorted to it as a piece of state magnificence. But in him
it was unpardonable, as it was a direct and outrageous violation of the
divine law ([Deu 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)), and the very
result which that statute was ordained to prevent was realized in him.
His marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh is not censured either here or
elsewhere (see on [Kg1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001)). It was
only his love for many strange women; for women, though in the East
considered inferiors, exert often a silent but powerful seductive
influence over their husbands in the harem, as elsewhere, and so it was
exemplified in Solomon.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 11:3</span></span>

he had seven hundred wives, princesses--They were, probably, according
to an existing custom, the daughters of tributary chiefs, given as
hostages for good conduct of their fathers.

concubines--were legitimate, but lower or secondary wives. These the
chief or first wife regards without the smallest jealousy or regret, as
they look up to her with feelings of respectful submission. Solomon's
wives became numerous, not all at once, but gradually. Even at an early
period his taste for Oriental show seems to have led to the
establishment of a considerable harem ([Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 11:4</span></span>

when Solomon was old--He could not have been more than fifty.

his wives turned away his heart after other gods--Some, considering the
lapse of Solomon into idolatry as a thing incredible, regard him as
merely humoring his wives in the practice of their superstition; and, in
countenancing their respective rites by his presence, as giving only an
outward homage--a sensible worship, in which neither his understanding
nor his heart was engaged. The apology only makes matters worse, as it
implies an adding of hypocrisy and contempt of God to an open breach of
His law. There seems no possibility of explaining the language of the
sacred historian, but as intimating that Solomon became an actual and
open idolater, worshipping images of wood or stone in sight of the very
temple which, in early life, he had erected to the true God. Hence that
part of Olivet was called the high place of Tophet ([Jer
7:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030)), and the hill is still known
as the Mount of Offense, of the Mount of Corruption ([Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 11:5</span></span>

Ashtoreth--Astarte,

Milcom--Molech,

and Chemosh--He built altars for these three; but, although he is
described ([Kg1 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#008)) as doing the
same for "all his strange wives," there is no evidence that they had
idols distinct from these; and there is no trace whatever of Egyptian
idolatry.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 11:8</span></span>

burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods--The first was considered a
higher act of homage, and is often used as synonymous with worship ([Kg2
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017); [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 11:9</span></span>

GOD THREATENS HIM. ([Kg1 11:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009))

the Lord was angry with Solomon--The divine appearance, first at Gibeon
\[[Kg1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005)\], and then at Jerusalem
\[[Kg1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002)\], after the dedication of
the temple, with the warnings given him on both occasions \[[Kg1
3:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#011); [Kg1
9:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#003)\], had left Solomon inexcusable;
and it was proper and necessary that on one who had been so signally
favored with the gifts of Heaven, but who had grossly abused them, a
terrible judgment should fall. The divine sentence was announced to him
probably by Ahijah; but there was mercy mingled with judgment, in the
circumstance, that it should not be inflicted on Solomon personally--and
that a remnant of the kingdom should be spared--"for David's sake, and
for Jerusalem's sake, which had been chosen" to put God's name there;
not from a partial bias in favor of either, but that the divine promise
might stand ([Sa2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 11:13</span></span>

I will give one tribe to thy son--There were left to Rehoboam the tribes
of Judah, Benjamin, and Levi ([Ch2
11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#012)); and multitudes of
Israelites, who, after the schism of the kingdom, established their
residence within the territory of Judah to enjoy the privileges of the
true religion ([Kg1 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#017)). These are
all reckoned as one tribe.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 11:14</span></span>

SOLOMON'S ADVERSARIES. (1Ki. 11:14-40)

the Lord stirred up an adversary--that is, permitted him, through the
impulse of his own ambition, or revenge, to attack Israel. During the
war of extermination, which Joab carried on in Edom ([Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013)), this Hadad, of the royal
family, a mere boy when rescued from the sword of the ruthless
conqueror, was carried into Egypt, hospitably entertained, and became
allied with the house of the Egyptian king. In after years, the thought
of his native land and his lost kingdom taking possession of his mind,
he, on learning the death of David and Joab, renounced the ease,
possessions, and glory of his Egyptian residence, to return to Edom and
attempt the recovery of his ancestral throne. The movements of this
prince seem to have given much annoyance to the Hebrew government; but
as he was defeated by the numerous and strong garrisons planted
throughout the Edomite territory, Hadad seems to have offered his
services to Rezon, another of Solomon's adversaries ([Kg1
11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)). This man, who had been
general of Hadadezer and, on the defeat of that great king, had
successfully withdrawn a large force, went into the wilderness, led a
predatory life, like Jephthah, David, and others, on the borders of the
Syrian and Arabian deserts. Then, having acquired great power, he at
length became king in Damascus, threw off the yoke, and was "the
adversary of Israel all the days of Solomon." He was succeeded by Hadad,
whose successors took the official title of Ben-hadad from him, the
illustrious founder of the powerful kingdom of Damascene-Syria. These
hostile neighbors, who had been long kept in check by the traditional
fame of David's victories, took courage; and breaking out towards the
latter end of Solomon's reign, they must have not only disturbed his
kingdom by their inroads, but greatly crippled his revenue by stopping
his lucrative traffic with Tadmor and the Euphrates.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 11:26</span></span>

Jeroboam--This was an internal enemy of a still more formidable
character. He was a young man of talent and energy, who, having been
appointed by Solomon superintendent of the engineering works projected
around Jerusalem, had risen into public notice, and on being informed by
a very significant act of the prophet Ahijah of the royal destiny which,
by divine appointment, awaited him, his mind took a new turn.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 11:29</span></span>

clad--rather, "wrapped up." The meaning is, "Ahijah, the Shilonite, the
prophet, went and took a fit station in the way; and, in order that he
might not be known, he wrapped himself up, so as closely to conceal
himself, in a new garment, a surtout, which he afterwards tore in twelve
pieces." Notwithstanding this privacy, the story, and the prediction
connected with it \[[Kg1 11:30-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#030)\],
probably reached the king's ears; and Jeroboam became a marked man
\[[Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040)\]. His aspiring ambition,
impatient for the death of Solomon, led him to form plots and
conspiracies, in consequence of which he was compelled to flee to Egypt.
Though chosen of God, he would not wait the course of God's providence,
and therefore incurred the penalty of death by his criminal rebellion.
The heavy exactions and compulsory labor ([Kg1
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028)) which Solomon latterly imposed
upon his subjects, when his foreign resources began to fail, had
prepared the greater part of the kingdom for a revolt under so popular a
demagogue as Jeroboam.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 11:40</span></span>

Shishak--He harbored and encouraged the rebellious refugee, and was of a
different dynasty from the father-in-law of Solomon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](kg1012)

</div>
