<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1011)  [Next](kg1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 12:1</span></span>

REFUSING THE OLD MEN'S COUNSEL. ([Kg1
12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001))

Rehoboam went to Shechem--He was the oldest, and perhaps the only son of
Solomon, and had been, doubtless, designated by his father heir to the
throne, as Solomon had been by David. The incident here related took
place after the funeral obsequies of the late king and the period for
public mourning had past. When all Israel came to make him king, it was
not to exercise their old right of election ([Sa1
10:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#019)), for, after God's promise of
the perpetual sovereignty to David's posterity, their duty was
submission to the authority of the rightful heir; but their object was,
when making him king, to renew the conditions and stipulations to which
their constitutional kings were subject ([Sa1
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#025)). To the omission of such
rehearsing which, under the peculiar circumstances in which Solomon was
made king, they were disposed to ascribe the absolutism of his
government.

Shechem--This ancient, venerable, and central town was the place of
convocation; and it is evident, if not from the appointment of that
place, at least from the tenor of their language, and the concerted
presence of Jeroboam \[[Kg1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#003)\],
that the people were determined on revolt.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 12:4</span></span>

Thy father made our yoke grievous--The splendor of Solomon's court and
the magnitude of his undertakings being such, that neither the tribute
of dependent states, nor the presents of foreign princes, nor the
profits of his commercial enterprises, were adequate to carry them on,
he had been obliged, for obtaining the necessary revenue, to begin a
system of heavy taxation. The people looked only to the burdens, not to
the benefits they derived from Solomon's peaceful and prosperous
reign--and the evils from which they demanded deliverance were civil
oppressions, not idolatry, to which they appear to have been indifferent
or approving.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 12:5</span></span>

he said . . . Depart yet for three days--It was prudent to take the
people's demand into calm and deliberate consideration. Whether, had the
advice of the sage and experienced counsellors been followed, any good
result would have followed, it is impossible to say. It would at least
have removed all pretext for the separation. \[See on [Ch2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#007).\] But he preferred the counsel
of his young companions (not in age, for they were all about forty-one,
but inexperienced), who recommended prompt and decisive measures to
quell the malcontents.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 12:11</span></span>

whips . . . scorpions--The latter \[instruments\], as contrasted with
the former, are supposed to mean thongs thickly set with sharp iron
points, used in the castigation of slaves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 12:15</span></span>

the king hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from the
Lord--That was the overruling cause. Rehoboam's weakness ([Ecc
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#018)) and inexperience in public
affairs has given rise to the probable conjecture, that, like many other
princes in the East, he had been kept secluded in the harem till the
period of his accession ([Ecc 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#014)),
his father being either afraid of his aspiring to the sovereignty, like
the two sons of David, or, which is more probable, afraid of prematurely
exposing his imbecility. The king's haughty and violent answer to a
people already filled with a spirit of discontent and exasperation,
indicated so great an incapacity to appreciate the gravity of the
crisis, so utter a want of common sense, as to create a belief that he
was struck with judicial blindness. It was received with mingled scorn
and derision. The revolt was accomplished, and yet so quietly, that
Rehoboam remained in Shechem, fancying himself the sovereign of a united
kingdom, until his chief tax gatherer, who had been most imprudently
sent to treat with the people, had been stoned to death. This opened his
eyes, and he fled for security to Jerusalem.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 12:20</span></span>

JEROBOAM MADE KING OVER THEM. ([Kg1
12:20-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020))

when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again--This verse closes
the parenthetical narrative begun at [Kg1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002), and [Kg1
12:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#021) resume the history from [Kg1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001). Rehoboam determined to assert
his authority by leading a large force into the disaffected provinces.
But the revolt of the ten tribes was completed when the prophet Shemaiah
ordered, in the Lord's name, an abandonment of any hostile measures
against the revolutionists. The army, overawed by the divine
prohibition, dispersed, and the king was obliged to submit.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 12:25</span></span>

Jeroboam built Shechem--destroyed by Abimelech (Jdg. 9:1-49). It was
rebuilt, and perhaps fortified, by Jeroboam, as a royal residence.

built Penuel--a ruined city with a tower ([Jdg
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#009)), east of Jordan, on the north
bank of the Jabbok. It was an object of importance to restore this
fortress (as it lay on the caravan road from Gilead to Damascus and
Palmyra) and to secure his frontier on that quarter.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 12:26</span></span>

Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of
David--Having received the kingdom from God, he should have relied on
the divine protection. But he did not. With a view to withdraw the
people from the temple and destroy the sacred associations connected
with Jerusalem, he made serious and unwarranted innovations on the
religious observances of the country, on pretext of saving the people
the trouble and expense of a distant journey. First, he erected two
golden calves--the young bulls, Apis and Mnevis, as symbols (in the
Egyptian fashion) of the true God, and the nearest, according to his
fancy, to the figures of the cherubim. The one was placed at Dan, in the
northern part of his kingdom; the other at Beth-el, the southern
extremity, in sight of Jerusalem, and in which place he probably thought
God was as likely to manifest Himself as at Jerusalem (Gen. 32:1-32;
[Kg2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#002)). The latter place was the
most frequented--for the words ([Kg1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#030)) should be rendered, "the people
even to Dan went to worship before the one" ([Jer
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013); [Amo
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004); [Amo
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#005); [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008); [Hos
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008)). The innovation was a sin
because it was setting up the worship of God by symbols and images and
departing from the place where He had chosen to put His name. Secondly,
he changed the feast of tabernacles from the fifteenth of the seventh to
the fifteenth of the eighth month. The ostensible reason might be, that
the ingathering or harvest was later in the northern parts of the
kingdom; but the real reason was to eradicate the old association with
this, the most welcome and joyous festival of the year.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 12:31</span></span>

made priests of the lowest of the people--literally, "out of all the
people," the Levites refusing to act. He himself assumed to himself the
functions of the high priest, at least, at the great festival, probably
from seeing the king of Egypt conjoin the royal and sacred offices, and
deeming the office of the high priest too great to be vested in a
subject.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](kg1013)

</div>
