<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2022)  [Next](kg2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 23:1</span></span>

JOSIAH CAUSES THE LAW TO BE READ. ([Kg2
23:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001))

the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders--This pious and
patriotic king, not content with the promise of his own security, felt,
after Huldah's response, an increased desire to avert the threatened
calamities from his kingdom and people. Knowing the richness of the
divine clemency and grace to the penitent, he convened the elders of the
people, and placing himself at their head, accompanied by the collective
body of the inhabitants, went in solemn procession to the temple, where
he ordered the book of the law to be read to the assembled audience, and
covenanted, with the unanimous concurrence of his subjects, to adhere
steadfastly to all the commandments of the Lord. It was an occasion of
solemn interest, closely connected with a great national crisis, and the
beautiful example of piety in the highest quarter would exert a salutary
influence over all classes of the people in animating their devotions
and encouraging their return to the faith of their fathers.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 23:2</span></span>

he read in their ears--that is, "caused to be read."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 23:3</span></span>

all the people stood to the covenant--that is, they agreed to the
proposals made; they assented to what was required of them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 23:4</span></span>

HE DESTROYS IDOLATRY. (2Ki. 23:4-28)

the king commanded Hilkiah, &c.--that is, the high priest and other
priests, for there was not a variety of official gradations in the
temple.

all the vessels, &c.--the whole apparatus of idol-worship.

burned them without Jerusalem--The law required them to be consigned to
the flames ([Deu 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025)).

in the fields of Kidron--most probably that part of the valley of
Kidron, where lies Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives. It is a level,
spacious basin, abounding at present with plantations \[ROBINSON\]. The
brook winds along the east and south of the city, the channel of which
is throughout a large portion of the year almost or wholly dry, except
after heavy rains, when it suddenly swells and overflows. There were
emptied all the impurities of the temple ([Ch2
29:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#015)) and the city. His reforming
predecessors had ordered the mutilated relics of idolatry to be thrown
into that receptacle of filth ([Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013); [Ch2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016); [Ch2
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#014)); but Josiah, while he imitated
their piety, far outstripped them in zeal; for he caused the ashes of
the burnt wood and the fragments of the broken metal to be collected and
conveyed to Beth-el, in order thenceforth to associate ideas of horror
and aversion with that place, as odious for the worst pollutions.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 23:5</span></span>

put down the idolatrous priests--Hebrew, chemarim, "scorched," that is,
Guebres, or fire-worshippers, distinguished by a girdle ([Eze
23:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014)) or belt of wool and camel's
hair, twisted round the body twice and tied with four knots, which had a
symbolic meaning, and made it a supposed defense against evil.

them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon,
&c.--or Baal-shemesh, for Baal was sometimes considered the sun. This
form of false worship was not by images, but pure star-worship, borrowed
from the old Assyrians.

and--rather, "even to all the host of heaven."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 23:6</span></span>

brought out the grove--that is, Asherah, the mystic tree, placed by
Manasseh in the temple \[[Kg2 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005);
[Ch2 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#005)\], removed by him after his
conversion \[[Ch2 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)\], but
replaced in the sanctuary by his wicked son Amon \[[Kg2
21:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#020)\]. Josiah had it taken to
Kidron, burnt the wood, ground the metal about it to powder, and strewed
the ashes "on the graves of the children of the people." The poor were
buried in a common on part of the valley of Kidron. But reference is
here made to the graves "of those that had sacrificed" ([Ch2
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 23:7</span></span>

brake down the houses of the sodomites--not solid houses, but tents,
called elsewhere \[[Kg2 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030)\]
Succoth-benoth, "the booths of the young women," who were devoted to the
service of Asherah, for which they made embroidered hangings, and in
which they gave themselves to unbridled revelry and lust. Or the
hangings might be for Asherah itself, as it is a popular superstition in
the East to hang pieces of cloth on trees.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 23:8</span></span>

he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the
high places, &c.--Many of the Levitical order, finding in the reigns of
Manasseh and Amon the temple-worship abolished and the tithes and other
offerings alienated, had been betrayed into the folly of officiating on
high places, and presenting such sacrifices as were brought to them.
These irregularities, even though the object of that worship was the
true God, were prohibited in the law ([Deu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011)). Those who had been guilty of
this sin, Josiah brought to Jerusalem. Regarding them as defiled, he
debarred them from the service of the temple, but gave them an allowance
out of the temple revenues, like the lame and disabled members of the
priesthood ([Lev 21:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#021)).

from Geba to to Beer-sheba--the most northern and the most southern
places in Judah--meaning all parts of the kingdom.

the high places . . . which were in the entering in of the gate of
Joshua--The governor's house and gate were on the left of the city gate,
and close by the entrance of that civic mansion house were public
altars, dedicated, it might be, to the true God, but contrary to His own
ordinance of worship ([Isa 57:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#008)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 23:10</span></span>

Topheth--so called from Toph--a "drum." It is the prevailing opinion
among Jewish writers that the cries of the terrified children made to
pass through the fire in that place of idolatrous horror were drowned by
the sound of that instrument.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 23:11</span></span>

took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun--Among
the people who anciently worshipped the sun, horses were usually
dedicated to that divinity, from the supposed idea that the sun himself
was drawn in a chariot by horses. In some cases these horses were
sacrificed; but more commonly they were employed either in the sacred
processions to carry the images of the sun, or for the worshippers to
ride in every morning to welcome his rise. It seems that the idolatrous
kings, Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon, or their great officers, proceeded on
these horses early on each day from the east gate of the temple to
salute and worship the sun at his appearing above the horizon.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 23:12</span></span>

the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz--Altars
were reared on the flat roofs of houses, where the worshippers of "the
host of heaven" burnt incense ([Zep
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005); [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)). Ahaz had reared altars for
this purpose on the oleah, or upper chamber of his palace, and Manasseh
on some portion of the roof of the temple. Josiah demolished both of
these structures.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 23:13</span></span>

the high places . . . which Solomon . . . had builded--(See on [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005)).

the right hand of the mount of corruption--The Mount of Olives is a
hilly range on the east of Jerusalem. This range has three summits, of
which the central one is the Mount of Corruption, so called from the
idol temples built there, and of course the hill on the right hand
denotes the southernmost peak. Josiah is said not to have destroyed, but
only defiled, "the high places on the hill of corruption." It is most
probable that Hezekiah had long before demolished the idolatrous temples
erected there by Solomon but, as the superstitious people continued to
regard the spot as consecrated ground, Josiah defiled it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 23:14</span></span>

filled their places with the bones of men--Every monument of idolatry in
his dominion he in like manner destroyed, and the places where they
stood he defiled by strewing them with dead men's bones. The presence of
a dead carcass rendered both persons and places unclean in the eyes both
of Jews and heathens.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 23:15</span></span>

Moreover the altar that was at Beth-el, &c.--Not satisfied with the
removal of every vestige of idolatry from his own dominion, this zealous
iconoclast made a tour of inspection through the cities of Samaria and
all the territory formerly occupied by the ten tribes, destroying the
altars and temples of the high places, consigning the Asherim to the
flames, putting to death the priests of the high places, and showing his
horror at idolatry by ransacking the sepulchers of idolatrous priests,
and strewing the burnt ashes of their bones upon the altars before he
demolished them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 23:16</span></span>

according to the word of the Lord which the man of God proclaimed,
&c.--In carrying on these proceedings, Josiah was prompted by his own
intense hatred of idolatry. But it is remarkable that this act was
predicted three hundred twenty-six years before his birth, and his name
also was expressly mentioned, as well as the very place where it should
be done ([Kg1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)). This is one of
the most most remarkable prophecies in the Bible.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 23:17</span></span>

What title is that that I see?--The king's attention probably, had been
arrested by a tombstone more conspicuous than the rest around it,
bearing on an inscription the name of him that lay beneath; and this
prompted his curiosity to make the inquiry.

the men of the city--not the Assyrian colonists--for they could know
nothing about the ancient transactions of the place--but some of the old
people who had been allowed to remain, and perhaps the tomb itself might
not then have been discoverable, through the effects of time and
neglect, had not some "Old Mortality" garnished the sepulcher of the
righteous.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 23:21</span></span>

the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the passover unto the
Lord your God, &c.--It was observed with great solemnity and was
attended not only by his own subjects, but by the remnant people from
Israel (see on 2Ch. 35:1-19). Many of the Israelites who were at
Jerusalem might have heard of, if they did not hear, the law read by
Josiah. It is probable that they might even have procured a copy of the
law, stimulated as they were to the better observance of Jehovah's
worship by the unusual and solemn transactions at Jerusalem.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 23:26</span></span>

Notwithstanding, the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his
wrath,--&c. The national reformation which Josiah carried on was
acquiesced in by the people from submission to the royal will; but they
entertained a secret and strong hankering after the suppressed
idolatries. Though outwardly purified, their hearts were not right
towards God, as appears from many passages of the prophetic writings;
their thorough reform was hopeless; and God, who saw no sign of genuine
repentance, allowed His decree ([Kg2
21:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012)) for the subversion of the
kingdom to take fatal effect.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 23:29</span></span>

In his days Pharaoh-nechoh--(See [Ch2
35:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 24](kg2024)

</div>
