<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2009)  [Next](kg2011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 10:1</span></span>

JEHU CAUSES SEVENTY OF AHAB'S CHILDREN TO BE BEHEADED. (2Ki. 10:1-17)

Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria--As it appears ([Kg2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#013)), that grandsons are included it
is probable that this number comprehended the whole posterity of Ahab.
Their being all assembled in that capital might arise from their being
left there on the king's departure for Ramoth-gilead, or from their
taking refuge in some of the strongholds of that city on the news of
Jehu's conspiracy. It may be inferred from the tenor of Jehu's letters
that their first intention was to select the fittest of the royal family
and set him up as king. Perhaps this challenge of Jehu was designed as a
stroke of policy on his part to elicit their views, and to find out
whether they were inclined to be pacific or hostile. The bold character
of the man, and the rapid success of his conspiracy, terrified the civic
authorities of Samaria and Jezreel into submission.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 10:5</span></span>

he that was over the house--the governor or chamberlain of the palace.

the bringers-up of the children--Anciently, and still also in many
Eastern countries, the principal grandees were charged with the support
and education of the royal princes. This involved a heavy expense which
they were forced to bear, but for which they endeavored to find some
compensation in the advantages of their connection with the court.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 10:6</span></span>

take ye the heads of the men, your master's sons--The barbarous practice
of a successful usurper slaughtering all who may have claims to the
throne, has been frequently exemplified in the ancient and modern
histories of the East.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 10:8</span></span>

Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate, &c.--The
exhibition of the heads of enemies is always considered a glorious
trophy. Sometimes a pile of heads is erected at the gate of the palace;
and a head of peculiarly striking appearance selected to grace the
summit of the pyramid.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 10:9</span></span>

said to all the people, Ye be righteous, &c.--A great concourse was
assembled to gaze on this novel and ghastly spectacle. The speech which
Jehu addressed to the spectators was artfully framed to impress their
minds with the idea that so wholesale a massacre was the result of the
divine judgments denounced on the house of Ahab; and the effect of it
was to prepare the public mind for hearing, without horror, of a similar
revolting tragedy which was soon after perpetrated, namely, the
extinction of all the influential friends and supporters of the dynasty
of Ahab, including those of the royal house of Judah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 10:13</span></span>

We are the brethren of Ahaziah--that is, not full, but step-brothers,
sons of Jehoram by various concubines. Ignorant of the revolution that
had taken place, they were travelling to Samaria on a visit to their
royal relatives of Israel, when they were seized and put to death,
because of the apprehension that they might probably stimulate and
strengthen the party that still remained faithful in their allegiance to
Ahab's dynasty.

children of the queen--that is, of the queen mother, or regent, Jezebel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 10:15</span></span>

Jehonadab the son of Rechab--(See [Ch1
2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055)). A person who, from his piety
and simple primitive manner of life (Jer. 35:1-19), was highly esteemed,
and possessed great influence in the country. Jehu saw in a moment the
advantage that his cause would gain from the friendship and countenance
of this venerable man in the eyes of the people, and accordingly paid
him the distinguished attention of inviting him to a seat in his
chariot.

give me thine hand--not simply to aid him in getting up, but for a far
more significant and important purpose--the giving, or rather joining
hands, being the recognized mode of striking a league or covenant, as
well as of testifying fealty to a new sovereign; accordingly, it is
said, "he \[Jehonadab\] gave him \[Jehu\] his hand."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 10:19</span></span>

HE DESTROYS THE WORSHIPPERS OF BAAL. ([Kg2
10:18-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#018))

call unto me all the prophets of Baal--The votaries of Baal are here
classified under the several titles of prophets, priests, and servants,
or worshippers generally. They might be easily convened into one
spacious temple, as their number had been greatly diminished both by the
influential ministrations of Elijah and Elisha, and also from the late
King Joram's neglect and discontinuance of the worship. Jehu's
appointment of a solemn sacrifice in honor of Baal, and a summons to all
his worshippers to join in its celebration, was a deep-laid plot, which
he had resolved upon for their extinction, a measure in perfect harmony
with the Mosaic law, and worthy of a constitutional king of Israel. It
was done, however, not from religious, but purely political motives,
because he believed that the existence and interests of the Baalites
were inseparably bound up with the dynasty of Ahab and because he hoped
that by their extermination he would secure the attachment of the far
larger and more influential party who worshipped God in Israel.
Jehonadab's concurrence must have been given in the belief of his being
actuated solely by the highest principles of piety and zeal.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 10:22</span></span>

Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal--The priests of
Baal were clad, probably, in robes of white byssus while they were
engaged in the functions of their office, and these were kept under the
care of an officer in a particular wardrobe of Baal's temple. This
treacherous massacre, and the means taken to accomplish it, are
paralleled by the slaughter of the Janissaries and other terrible
tragedies in the modern history of the East.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 10:29</span></span>

Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam . . . Jehu departed not from after
them--Jehu had no intention of carrying his zeal for the Lord beyond a
certain point, and as he considered it impolitic to encourage his
subjects to travel to Jerusalem, he re-established the symbolic worship
of the calves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 11](kg2011)

</div>
