<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2008)  [Next](kg2010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 9:1</span></span>

JEHU IS ANOINTED. (2Ki. 9:1-23)

Ramoth-gilead--a city of great importance to the Hebrew people, east of
Jordan, as a fortress of defense against the Syrians. Jehoram had
regained it ([Kg2 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#029)). But the
Israelitish army was still encamped there, under the command of Jehu.

Elisha . . . called one of the children of the prophets--This errand
referred to the last commission given to Elijah in Horeb ([Kg1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)).

box of oil--(See [Sa1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 9:2</span></span>

carry him to an inner chamber--both to ensure the safety of the
messenger and to prevent all obstruction in the execution of the
business.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 9:3</span></span>

I have anointed thee king over Israel--This was only a part of the
message; the full announcement of which is given ([Kg2
9:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#007)).

flee, and tarry not--for fear of being surprised and overtaken by the
spies or servants of the court.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 9:4</span></span>

So the young man . . . went to Ramoth-gilead--His ready undertaking of
this delicate and hazardous mission was an eminent proof of his piety
and obedience. The act of anointing being done through a commissioned
prophet, was a divine intimation of his investiture with the sovereign
power. But it was sometimes done long prior to the actual possession of
the throne ([Sa1 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013)); and, in like
manner, the commission had, in this instance, been given also a long
time before to Elijah \[[Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)\],
who, for good reasons, left it in charge to Elisha; and he awaited God's
time and command for executing it \[POOLE\].

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 9:10</span></span>

in the portion of Jezreel--that is, that had formerly been the vineyard
of Naboth.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 9:11</span></span>

Is all well? &c.--Jehu's attendants knew that the stranger belonged to
the order of the prophets by his garb, gestures, and form of address;
and soldiers such as they very readily concluded such persons to be
crackbrained, not only from the sordid negligence of their personal
appearance and their open contempt of the world, but from the religious
pursuits in which their whole lives were spent, and the grotesque
actions which they frequently performed (compare [Jer
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#026)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 9:13</span></span>

they hasted, and took every man his garment--the upper cloak which they
spread on the ground, as a token of their homage to their distinguished
commander ([Mat 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#007)).

top of the stairs--from the room where the prophet had privately
anointed Jehu. That general returned to join his brother officers in the
public apartment, who, immediately on learning his destined elevation,
conducted him to the top of the stairs leading to the roof. This was the
most conspicuous place of an Oriental structure that could be chosen,
being at the very top of the gate building, and fully in view of the
people and military in the open ground in front of the building
\[KITTO\]. The popularity of Jehu with the army thus favored the designs
of Providence in procuring his immediate and enthusiastic proclamation
as king, and the top of the stairs was taken as a most convenient
substitute for a throne.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 9:14</span></span>

Joram had kept Ramoth-gilead--rather, "was keeping," guarding, or
besieging it, with the greater part of the military force of Israel. The
king's wounds had compelled his retirement from the scene of action, and
so the troops were left in command of Jehu.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 9:16</span></span>

So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel--Full of ambitious
designs, he immediately proceeded to cross the Jordan to execute his
commission on the house of Ahab.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 9:17</span></span>

there stood a watchman on the tower of Jezreel--The Hebrew palaces,
besides being situated on hills had usually towers attached to them, not
only for the pleasure of a fine prospect, but as posts of useful
observation. The ancient watchtower of Jezreel must have commanded a
view of the whole region eastward, nearly down to the Jordan. Beth-shan
stands on a rising ground about six or seven miles below it, in a narrow
part of the plain; and when Jehu and his retinue reached that point
between Gilboa and Beth-shan, they could be fully descried by the
watchman on the tower. A report was made to Joram in his palace below. A
messenger on horseback was quickly despatched down into the plain to
meet the ambiguous host and to question the object of their approach.
"Is it peace?" We may safely assume that this messenger would meet Jehu
at the distance of three miles or more. On the report made of his being
detained and turned into the rear of the still advancing troops, a
second messenger was in like manner despatched, who would naturally meet
Jehu at the distance of a mile or a mile and a half down on the plain.
He also being turned into the rear, the watchman now distinctly
perceived "the driving to be like the driving of Jehu, the son of
Nimshi; for he driveth furiously." The alarmed monarch, awakened to a
sense of his impending danger, quickly summoned his forces to meet the
crisis. Accompanied by Ahaziah, king of Judah, the two sovereigns
ascended their chariots to make a feeble resistance to the impetuous
onset of Jehu, who quickly from the plain ascended the steep northern
sides of the site on which Jezreel stood, and the conflicting parties
met "in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite," where Joram was quickly
despatched by an arrow from the strong arm of Jehu. We were impressed
with the obvious accuracy of the sacred historian; the localities and
distances being such as seem naturally to be required by the incidents
related, affording just time for the transactions to have occurred in
the order in which they are recorded \[HOWE\].

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 9:25</span></span>

cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite,
&c.--according to the doom pronounced by divine authority on Ahab ([Kg1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019)), but which on his repentance
was deferred to be executed on his son.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 9:26</span></span>

the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the Lord--Although
their death is not expressly mentioned, it is plainly implied in the
confiscation of his property (see [Kg1
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#016)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 9:27</span></span>

AHAZIAH IS SLAIN. ([Kg2 9:27-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#027))

Ahaziah--was grandnephew to King Joram, and great-grandson to King Ahab.

Ibleam--near Megiddo, in the tribe of Issachar ([Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011); [Jdg
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027)); and Gur was an adjoining hill.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 9:30</span></span>

Jezebel painted her face--literally, "her eyes," according to a custom
universal in the East among women, of staining the eyelids with a black
powder made of pulverized antimony, or lead ore mixed with oil, and
applied with a small brush on the border, so that by this dark ligament
on the edge, the largeness as well as the luster of the eye itself was
thought to be increased. Her object was, by her royal attire, not to
captivate, but to overawe Jehu.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 9:35</span></span>

found no more of her than the skull, and the palms of her hands,
&c.--The dog has a rooted aversion to prey on the human hands and feet.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 9:36</span></span>

JEZEBEL EATEN BY DOGS. ([Kg2 9:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#036))

This is the word of the Lord--(See [Kg1
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#023)). Jehu's statement, however, was
not a literal but a paraphrased quotation of Elijah's prophecy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 10](kg2010)

</div>
