<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2019)  [Next](kg2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 20:1</span></span>

HEZEKIAH'S LIFE LENGTHENED. ([Kg2
20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001))

In those days was Hezekiah sick--As his reign lasted twenty-nine years
([Kg2 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002)), and his kingdom was
invaded in the fourteenth ([Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)), it is evident that this sudden
and severe illness must have occurred in the very year of the Syrian
invasion. Between the threatened attack and the actual appearance of the
enemy, this incident in Hezekiah's history must have taken place. But
according to the usage of the sacred historian, the story of Sennacherib
is completed before entering on what was personal to the king of Judah
(see also Isa. 37:36-38:1).

Set thine house in order--Isaiah, being of the blood royal, might have
access to the king's private house. But since the prophet was
commissioned to make this announcement, the message must be considered
as referring to matters of higher importance than the settlement of the
king's domestic and private affairs. It must have related chiefly to the
state of his kingdom, he having not as yet any son (compare [Kg2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006) with [Kg2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)).

for thou shall die, and not live--The disease was of a malignant
character and would be mortal in its effects, unless the healing power
of God should miraculously interpose.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 20:2</span></span>

he turned his face to the wall--not like Ahab ([Kg1
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#004)), in fretful discontent, but in
order to secure a better opportunity for prayer.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 20:3</span></span>

remember now how I have walked before thee, &c.--The course of
Hezekiah's thoughts was evidently directed to the promise made to David
and his successors on the throne ([Kg1
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025)). He had kept the conditions as
faithfully as human infirmity admitted; and as he had been all along
free from any of those great crimes by which, through the judgment of
God, human life was often suddenly cut short, his great grief might
arise partly from the love of life, partly from the obscurity of the
Mosaic dispensation, where life and immortality had not been fully
brought to light, and partly from his plans for the reformation of his
kingdom being frustrated by his death. He pleaded the fulfilment of the
promise.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 20:4</span></span>

afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court--of the royal castle.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 20:5</span></span>

Thus saith . . . the God of David thy father--An immediate answer was
given to his prayer, containing an assurance that the Lord was mindful
of His promise to David and would accomplish it in Hezekiah's
experience, both by the prolongation of his life, and his deliverance
from the Assyrians.

on the third day--The perfect recovery from a dangerous sickness, within
so short a time, shows the miraculous character of the cure (see his
thanksgiving song, [Isa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#009)). The
disease cannot be ascertained; but the text gives no hint that the
plague was raging then in Jerusalem; and although Arab physicians apply
a cataplasm of figs to plague-boils, they also do so in other cases, as
figs are considered useful in ripening and soothing inflammatory ulcers.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 20:8</span></span>

THE SUN GOES TEN DEGREES BACKWARD. ([Kg2
20:8-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008))

Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What will be the sign that the Lord shall
heal me--His recovery in the course of nature was so unlooked for, that
the king asked for some token to justify his reliance on the truth of
the prophet's communication; and the sign he specified was granted to
him. The shadow of the sun went back upon the dial of Ahaz the ten
degrees it had gone down. Various conjectures have been formed as to
this dial. The word in the original is "degrees," or "steps," and hence
many commentators have supposed that it was a stair, so artfully
contrived, that the shadows on the steps indicated the hours and course
of the sun. But it is more probable that it was a proper instrument,
and, from the Hebrews having no term to designate it, that it was one of
the foreign novelties imported from Babylon by Ahaz. It seems to have
been of such magnitude, and so placed in the court, that Isaiah could
point to it, and the king see it, from his chamber. The retrogression of
the sun's shadow on the dial was miraculously accomplished by the
omnipotent power of God; but the phenomenon was temporary, local,
confined to the notice, and intended for the satisfaction, only of
Hezekiah and his court.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 20:12</span></span>

Berodach-baladan-- ([Isa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001)), the
first king of Babylon mentioned in sacred history; formerly its rulers
were viceroys of the Assyrian monarchs. This individual threw off the
yoke, and asserting his independence, made with varying success, a long
and obstinate resistance \[RAWLINSON, Outlines\]. The message of
congratulation to Hezekiah, was, in all likelihood, accompanied with
proposals for a defensive alliance against their common Assyrian enemy.
The king of Judah, flattered with this honor, showed the ambassadors all
his treasures, his armory and warlike stores; and his motive for this
was evidently that the Babylonian deputies might be the more induced to
prize his friendship.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 20:13</span></span>

the silver, and the gold--He paid so much tribute to Sennacherib as
exhausted his treasury (compare [Kg2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016)). But, after the destruction of
Sennacherib, presents were brought him from various quarters, out of
respect to a king who, by his faith and prayer, saved his country; and
besides, it is by no means improbable that from the corpses in the
Assyrian camp, all the gold and silver he had paid might be recovered.
The vain display, however, was offensive to his divine liege lord, who
sent Isaiah to reprove him. The answer he gave the prophet ([Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)) shows how he was elated by the
compliment of their visit; but it was wrong, as presenting a bait for
the cupidity of these rapacious foreigners, who, at no distant period,
would return and pillage his country, and transfer all the possessions
he ostentatiously displayed to Babylon, as well as his posterity to be
court attendants in that country--(see on [Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 20:19</span></span>

Good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken--indicating a humble
and pious resignation to the divine will. The concluding part of his
reply was uttered after a pause and was probably an ejaculation to
himself, expressing his thankfulness, that, though great afflictions
should befall his descendants, the execution of the divine judgment was
to be suspended during his own lifetime.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 20:20</span></span>

pool and a conduit--(See on [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](kg2021)

</div>
