<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev021)  [Next](lev023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001)

[Leviticus 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 22:2</span></span>

THE PRIESTS IN THEIR UNCLEANNESS. ([Lev
22:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001))

Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the
holy things--"To separate" means, in the language of the Mosaic ritual,
"to abstain"; and therefore the import of this injunction is that the
priests should abstain from eating that part of the sacrifices which,
though belonging to their order, was to be partaken of only by such of
them as were free from legal impurities.

that they profane not my holy name in those things which they hallow
unto me, &c.--that is, let them not, by their want of due reverence,
give occasion to profane my holy name. A careless or irreverent use of
things consecrated to God tends to dishonor the name and bring
disrespect on the worship of God.

[Leviticus 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 22:3</span></span>

Whosoever he be . . . that goeth unto the holy things--The multitude of
minute restrictions to which the priests, from accidental defilement,
were subjected, by keeping them constantly on their guard lest they
should be unfit for the sacred service, tended to preserve in full
exercise the feeling of awe and submission to the authority of God. The
ideas of sin and duty were awakened in their breasts by every case to
which either an interdict or an injunction was applied. But why enact an
express statute for priests disqualified by the leprosy or polluting
touch of a carcass \[[Lev 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#004)\], when
a general law was already in force which excluded from society all
persons in that condition? Because priests might be apt, from
familiarity, to trifle with religion, and in committing irregularities
or sins, to shelter themselves under the cloak of the sacred office.
This law, therefore, was passed, specifying the chief forms of temporary
defilement which excluded from the sanctuary, that priests might not
deem themselves entitled to greater license than the rest of the people;
and that so far from being in any degree exempted from the sanctions of
the law, they were under greater obligations, by their priestly station,
to observe it in its strict letter and its smallest enactments.

[Leviticus 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 22:4</span></span>

wash his flesh with water--Any Israelite who had contracted a defilement
of such a nature as debarred him from the enjoyment of his wonted
privileges, and had been legally cleansed from the disqualifying
impurity, was bound to indicate his state of recovery by the immersion
of his whole person in water. Although all ceremonial impurity formed a
ground of exclusion, there were degrees of impurity which entailed a
longer or shorter period of excommunication, and for the removal of
which different rites required to be observed according to the trivial
or the malignant nature of the case. A person who came inadvertently
into contact with an unclean animal was rendered unclean for a specified
period; and then, at the expiry of that term, he washed, in token of his
recovered purity. But a leper was unclean so long as he remained subject
to that disease, and on his convalescence, he also washed, not to
cleanse himself, for the water was ineffectual for that purpose, but to
signify that he was clean. Not a single case is recorded of a leper
being restored to communion by the use of water; it served only as an
outward and visible sign that such a restoration was to be made. The
Book of Leviticus abounds with examples which show that in all the
ceremonial washings, as uncleanness meant loss of privileges, so baptism
with water indicated a restoration to those privileges. There was no
exemption; for as the unclean Israelite was exiled from the
congregation, so the unclean priest was disqualified from executing his
sacred functions in the sanctuary; and in the case of both, the same
observance was required--a formal intimation of their being readmitted
to forfeited privileges was intimated by the appointed rite of baptism.
If any one neglected or refused to perform the washing, he disobeyed a
positive precept, and he remained in his uncleanness; he forbore to
avail himself of this privilege, and was therefore said to be "cut off"
from the presence of the Lord.

[Leviticus 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 22:8</span></span>

dieth of itself--The feelings of nature revolt against such food. It
might have been left to the discretion of the Hebrews, who it may be
supposed (like the people of all civilized nations) would have abstained
from the use of it without any positive interdict. But an express
precept was necessary to show them that whatever died naturally or from
disease, was prohibited to them by the operation of that law which
forbade them the use of any meat with its blood.

[Leviticus 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 22:10</span></span>

WHO OF THE PRIESTS' HOUSE MAY EAT OF THEM. ([Lev
22:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010))

There shall no stranger eat the holy thing--The portion of the
sacrifices assigned for the support of the officiating priests was
restricted to the exclusive use of his own family. A temporary guest or
a hired servant was not at liberty to eat of them; but an exception was
made in favor of a bought or homeborn slave, because such was a stated
member of his household. On the same principle, his own daughter, who
married a husband not a priest, could not eat of them. However, if a
widow and childless, she was reinstated in the privileges of her
father's house as before her marriage. But if she had become a mother,
as her children had no right to the privileges of the priesthood, she
was under a necessity of finding support for them elsewhere than under
her father's roof.

[Leviticus 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 22:13</span></span>

there shall no stranger eat thereof--The interdict recorded ([Lev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010)) is repeated to show its
stringency. All the Hebrews, even the nearest neighbors of the priest,
the members of his family excepted, were considered strangers in this
respect, so that they had no right to eat of things offered at the
altar.

[Leviticus 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 22:14</span></span>

if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly--A common Israelite might
unconsciously partake of what had been offered as tithes, first-fruits,
&c., and on discovering his unintentional error, he was not only to
restore as much as he had used, but be fined in a fifth part more for
the priests to carry into the sanctuary.

[Leviticus 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 22:15</span></span>

they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel--There
is some difficulty felt in determining to whom "they" refers. The
subject of the preceding context being occupied about the priests, it is
supposed by some that this relates to them also; and the meaning then is
that the whole people would incur guilt through the fault of the
priests, if they should defile the sacred offerings, which they would
have done had they presented them while under any defilement \[CALVIN\].
According to others, "the children of Israel" is the nominative in the
sentence; which thus signifies, the children of Israel shall not profane
or defile their offerings, by touching them or reserving any part of
them, lest they incur the guilt of eating what is divinely appointed to
the priests alone \[CALMET\].

[Leviticus 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 22:19</span></span>

THE SACRIFICES MUST BE WITHOUT BLEMISH. (Lev. 22:17-33)

Ye shall offer at your own will--rather, to your being accepted.

a male without blemish--This law ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)) is founded on a sense of natural
propriety, which required the greatest care to be taken in the selection
of animals for sacrifice. The reason for this extreme caution is found
in the fact that sacrifices are either an expression of praise to God
for His goodness, or else they are the designed means of conciliating or
retaining His favor. No victim that was not perfect in its kind could be
deemed a fitting instrument for such purposes if we assume that the
significance of sacrifices is derived entirely from their relation to
Jehovah. Sacrifices may be likened to gifts made to a king by his
subjects, and hence the reasonableness of God's strong remonstrance with
the worldly-minded Jews ([Mal 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)). If
the tabernacle, and subsequently the temple, were considered the palace
of the great King, then the sacrifices would answer to presents as
offered to a monarch on various occasions by his subjects; and in this
light they would be the appropriate expressions of their feelings
towards their sovereign. When a subject wished to do honor to his
sovereign, to acknowledge allegiance, to appease his anger, to
supplicate forgiveness, or to intercede for another, he brought a
present; and all the ideas involved in sacrifices correspond to these
sentiments--those of gratitude, of worship, of prayer, of confession and
atonement \[BIB. SAC.\].

[Leviticus 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 22:23</span></span>

that mayest thou offer, &c.--The passage should be rendered thus: "if
thou offer it either for a freewill offering, or for a vow, it shall not
be accepted." This sacrifice being required to be "without blemish"
\[[Lev 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)\], symbolically implied
that the people of God were to dedicate themselves wholly with sincere
purposes of heart, and its being required to be "perfect to be accepted"
\[[Lev 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021)\], led them typically to
Him without whom no sacrifice could be offered acceptable to God.

[Leviticus 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 22:27</span></span>

it shall be seven days under the dam--Animals were not considered
perfect nor good for food till the eighth day. As sacrifices are called
the bread or food of God ([Lev 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#025)),
to offer them immediately after birth, when they were unfit to be eaten,
would have indicated a contempt of religion; and besides, this
prohibition, as well as that contained in [Lev
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#028), inculcated a lesson of humanity
or tenderness to the dam, as well as secured the sacrifices from all
appearance of unfeeling cruelty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 23](lev023)

</div>
