<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

[Leviticus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 3:1</span></span>

THE PEACE OFFERING OF THE HERD. (Lev. 3:1-17)

if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering--"Peace" being used in
Scripture to denote prosperity and happiness generally, a peace offering
was a voluntary tribute of gratitude for health or other benefits. In
this view it was eucharistic, being a token of thanksgiving for benefits
already received, or it was sometimes votive, presented in prayer for
benefits wished for in the future.

of the herd--This kind of offering being of a festive character, either
male or female, if without blemish, might be used, as both of them were
equally good for food, and, if the circumstances of the offerer allowed
it, it might be a calf.

[Leviticus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 3:2</span></span>

he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering--Having performed
this significant act, he killed it before the door of the tabernacle,
and the priests sprinkled the blood round about upon the altar.

[Leviticus 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 3:3</span></span>

he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering--The peace
offering differed from the oblations formerly mentioned in this respect:
while the burnt offering was wholly consumed on the altar, and the
freewill offering was partly consumed and partly assigned to the
priests; in this offering the fat alone was burnt; only a small part was
allotted to the priests while the rest was granted to the offerer and
his friends, thus forming a sacred feast of which the Lord, His priests,
and people conjointly partook, and which was symbolical of the spiritual
feast, the sacred communion which, through Christ, the great peace
offering, believers enjoy. (See further on [Lev
19:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#005); [Lev
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021)).

the fat that covereth the inwards--that is, the web work that presents
itself first to the eye on opening the belly of a cow.

the fat . . . upon the inwards--adhering to the intestines, but easily
removable from them; or, according to some, that which was next the
ventricle.

[Leviticus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 3:4</span></span>

the two kidneys . . . of the flock . . . the whole rump--There is, in
Eastern countries, a species of sheep the tails of which are not less
than four feet and a half in length. These tails are of a substance
between fat and marrow. A sheep of this kind weighs sixty or seventy
English pounds weight, of which the tail usually weighs fifteen pounds
and upwards. This species is by far the most numerous in Arabia, Syria,
and Palestine, and, forming probably a large portion in the flocks of
the Israelites, it seems to have been the kind that usually bled on the
Jewish altars. The extraordinary size and deliciousness of their tails
give additional importance to this law. To command by an express law the
tail of a certain sheep to be offered in sacrifice to God, might well
surprise us; but the wonder ceases, when we are told of those
broad-tailed Eastern sheep, and of the extreme delicacy of that part
which was so particularly specified in the statute \[PAXTON\].

[Leviticus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 3:12</span></span>

if his offering be a goat--Whether this or any of the other two animals
were chosen, the same general directions were to be followed in the
ceremony of offering.

[Leviticus 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 3:17</span></span>

ye eat neither fat nor blood--The details given above distinctly define
the fat in animals which was not to be eaten, so that all the rest,
whatever adhered to other parts, or was intermixed with them, might be
used. The prohibition of blood rested on a different foundation, being
intended to preserve their reverence for the Messiah, who was to shed
His blood as an stoning sacrifice for the sins of the world \[BROWN\].

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004)

</div>
