<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev001)  [Next](lev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

[Leviticus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 2:1</span></span>

THE MEAT OFFERINGS. (Lev. 2:1-16)

when any will offer a meat offering--or gift--distinguishing a bloodless
from a bloody sacrifice. The word "meat," however, is improper, as its
meaning as now used is different from that attached at the date of our
English translation. It was then applied not to "flesh," but "food,"
generally, and here it is applied to the flour of wheat. The meat
offerings were intended as a thankful acknowledgment for the bounty of
Providence; and hence, although meat offerings accompanied some of the
appointed sacrifices, those here described being voluntary oblations,
were offered alone.

pour oil upon it--Oil was used as butter is with us; symbolically it
meant the influences of the Spirit, of which oil was the emblem, as
incense was of prayer.

[Leviticus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 2:2</span></span>

shall burn the memorial--rather, "for a memorial"; that is, a part of
it.

[Leviticus 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 2:3</span></span>

the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'--The
circumstance of a portion of it being appropriated to the use of the
priests distinguishes this from a burnt offering. They alone were to
partake of it within the sacred precincts, as among "the most holy
things."

[Leviticus 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 2:4</span></span>

if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the
oven--generally a circular hole excavated in the floor, from one to five
feet deep, the sides of which are covered with hardened plaster, on
which cakes are baked of the form and thickness of pancakes. (See on
[Gen 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006)). The shape of Eastern ovens
varies considerably according to the nomadic or settled habits of the
people.

[Leviticus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 2:5</span></span>

baken in a pan--a thin plate, generally of copper or iron, placed on a
slow fire, similar to what the country people in Scotland called a
"girdle" for baking oatmeal cakes.

[Leviticus 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 2:6</span></span>

part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon--Pouring oil on bread is a
common practice among Eastern people, who are fond of broken bread
dipped in oil, butter, and milk. Oil only was used in the meat
offerings, and probably for a symbolic reason. It is evident that these
meat offerings were previously prepared by the offerer, and when
brought, the priest was to take it from his hands and burn a portion on
the altar.

[Leviticus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 2:11</span></span>

ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the
Lord--Nothing sweet or sour was to be offered. In the warm climates of
the East leavened bread soon spoils, and hence it was regarded as the
emblem of hypocrisy or corruption. Some, however, think that the
prohibition was that leaven and honey were used in the idolatrous rites
of the heathen.

[Leviticus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 2:12</span></span>

the oblation of the first-fruits--voluntary offerings made by
individuals out of their increase, and leaven and honey might be used
with these ([Lev 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#017); [Num
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#020)). Though presented at the altar,
they were not consumed, but assigned by God for the use of the priests.

[Leviticus 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 2:13</span></span>

every . . . meat offering shalt thou season with salt--The same reasons
which led to the prohibition of leaven, recommended the use of salt--if
the one soon putrefies, the other possesses a strongly preservative
property, and hence it became an emblem of incorruption and purity, as
well as of a perpetual covenant--a perfect reconciliation and lasting
friendship. No injunction in the whole law was more sacredly observed
than this application of salt; for besides other uses of it that will be
noticed elsewhere, it had a typical meaning referred to by our Lord
concerning the effect of the Gospel on those who embrace it ([Mar
9:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)); as when plentifully applied
it preserves meat from spoiling, so will the Gospel keep men from being
corrupted by sin. And as salt was indispensable to render sacrifices
acceptable to God, so the Gospel, brought home to the hearts of men by
the Holy Ghost, is indispensably requisite to their offering up of
themselves as living sacrifices \[BROWN\].

[Leviticus 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 2:14</span></span>

a meat offering of thy first-fruits--From the mention of "green ears,"
this seems to have been a voluntary offering before the harvest--the
ears being prepared in the favorite way of Eastern people, by parching
them at the fire, and then beating them out for use. It was designed to
be an early tribute of pious thankfulness for the earth's increase, and
it was offered according to the usual directions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 3](lev003)

</div>
