<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev017)  [Next](lev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)

[Leviticus 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 18:2</span></span>

UNLAWFUL MARRIAGES. (Lev. 18:1-30)

I am the Lord your God--This renewed mention of the divine sovereignty
over the Israelites was intended to bear particularly on some laws that
were widely different from the social customs that obtained both in
Egypt and Canaan; for the enormities, which the laws enumerated in this
chapter were intended to put down, were freely practised or publicly
sanctioned in both of those countries; and, indeed, the extermination of
the ancient Canaanites is described as owing to the abominations with
which they had polluted the land.

[Leviticus 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 18:5</span></span>

Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man
do, he shall live in them--A special blessing was promised to the
Israelites on condition of their obedience to the divine law; and this
promise was remarkably verified at particular eras of their history,
when pure and undefiled religion prevailed among them, in the public
prosperity and domestic happiness enjoyed by them as a people. Obedience
to the divine law always, indeed, ensures temporal advantages; and this,
doubtless, was the primary meaning of the words, "which if a man do, he
shall live in them." But that they had a higher reference to spiritual
life is evident from the application made of them by our Lord ([Luk
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#028)) and the apostle ([Rom
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)).

[Leviticus 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 18:6</span></span>

None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him--Very great
laxity prevailed amongst the Egyptians in their sentiments and practice
about the conjugal relation, as they not only openly sanctioned
marriages between brothers and sisters, but even between parents and
children. Such incestuous alliances Moses wisely prohibited, and his
laws form the basis upon which the marriage regulations of this and
other Christian nations are chiefly founded. This verse contains a
general summary of all the particular prohibitions; and the forbidden
intercourse is pointed out by the phrase, "to approach to." In the
specified prohibitions that follow, all of which are included in this
general summary, the prohibited familiarity is indicated by the phrases,
to "uncover the nakedness" \[[Lev
18:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#012)\], to "take" \[[Lev
18:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017)\], and to "lie with" \[[Lev
18:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022)\]. The phrase in this sixth
verse, therefore, has the same identical meaning with each of the other
three, and the marriages in reference to which it is used are those of
consanguinity or too close affinity, amounting to incestuous
connections.

[Leviticus 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 18:18</span></span>

Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her--The original
is rendered in the Margin, "neither shalt thou take one wife to another
to vex her," and two different and opposite interpretations have been
put upon this passage. The marginal construction involves an express
prohibition of polygamy; and, indeed, there can be no doubt that the
practice of having more wives than one is directly contrary to the
divine will. It was prohibited by the original law of marriage, and no
evidence of its lawfulness under the Levitical code can be discovered,
although Moses--from "the hardness of their hearts" \[[Mat
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008); [Mar
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#005)\] --tolerated it in the people of
a rude and early age. The second interpretation forms the ground upon
which the "vexed question" has been raised in our times respecting the
lawfulness of marriage with a deceased wife's sister. Whatever arguments
may be used to prove the unlawfulness or inexpediency of such a
matrimonial relation, the passage under consideration cannot, on a sound
basis of criticism, be enlisted in the service; for the crimes with
which it is here associated warrant the conclusion that it points not to
marriage with a deceased wife's sister, but with a sister in the wife's
lifetime, a practice common among the ancient Egyptians, Chaldeans, and
others.

[Leviticus 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 18:21</span></span>

thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech,
&c.--Molech, or Moloch, which signifies "king," was the idol of the
Ammonites. His statue was of brass, and rested on a pedestal or throne
of the same metal. His head, resembling that of a calf, was adorned with
a crown, and his arms were extended in the attitude of embracing those
who approached him. His devotees dedicated their children to him; and
when this was to be done, they heated the statue to a high pitch of
intensity by a fire within, and then the infants were either shaken over
the flames, or passed through the ignited arms, by way of lustration to
ensure the favor of the pretended deity. The fire-worshippers asserted
that all children who did not undergo this purifying process would die
in infancy; and the influence of this Zabian superstition was still so
extensively prevalent in the days of Moses, that the divine lawgiver
judged it necessary to prohibit it by an express statute.

neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God--by giving it to false or
pretended divinities; or, perhaps, from this precept standing in close
connection with the worship of Molech, the meaning rather is, Do not, by
devoting your children to him, give foreigners occasion to blaspheme the
name of your God as a cruel and sanguinary deity, who demands the
sacrifice of human victims, and who encourages cruelty in his votaries.

[Leviticus 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 18:24</span></span>

Defile not yourselves in any of these things--In the preceding verses
seventeen express cases of incest are enumerated; comprehending eleven
of affinity \[[Lev 18:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007)\], and six
of consanguinity \[[Lev 18:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017)\],
together with some criminal enormities of an aggravated and unnatural
character. In such prohibitions it was necessary for the instruction of
a people low in the scale of moral perception, that the enumeration
should be very specific as well as minute; and then, on completing it,
the divine lawgiver announces his own views of these crimes, without any
exception or modification, in the remarkable terms employed in this
verse.

in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you,
&c.--Ancient history gives many appalling proofs that the enormous vices
described in this chapter were very prevalent, nay, were regularly
practised from religious motives in the temples of Egypt and the groves
of Canaan; and it was these gigantic social disorders that occasioned
the expulsion, of which the Israelites were, in the hands of a righteous
and retributive Providence, the appointed instruments ([Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)). The strongly figurative
language of "the land itself vomiting out her inhabitants" \[[Lev
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)\], shows the hopeless depth of
their moral corruption.

[Leviticus 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 18:25</span></span>

therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it; and the land itself
vomiteth out her inhabitants--The Canaanites, as enormous and
incorrigible sinners, were to be exterminated; and this extermination
was manifestly a judicial punishment inflicted by a ruler whose laws had
been grossly and perseveringly outraged. But before a law can be
disobeyed, it must have been previously in existence; and hence a law,
prohibiting all the horrid crimes enumerated above--a law obligatory
upon the Canaanites as well as other nations--was already known and in
force before the Levitical law of incest was promulgated. Some general
Iaw, then, prohibiting these crimes must have been published to mankind
at a very early period of the world's history; and that law must either
have been the moral law, originally written on the human heart, or a law
on the institution of marriage revealed to Adam and known to the
Canaanites and others by tradition or otherwise.

[Leviticus 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 18:29</span></span>

the souls that commit them shall be cut off--This strong denunciatory
language is applied to all the crimes specified in the chapter without
distinction: to incest as truly as to bestiality, and to the eleven
cases of affinity \[[Lev 18:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007)\], as
fully as to the six of consanguinity \[[Lev
18:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017)\]. Death is the punishment
sternly denounced against all of them. No language could be more
explicit or universal; none could more strongly indicate intense
loathing and abhorrence.

[Leviticus 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 18:30</span></span>

Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one of
these abominable customs--In giving the Israelites these particular
institutions, God was only re-delivering the law imprinted on the
natural heart of man; for there is every reason to believe that the
incestuous alliances and unnatural crimes prohibited in this chapter
were forbidden to all men by a law expressed or understood from the
beginning of the world, or at least from the era of the flood, since God
threatens to condemn and punish, in a manner so sternly severe, these
atrocities in the practice of the Canaanites and their neighbors, who
were not subject to the laws of the Hebrew nation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 19](lev019)

</div>
