<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev009)  [Next](lev011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)

[Leviticus 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 10:1</span></span>

NADAB AND ABIHU BURNT. (Lev. 10:1-20)

the sons of Aaron, &c.--If this incident occurred at the solemn period
of the consecrating and dedicating the altar, these young men assumed an
office which had been committed to Moses; or if it were some time after,
it was an encroachment on duties which devolved on their father alone as
the high priest. But the offense was of a far more aggravated nature
than such a mere informality would imply. It consisted not only in their
venturing unauthorized to perform the incense service--the highest and
most solemn of the priestly offices--not only in their engaging together
in a work which was the duty only of one, but in their presuming to
intrude into the holy of holies, to which access was denied to all but
the high priest alone. In this respect, "they offered strange fire
before the Lord"; they were guilty of a presumptuous and unwarranted
intrusion into a sacred office which did not belong to them. But their
offense was more aggravated still; for instead of taking the fire which
was put into their censers from the brazen altar, they seem to have been
content with common fire and thus perpetrated an act which, considering
the descent of the miraculous fire they had so recently witnessed and
the solemn obligation under which they were laid to make use of that
which was specially appropriated to the service of the altars, they
betrayed a carelessness, an irreverence, a want of faith, most
surprising and lamentable. A precedent of such evil tendency was
dangerous, and it was imperatively necessary, therefore, as well for the
priests themselves as for the sacred things, that a marked expression of
the divine displeasure should be given for doing that which "God
commanded them not."

[Leviticus 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 10:2</span></span>

there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them--rather, "killed
them"; for it appears ([Lev 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#005)) that
neither their bodies nor their robes were consumed. The expression,
"from the Lord," indicates that this fire issued from the most holy
place. In the destruction of these two young priests by the infliction
of an awful judgment, the wisdom of God observed the same course, in
repressing the first instance of contempt for sacred things, as he did
at the commencement of the Christian dispensation ([Act
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001)).

[Leviticus 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 10:3</span></span>

Moses said . . . This is it that the Lord spoke . . . I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me--"They that come nigh me," points,
in this passage, directly to the priests; and they had received repeated
and solemn warnings as to the cautious and reverent manner of their
approach into the divine presence ([Exo
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#022); [Exo
29:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#044); [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035)).

Aaron held his peace--The loss of two sons in so sudden and awful a
manner was a calamity overwhelming to parental feelings. But the pious
priest indulged in no vehement ebullition of complaint and gave vent to
no murmur of discontent, but submitted in silent resignation to what he
saw was "the righteous judgment of God" \[[Rom
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)\].

[Leviticus 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 10:4</span></span>

Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan--The removal of the two corpses for
burial without the camp would spread the painful intelligence throughout
all the congregation; and the remembrance of so appalling a judgment
could not fail to strike a salutary fear into the hearts both of priests
and people. The interment of the priestly vestments along with Nadab and
Abihu, was a sign of their being polluted by the sin of their
irreligious wearers.

[Leviticus 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 10:6</span></span>

Uncover not your heads--They who were ordered to carry out the two
bodies, being engaged in their sacred duties, were forbidden to remove
their turbans, in conformity with the usual customs of mourning; and the
prohibition "neither rend your garments," was, in all probability,
confined also to their official costume. For at other times the priests
wore the ordinary dress of their countrymen and, in common with their
families, might indulge their private feelings by the usual signs or
expressions of grief.

[Leviticus 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 10:8</span></span>

Do not drink wine nor strong drink--This prohibition, and the
accompanying admonitions, following immediately the occurrence of so
fatal a catastrophe \[[Lev 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)\],
has given rise to an opinion entertained by many, that the two
disobedient priests were under the influence of intoxication when they
committed the offense which was expiated only by their lives. But such
an idea, though the presumption is in its favor, is nothing more than
conjecture.

[Leviticus 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 10:12</span></span>

Moses spake unto Aaron, &c.--This was a timely and considerate rehearsal
of the laws that regulated the conduct of the priests. Amid the
distractions of their family bereavement, Aaron and his surviving sons
might have forgotten or overlooked some of their duties.

[Leviticus 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 10:16</span></span>

Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it
was burnt--In a sacrifice presented, as that had been, on behalf of the
people, it was the duty of the priests, as typically representing them
and bearing their sins, to have eaten the flesh after the blood had been
sprinkled upon the altar. Instead of using it, however, for a sacred
feast, they had burnt it without the camp; and Moses, who discovered
this departure from the prescribed ritual, probably from a dread of some
further chastisements, challenged, not Aaron, whose heart was too much
lacerated to bear a new cause of distress but his two surviving sons in
the priesthood for the great irregularity. Their father, however, who
heard the charge and by whose directions the error had been committed,
hastened to give the explanation. The import of his apology is, that all
the duty pertaining to the presentation of the offering had been duly
and sacredly performed, except the festive part of the observance, which
privately devolved upon the priest and his family. And that this had
been omitted, either because his heart was too dejected to join in the
celebration of a cheerful feast, or that he supposed, from the appalling
judgments that had been inflicted, that all the services of that
occasion were so vitiated that he did not complete them. Aaron was
decidedly in the wrong. By the express command of God, the sin offering
was to be eaten in the holy place; and no fanciful view of expediency or
propriety ought to have led him to dispense at discretion with a
positive statute. The law of God was clear and, where that is the case,
it is sin to deviate a hair's breadth from the path of duty. But Moses
sympathized with his deeply afflicted brother and, having pointed out
the error, said no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 11](lev011)

</div>
