<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

[Leviticus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 16:1</span></span>

HOW THE HIGH PRIEST MUST ENTER INTO THE HOLY PLACE. (Lev. 16:1-34)

after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the
Lord, and died--It is thought by some that this chapter has been
transposed out of its right place in the sacred record, which was
immediately after the narrative of the deaths of Nadab and Abihu \[Lev.
10:1-20\]. That appalling catastrophe must have filled Aaron with
painful apprehensions lest the guilt of these two sons might be entailed
on his house, or that other members of his family might share the same
fate by some irregularities or defects in the discharge of their sacred
functions. And, therefore, this law was established, by the due
observance of whose requirements the Aaronic order would be securely
maintained and accepted in the priesthood.

[Leviticus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 16:2</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the
holy place within the veil, &c.--Common priests went every day into the
part of the sanctuary without the veil to burn incense on the golden
altar. But none except the high priest was allowed to enter within the
veil, and that only once a year with the greatest care and solemnity.
This arrangement was evidently designed to inspire a reverence for the
most holy place, and the precaution was necessary at a time when the
presence of God was indicated by sensible symbols, the impression of
which might have been diminished or lost by daily and familiar
observation.

I will appear in the cloud--that is, the smoke of the incense which the
high priest burnt on his yearly entrance into the most holy place: and
this was the cloud which at that time covered the mercy seat.

[Leviticus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 16:3</span></span>

Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place--As the duties of the great
day of atonement led to the nearest and most solemn approach to God, the
directions as to the proper course to be followed were minute and
special.

with a young bullock . . . and a ram--These victims he brought alive,
but they were not offered in sacrifice till he had gone through the
ceremonies described between [Lev
16:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003). He was not to attire himself
on that occasion in the splendid robes that were proper to his sacred
office, but in a plain dress of linen, like the common Levites, for, as
he was then to make atonement for his own sins, as well as for those of
the people, he was to appear in the humble character of a suppliant.
That plain dress was more in harmony with a season of humiliation (as
well as lighter and more convenient for the duties which on that
occasion he had singly to perform) than the gorgeous robes of the
pontificate. It showed that when all appeared as sinners, the highest
and lowest were then on a level, and that there is no distinction of
persons with God \[[Act 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034)\].

[Leviticus 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 16:5</span></span>

shall take of the congregation . . . two kids of the goats . . . and one
ram--The sacrifices were to be offered by the high priest, respectively
for himself and the other priests, as well as for the people. The
bullock ([Lev 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)) and the goats were
for sin offerings and the rams for burnt offerings. The goats, though
used in different ways, constituted only one offering. They were both
presented before the Lord, and the disposal of them determined by lot,
which Jewish writers have thus described: The priest, placing one of the
goats on his right hand and the other on his left, took his station by
the altar, and cast into an urn two pieces of gold exactly similar,
inscribed, the one with the words "for the Lord," and the other for
"Azazel" (the scapegoat). After having well shaken them together, he put
both his hands into the box and took up a lot in each: that in his right
hand he put on the head of the goat which stood on his right, and that
in his left he dropped on the other. In this manner the fate of each was
decided.

[Leviticus 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 16:11</span></span>

Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself,
&c.--The first part of the service was designed to solemnize his own
mind, as well as the minds of the people, by offering the sacrifices for
their sins. The sin offerings being slain had the sins of the offerer
judicially transferred to them by the imputation of his hands on their
head ([Lev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004), [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015), [Lev
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#024), [Lev
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#029), [Lev
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#033)); and thus the young bullock,
which was to make atonement for himself and the other priests (called
"his house," [Psa 135:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#019)), was killed
by the hands of the high priest. While the blood of the victim was being
received into a vessel, taking a censer of live coals in his right hand
and a platter of sweet incense in his left, he, amid the solemn
attention and the anxious prayers of the assembled multitude, crossed
the porch and the holy place, opened the outer veil which led into the
holy of holies and then the inner veil. Standing before the ark, he
deposited the censer of coals on the floor, emptied the plate of incense
into his hand, poured it on the burning coals; and the apartment was
filled with fragrant smoke, intended, according to Jewish writers, to
prevent any presumptuous gazer prying too curiously into the form of the
mercy seat, which was the Lord's throne. The high priest having done
this, perfumed the sanctuary, returned to the door, took the blood of
the slain bullock, and, carrying it into the holy of holies, sprinkled
it with his finger once upon the mercy seat "eastward"--that is, on the
side next to himself; and seven times "before the mercy seat"--that is,
on the front of the ark. Leaving the coals and the incense burning, he
went out a second time, to sacrifice at the altar of burnt offering the
goat which had been assigned as a sin offering for the people; and
carrying its blood into the holy of holies, he made similar sprinklings
as he had done before with the blood of the bullock. While the high
priest was thus engaged in the most holy place, none of the ordinary
priests were allowed to remain within the precincts of the tabernacle.
The sanctuary or holy place and the altar of burnt offering were in like
manner sprinkled seven times with the blood of the bullock and the goat.
The object of this solemn ceremonial was to impress the minds of the
Israelites with the conviction that the whole tabernacle was stained by
the sins of a guilty people, that by their sins they had forfeited the
privileges of the divine presence and worship, and that an atonement had
to be made as the condition of God's remaining with them. The sins and
shortcomings of the past year having polluted the sacred edifice, the
expiation required to be annually renewed. The exclusion of the priests
indicated their unworthiness and the impurities of their service. The
mingled blood of the two victims being sprinkled on the horns of the
altar indicated that the priests and the people equally needed an
atonement for their sins. But the sanctuary being thus ceremonially
purified, and the people of Israel reconciled by the blood of the
consecrated victim, the Lord continued to dwell in the midst of them,
and to honor them with His gracious presence.

[Leviticus 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 16:20</span></span>

he shall bring the live goat--Having already been presented before the
Lord ([Lev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010)), it was now brought
forward to the high priest, who, placing his hands upon its head, and
"having confessed over it all the iniquities of the people of Israel,
and all their transgressions in all their sins," transferred them by
this act to the goat as their substitute. It was then delivered into the
hands of a person, who was appointed to lead him away into a distant,
solitary, and desert place, where in early times he was let go, to
escape for his life; but in the time of Christ, he was carried to a high
rock twelve miles from Jerusalem, and there, being thrust over the
precipice, he was killed. Commentators have differed widely in their
opinions about the character and purpose of this part of the ceremonial;
some considering the word "Azazel," with the Septuagint and our
translators, to mean, "the scapegoat"; others, "a lofty, precipitous
rock" \[BOCHART\]; others, "a thing separated to God" \[EWALD,
THOLUCK\]; while others think it designates Satan \[GESENIUS,
HENGSTENBERG\]. This last view is grounded on the idea of both goats
forming one and the same sacrifice of atonement, and it is supported by
[Zac 3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001), which presents a striking
commentary on this passage. Whether there was in this peculiar ceremony
any reference to an Egyptian superstition about Typhon, the spirit of
evil, inhabiting the wilderness, and the design was to ridicule it by
sending a cursed animal into his gloomy dominions, it is impossible to
say. The subject is involved in much obscurity. But in any view there
seems to be a typical reference to Christ who bore away our sins \[[Heb
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004); [Jo1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005)\].

[Leviticus 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 16:23</span></span>

Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put
off the linen garments--On the dismissal of the scapegoat, the high
priest prepared for the important parts of the service which still
remained; and for the performance of these he laid aside his plain linen
clothes, and, having bathed himself in water, he assumed his pontifical
dress. Thus gorgeously attired, he went to present the burnt offerings
which were prescribed for himself and the people, consisting of the two
rams which had been brought with the sin offerings, but reserved till
now. The fat was ordered to be burnt upon the altar; the rest of the
carcasses to be cut down and given to some priestly attendants to burn
without the camp, in conformity with the general law for the sin
offerings ([Lev 4:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#008); [Lev
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)). The persons employed in
burning them, as well as the conductor of the scapegoat, were obliged to
wash their clothes and bathe their flesh in water before they were
allowed to return into the camp.

[Leviticus 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 16:29</span></span>

this shall be a statute for ever unto you, that in the seventh month ye
shall afflict your souls--This day of annual expiation for all the sins,
irreverences, and impurities of all classes in Israel during the
previous year, was to be observed as a solemn fast, in which "they were
to afflict their souls"; it was reckoned a sabbath, kept as a season of
"holy convocation," or, assembling for religious purposes. All persons
who performed any labor were subject to the penalty of death \[[Exo
31:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014); [Exo
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002)\]. It took place on the tenth day
of the seventh month, corresponding to our third of October; and this
chapter, together with [Lev 23:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027),
as containing special allusion to the observances of the day, was
publicly read. The rehearsal of these passages appointing the solemn
ceremonial was very appropriate, and the details of the successive parts
of it (above all the spectacle of the public departure of the scapegoat
under the care of its leader) must have produced salutary impressions
both of sin and of duty that would not be soon effaced.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017)

</div>
