<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev020)  [Next](lev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

[Leviticus 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 21:1</span></span>

OF THE PRIESTS' MOURNING. (Lev. 21:1-24)

There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people--The obvious
design of the regulations contained in this chapter was to keep
inviolate the purity and dignity of the sacred office. Contact with a
corpse, or even contiguity to the place where it lay, entailing
ceremonial defilement ([Num 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014)),
all mourners were debarred from the tabernacle for a week; and as the
exclusion of a priest during that period would have been attended with
great inconvenience, the whole order were enjoined to abstain from all
approaches to the dead, except at the funerals of relatives, to whom
affection or necessity might call them to perform the last offices.
Those exceptional cases, which are specified, were strictly confined to
the members of their own family, within the nearest degrees of kindred.

[Leviticus 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 21:4</span></span>

But he shall not defile himself--"for any other," as the sense may be
fully expressed. "The priest, in discharging his sacred functions, might
well be regarded as a chief man among his people, and by these
defilements might be said to profane himself" \[BISHOP PATRICK\]. The
word rendered "chief man" signifies also "a husband"; and the sense
according to others is, "But he being a husband, shall not defile
himself by the obsequies of a wife" ([Eze
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#025)).

[Leviticus 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 21:5</span></span>

They shall not make baldness upon their heads . . . nor . . . cuttings
in their flesh--The superstitious marks of sorrow, as well as the
violent excesses in which the heathen indulged at the death of their
friends, were forbidden by a general law to the Hebrew people ([Lev
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028)). But the priests were to be
laid under a special injunction, not only that they might exhibit
examples of piety in the moderation of their grief, but also by the
restraint of their passions, be the better qualified to administer the
consolations of religion to others, and show, by their faith in a
blessed resurrection, the reasons for sorrowing not as those who have no
hope.

[Leviticus 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 21:7</span></span>

They shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane--Private
individuals might form several connections, which were forbidden as
inexpedient or improper in priests. The respectability of their office,
and the honor of religion, required unblemished sanctity in their
families as well as themselves, and departures from it in their case
were visited with severer punishment than in that of others.

[Leviticus 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 21:10</span></span>

he that is the high priest among his brethren . . . shall not uncover
his head, nor rend his clothes--The indulgence in the excepted cases of
family bereavement, mentioned above \[[Lev
21:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#002)\], which was granted to the
common priests, was denied to him; for his absence from the sanctuary
for the removal of any contracted defilement could not have been
dispensed with, neither could he have acted as intercessor for the
people, unless ceremonially clean. Moreover, the high dignity of his
office demanded a corresponding superiority in personal holiness, and
stringent rules were prescribed for the purpose of upholding the
suitable dignity of his station and family. The same rules are extended
to the families of Christian ministers ([Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002); [Tit
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)).

[Leviticus 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 21:16</span></span>

Whosoever he be . . . hath any blemish, let him not approach to offer
the bread of his God--As visible things exert a strong influence on the
minds of men, any physical infirmity or malformation of body in the
ministers of religion, which disturbs the associations or excites
ridicule, tends to detract from the weight and authority of the sacred
office. Priests laboring under any personal defect were not allowed to
officiate in the public service; they might be employed in some inferior
duties about the sanctuary but could not perform any sacred office. In
all these regulations for preserving the unsullied purity of the sacred
character and office, there was a typical reference to the priesthood of
Christ ([Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 22](lev022)

</div>
