<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk014)  [Next](luk016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001)

[Luke 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 15:1</span></span>

PUBLICANS AND SINNERS WELCOMED BY CHRIST--THREE PARABLES TO EXPLAIN
THIS. (Luke 15:1-32)

drew near . . . all the publicans and sinners, &c.--drawn around Him by
the extraordinary adaptation of His teaching to their case, who, till He
appeared--at least His forerunner--might well say, "No man careth for my
soul."

[Luke 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 15:2</span></span>

murmured, saying, &c.--took it ill, were scandalized at Him, and
insinuated (on the principle that a man is known by the company he
keeps) that He must have some secret sympathy with their character. But
oh, what a truth of unspeakable preciousness do their lips, as on other
occasions, unconsciously utter., Now follow three parables representing
the sinner: (1) in his stupidity; (2) as all-unconscious of his lost
condition; (3) knowingly and willingly estranged from God \[BENGEL\].
The first two set forth the seeking love of God; the last, His receiving
love \[TRENCH\].

[Luke 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 15:3</span></span>

I. THE LOST SHEEP. ([Luk 15:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#003))

Occurring again ([Mat 18:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)); but
there to show how precious one of His sheep is to the Good Shepherd;
here, to show that the shepherd, though the sheep stray never so widely,
will seek it out, and when he hath found, will rejoice over it.

[Luke 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 15:4</span></span>

leave the ninety and nine--bend all His attention and care, as it were,
to the one object of recovering the lost sheep; not saying. "It is but
one; let it go; enough remain."

go after . . . until, &c.--pointing to all the diversified means which
God sets in operation for recovering sinners.

[Luke 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 15:6</span></span>

Rejoice with me, &c.--The principle here is, that one feels exuberant
joy to be almost too much for himself to bear alone, and is positively
relieved by having others to share it with him. (See on [Luk
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)).

[Luke 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 15:7</span></span>

ninety-nine just . . . needing no repentance--not angels, whose place in
these parables is very different from this; but those represented by the
prodigal's well-behaved brother, who have "served their Father" many
years and not at any time transgressed His commandment (in the
outrageous sense of the prodigal). (See on [Luk
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#029); [Luk
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#031)). In other words, such as have
grown up from childhood in the fear of God and as the sheep of His
pasture. Our Lord does not say "the Pharisees and scribes" were such;
but as there was undoubtedly such a class, while "the publicans and
sinners" were confessedly the strayed sheep and the prodigal children,
He leaves them to fill up the place of the other class, if they could.

[Luke 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 15:8</span></span>

II\. THE LOST COIN. ([Luk 15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008))

sweep the house--"not done without dust on man's part" \[BENGEL\].

[Luke 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 15:10</span></span>

Likewise--on the same principle.

joy, &c.--Note carefully the language here--not "joy on the part," but
"joy in the presence of the angels of God." True to the idea of the
parables. The Great Shepherd. The Great Owner Himself, is He whose the
joy properly is over His own recovered property; but so vast and
exuberant is it ([Zac 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#017)), that as
if He could not keep it to Himself, He "calleth His friends and
neighbors together"--His whole celestial family--saying, "Rejoice WITH
ME, for I have found My sheep-My-piece," &c. In this sublime sense it is
"joy," before "or in the presence of the angels"; they only "catch the
flying joy," sharing it with Him! The application of this to the
reception of those publicans and sinners that stood around our Lord is
grand in the extreme: "Ye turn from these lost ones with disdain, and
because I do not the same, ye murmur at it: but a very different feeling
is cherished in heaven. There, the recovery of even one such outcast is
watched with interest and hailed with joy; nor are they left to come
home of themselves or perish; for lo! even now the great Shepherd is
going after His lost sheep, and the Owner is making diligent search for
the lost property; and He is finding it, too, and bringing it back with
joy, and all heaven is full of it." (Let the reader mark what sublime
claims Himself our Lord covertly puts in here--as if in Him they beheld,
all unknown to themselves, nothing less than heaven in the habiliments
of earth, the Great Shepherd above, clothed in a garment of flesh, come
"to seek and to save that which was lost")!

[Luke 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 15:12</span></span>

III\. THE PRODIGAL SON. (Luke 15:11-32)

the younger--as the more thoughtless.

said, &c.--weary of restraint, panting for independence, unable longer
to abide the check of a father's eye. This is man impatient of divine
control, desiring to be independent of God, seeking to be his own
master; that "sin of sins, in which all subsequent sins are included as
in their germ, for they are but the unfolding of this one" \[TRENCH\].

he divided, &c.--Thus "God, when His service no longer appears a perfect
freedom, and man promises himself something far better elsewhere, allows
him to make the trial; and he shall discover, if need be by saddest
proof, that to depart from Him is not to throw off the yoke, but to
exchange a light yoke for a heavy one, and one gracious Master for a
thousand imperious tyrants and lords" \[TRENCH\].

[Luke 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 15:13</span></span>

not many days--intoxicated with his new--found resources, and eager for
the luxury of using them at Will.

a far country--beyond all danger of interference from home.

wasted, &c.--So long as it lasted, the inward monitor ([Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002)) would be silenced ([Isa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010); [Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010); [Amo
4:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#006)).

riotous living-- ([Luk 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#030)), "with
harlots." Ah! but this reaches farther than the sensualist; for "in the
deep symbolical language of Scripture fornication is the standing image
of idolatry; they are in fact ever spoken of as one and the same sin,
considered now in its fleshly, now in its spiritual aspect" ([Jer
3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001); Eze. 16:1-17:24) \[TRENCH\].

[Luke 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 15:14</span></span>

when he had spent all . . . a mighty famine--a mysterious providence
holding back the famine till he was in circumstances to feel it in all
its rigor. Thus, like Jonah, whom the storm did not overtake till on the
mighty deep at the mercy of the waves, does the sinner feel as if "the
stars in their courses were fighting against" him ([Jdg
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020)).

in want--the first stage of his bitter experience, and preparation for a
change.

[Luke 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 15:15</span></span>

joined himself, &c.--his pride not yet humbled, unable to brook the
shame of a return.

to feed swine--glad to keep life anyhow, behold the son sank into a
swineherd--among the Jews, on account of the prohibition of swine's
flesh, emphatically vile! "He who begins by using the world as a
servant, to minister to his pleasure, ends by reversing the
relationship" \[TRENCH\].

[Luke 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 15:16</span></span>

would fain have filled--rather, "was fain to fill," ate greedily of the
only food he could get.

the husks--"the hulls of a leguminous plant which in the East is the
food of cattle and swine, and often the nourishment of the poorest in
times of distress" \[STIER\].

no man gave . . . him--not this food, for that he had, but anything
better ([Jer 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014)). This was his
lowest depth--perishing unpitied, alone in the world, and ready to
disappear from it unmissed! But this is just the blessed turning-point;
midnight before dawn of day ([Ch2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008); [Ch2
33:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011); [Jer
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019)).

[Luke 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 15:17</span></span>

came to himself--Before, he had been "beside himself" ([Ecc
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003)), in what sense will presently
appear.

How many hired, &c.--What a testimony to the nature of the home he had
left! But did he not know all this ere he departed and every day of his
voluntary exile? He did, and he did not. His heart being wholly
estranged from home and steeped in selfish gratification, his father's
house never came within the range of his vision, or but as another name
for bondage and gloom. Now empty, desolate, withered, perishing, home,
with all its peace, plenty, freedom, dignity, starts into view, fills
all his visions as a warm and living reality, and breaks his heart.

[Luke 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 15:18</span></span>

I will arise and go to my FATHER--The change has come at last, and what
a change!--couched in terms of such exquisite simplicity and power as if
expressly framed for all heart-broken penitents.

Father, &c.--Mark the term. Though "no more worthy to be called his
son," the prodigal sinner is taught to claim the defiled, but still
existing relationship, asking not to be made a servant, but remaining a
son to be made "as a servant," willing to take the lowest place and do
the meanest work. Ah! and is it come to this? Once it was, "Any place
rather than home." Now, "Oh, that home! Could I but dare to hope that
the door of it would not be closed against me, how gladly would I take
any place and do any worK, happy only to be there at all." Well, that is
conversion--nothing absolutely new, yet all new; old familiar things
seen in a new light and for the first time as realities of overwhelming
magnitude and power. How this is brought about the parable says not. (We
have that abundantly elsewhere, [Phi
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013), &c.). Its one object is to paint
the welcome home of the greatest sinners, when (no matter for the
present how) they "arise and go to their Father."

[Luke 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 15:20</span></span>

a great way off--Oh yes, when but the face is turned homeward, though as
yet far, far away, our Father recognizes His own child in us, and bounds
to meet us--not saying, Let him come to Me and sue for pardon first, but
Himself taking the first step.

fell on his neck and kissed him--What! In all his filth? Yes. In all his
rags? Yes. In all his haggard, shattered wretchedness? Yes. "Our Father
who art in heaven," is this Thy portraiture? It is even so ([Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)). And because it is so, I wonder
not that such incomparable teaching hath made the world new.

[Luke 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 15:21</span></span>

Father, I have sinned, &c.--"This confession is uttered after the kiss
of reconciliation" ([Eze 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063))
\[TRENCH\].

[Luke 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 15:22</span></span>

But the Father said, &c.--The son has not said all he purposed, not so
much, because the father's demonstrations had rekindled the filial, and
swallowed up all servile feeling \[TRENCH\] (on the word "Father," see
on [Luk 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018)), but because the
father's heart is made to appear too full to listen, at that moment, to
more in this strain.

the best robe--Compare [Zac 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004),
"Take away the filthy garments from him; behold I have clothed thee with
change of raiment; and they clothed him with garments" ([Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010); [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018)).

a ring--(Compare [Gen 41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042); [Jam
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002)).

shoes--Slaves went barefoot. Thus, we have here a threefold symbol of
freedom and honor, restored, as the fruit of perfect reconciliation.

[Luke 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 15:23</span></span>

the fatted calf--kept for festive occasions.

[Luke 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 15:24</span></span>

my son--now twice his son.

dead . . . lost--to me; to himself--to my service, my satisfaction; to
his own dignity, peace, profit.

alive again . . . found--to all these.

merry--(See on [Luk 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)).

[Luke 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 15:25</span></span>

in the field--engaged in his father's business: compare [Luk
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#029), "These many years do I serve
thee."

[Luke 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 15:28</span></span>

came his father out, and entreated him--"Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him" ([Psa
103:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013)). As it is the elder brother
who now errs, so it is the same paternal compassion which had fallen on
the neck of the younger that comes forth and pleads with the elder.

[Luke 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 15:29</span></span>

these many years . . . neither transgressed I at any time thy
commandment--The words are not to be pressed too far. He is merely
contrasting his constancy of love and service with the conduct of his
brother; just as Job, resenting the charge of hypocrisy by his friends,
speaks as if nothing could be laid to his charge ([Job
23:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#010)), and David too ([Psa
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)). The father attests the
truth of all he says.

never . . . a kid--I say not a calf, but not even a kid.

that I might make merry with my friends--Here lay his misapprehension.
It was no entertainment for the gratification of the prodigal: it was a
father's expression of the joy he felt at his recovery.

thy son . . . thy living--How unworthy a reflection on the common father
of both, for the one not only to disown the other, but fling him over
upon his father, as if he should say, Take him, and have joy of him!

[Luke 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 15:31</span></span>

Son, &c.--The father resents not the insult--how could he, after the
largeness of heart which had kissed the returning prodigal? He calmly
expostulates with him, "Son, listen to reason. What need for special,
exuberant joy over thee? Didst thou say, 'Lo, these many years do I
serve thee?' In that saidst thou truly; but just for that reason do I
not set the whole household a-rejoicing over thee. For thee is reserved
what is higher still--a tranquil lifelong satisfaction in thee, as a
true-hearted faithful son in thy father's house, nor of the inheritance
reserved for thee is aught alienated by this festive and fitting joy
over the once foolish but now wise and newly recovered one."

[Luke 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 15:32</span></span>

It was meet--Was it possible he should simply take his long vacant place
in the family without one special sign of wonder and delight at the
change? Would that have been nature? But this being the meaning of the
festivity, it would for that very reason be temporary. In time, the
dutifulness of even the younger son would become the law and not the
exception; he too at length might venture to say, "Lo, these many years
do I serve thee"; and of him the father would say, "Son, thou art ever
with me." In that case, therefore, it would not be "meet that they
should make merry and be glad." The lessons are obvious, but how
beautiful! (1) The deeper sunk and the longer estranged any sinner is,
the more exuberant is the joy which his recovery occasions. (2) Such joy
is not the portion of those whose whole lives have been spent in the
service of their Father in heaven. (3) Instead of grudging the want of
this, they should deem it the highest testimony to their lifelong
fidelity, that something better is reserved for them--the deep, abiding
complacency of their Father in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 16](luk016)

</div>
