<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar000)  [Next](mar002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

[Mark 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 1:1</span></span>

THE PREACHING AND BAPTISM OF JOHN. ( = [Mat
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001); Luke 3:1-18). ([Mar
1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001))

The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God--By the
"Gospel" of Jesus Christ here is evidently meant the blessed Story which
our Evangelist is about to tell of His Life, Ministry, Death,
Resurrection, and Glorification, and of the begun Gathering of Believers
in His Name. The abruptness with which he announces his subject, and the
energetic brevity with which, passing by all preceding events, he
hastens over the ministry of John and records the Baptism and Temptation
of Jesus--as if impatient to come to the Public Life of the Lord of
glory--have often been noticed as characteristic of this Gospel--a
Gospel whose direct, practical, and singularly vivid setting imparts to
it a preciousness peculiar to itself. What strikes every one is, that
though the briefest of all the Gospels, this is in some of the principal
scenes of our Lord's history the fullest. But what is not so obvious is,
that wherever the finer and subtler feelings of humanity, or the deeper
and more peculiar hues of our Lord's character were brought out, these,
though they should be lightly passed over by all the other Evangelists,
are sure to be found here, and in touches of such quiet delicacy and
power, that though scarce observed by the cursory reader, they leave
indelible impressions upon all the thoughtful and furnish a key to much
that is in the other Gospels. These few opening words of the Second
Gospel are enough to show, that though it was the purpose of this
Evangelist to record chiefly the outward and palpable facts of our
Lord's public life, he recognized in Him, in common with the Fourth
Evangelist, the glory of the Only-begotten of the Father.

[Mark 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 1:2</span></span>

As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee-- ([Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)).

[Mark 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 1:3</span></span>

The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight--The second of these quotations is given
by Matthew and Luke in the same connection, but they reserve the former
quotation till they have occasion to return to the Baptist, after his
imprisonment ([Mat 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010); [Luk
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#027)). (Instead of the words, "as it
is written in the Prophets," there is weighty evidence in favor of the
following reading: "As it is written in Isaiah the prophet." This
reading is adopted by all the latest critical editors. If it be the true
one, it is to be explained thus--that of the two quotations, the one
from Malachi is but a later development of the great primary one in
Isaiah, from which the whole prophetical matter here quoted takes its
name. But the received text is quoted by IRENÃ†US, before the end of the
second century, and the evidence in its favor is greater in amount, if
not in weight. The chief objection to it is, that if this was the true
reading, it is difficult to see how the other one could have got in at
all; whereas, if it be not the true reading, it is very easy to see how
it found its way into the text, as it removes the startling difficulty
of a prophecy beginning with the words of Malachi being ascribed to
Isaiah). For the exposition, see on [Mat
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001), [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011).

[Mark 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 1:21</span></span>

HEALING OF A DEMONIAC IN THE SYNAGOGUE OF CAPERNAUM AND THEREAFTER OF
SIMON'S MOTHER-IN-LAW AND MANY OTHERS--JESUS, NEXT DAY, IS FOUND IN A
SOLITARY PLACE AT MORNING PRAYERS, AND IS ENTREATED TO RETURN, BUT
DECLINES, AND GOES FORTH ON HIS FIRST MISSIONARY CIRCUIT. ( = [Luk
4:31-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031); [Mat
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014); [Mat
4:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)). (Mark 1:21-39)

And they went into Capernaum--(See on [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013)).

and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue, and
taught--This should have been rendered, "straightway on the sabbaths He
entered into the synagogue and taught," or "continued to teach." The
meaning is, that as He began this practice on the very first sabbath
after coming to settle at Capernaum, so He continued it regularly
thereafter.

[Mark 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 1:22</span></span>

And they were astonished at his doctrine--or "teaching"--referring quite
as much to the manner as the matter of it.

for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the
scribes--See on [Mat 7:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028).

[Mark 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 1:23</span></span>

And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean
spirit--literally, "in an unclean spirit"--that is, so entirely under
demoniacal power that his personality was sunk for the time in that of
the spirit. The frequency with which this character of "impurity" is
ascribed to evil spirits--some twenty times in the Gospels--is not to be
overlooked.

and he cried out--as follows:

[Mark 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 1:24</span></span>

Saying, Let us alone--or rather, perhaps, "ah!" expressive of mingled
astonishment and terror.

what have we to do with thee--an expression of frequent occurrence in
the Old Testament ([Kg1 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018); [Kg2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013); [Ch2
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#021), &c.). It denotes entire
separation of interests:--that is, "Thou and we have nothing in common;
we want not Thee; what wouldst Thou with us?" For the analogous
application of it by our Lord to His mother, see on [Joh
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004).

thou Jesus of Nazareth--"Jesus, Nazarene!" an epithet originally given
to express contempt, but soon adopted as the current designation by
those who held our Lord in honor ([Luk
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#037); [Mar
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#006); [Act
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)).

art thou come to destroy us?--In the case of the Gadarene demoniac the
question was, "Art Thou come hither to torment us before the time?"
([Mat 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)). Themselves tormentors and
destroyers of their victims, they discern in Jesus their own destined
tormentor and destroyer, anticipating and dreading what they know and
feel to be awaiting them! Conscious, too, that their power was but
permitted and temporary, and perceiving in Him, perhaps, the woman's
Seed that was to bruise the head and destroy the works of the devil,
they regard His approach to them on this occasion as a signal to let go
their grasp of this miserable victim.

I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God--This and other even more
glorious testimonies to our Lord were given, as we know, with no good
will, but in hope that, by the acceptance of them, He might appear to
the people to be in league with evil spirits--a calumny which His
enemies were ready enough to throw out against Him. But a Wiser than
either was here, who invariably rejected and silenced the testimonies
that came to Him from beneath, and thus was able to rebut the
imputations of His enemies against Him ([Mat
12:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024)). The expression, "Holy One
of God," seems evidently taken from that Messianic Psalm ([Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)), in which He is styled "Thine
Holy One."

[Mark 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 1:25</span></span>

And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him--A
glorious word of command. BENGEL remarks that it was only the testimony
borne to Himself which our Lord meant to silence. That he should
afterwards cry out for fear or rage ([Mar
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#026)) He would right willingly permit.

[Mark 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 1:26</span></span>

And when the unclean spirit had torn him--Luke ([Luk
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035)) says, "When he had thrown him in
the midst." Malignant cruelty--just showing what he would have done, if
permitted to go farther: it was a last fling!

and cried with a loud voice--the voice of enforced submission and
despair.

he came out of him--Luke ([Luk 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035))
adds, "and hurt him not." Thus impotent were the malignity and rage of
the impure spirit when under the restraint of "the Stronger than the
strong one armed" ([Luk 11:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#021)).

[Mark 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 1:27</span></span>

What thing is this? what new doctrine--teaching

is this?--The audience, rightly apprehending that the miracle was
wrought to illustrate the teaching and display the character and glory
of the Teacher, begin by asking what novel kind of teaching this could
be, which was so marvellously attested.

[Mark 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 1:28</span></span>

And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round
about Galilee--rather, "the whole region of Galilee"; though some, as
MEYER and ELLICOTT, explain it of the country surrounding Galilee.

[Mark 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 1:29</span></span>

And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue--so also in [Luk
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038).

they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and
John--The mention of these four--which is peculiar to Mark--is the first
of those traces of Peter's hand in this Gospel, of which we shall find
many more. The house being his, and the illness and cure so nearly
affecting himself, it is interesting to observe this minute
specification of the number and names of the witnesses; interesting
also--as the first occasion on which the sacred triumvirate of Peter and
James and John are selected from among the rest, to be a threefold cord
of testimony to certain events in their Lord's life (see on [Mar
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#037)) --Andrew being present on this
occasion, as the occurrence took place in his own house.

[Mark 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 1:30</span></span>

But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever--Luke, as was natural in
"the beloved physician" ([Col 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014)),
describes it professionally; calling it a "great fever," and thus
distinguishing it from that lighter kind which the Greek physicians were
wont to call "small fevers," as GALEN, quoted by WETSTEIN, tells us.

and anon--immediately.

they tell him of her--naturally hoping that His compassion and power
towards one of His own disciples would not be less signally displayed
than towards the demonized stranger in the synagogue.

[Mark 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 1:31</span></span>

And he came and took her by the hand--rather, "And advancing, He took
her," &c. The beloved physician again is very specific: "And He stood
over her."

and lifted her up--This act of condescension, most felt doubtless by
Peter, is recorded only by Mark.

and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto
them--preparing their sabbath-meal: in token both of the perfectness and
immediateness of the cure, and of her gratitude to the glorious Healer.

[Mark 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 1:32</span></span>

And at even, when the sun did set--so [Mat
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016). Luke ([Luk
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#040)) says it was setting.

they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were
possessed with devils--the demonized. From [Luk
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014) we see how unlawful they would
have deemed it to bring their sick to Jesus for a cure during the
sabbath hours. They waited, therefore, till these were over, and then
brought them in crowds. Our Lord afterwards took repeated occasion to
teach the people by example, even at the risk of His own life, how
superstitious a straining of the sabbath rest this was.

[Mark 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 1:33</span></span>

And all the city was gathered together at the door--of Peter's house;
that is, the sick and those who brought them, and the wondering
spectators. This bespeaks the presence of an eye-witness, and is one of
those lively examples of word-painting so frequent in this Gospel.

[Mark 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 1:34</span></span>

And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many
devils--In [Mat 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016) it is said, "He
cast out the spirits with His word"; or rather, "with a word"--a word of
command.

and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him--Evidently
they would have spoken, if permitted, proclaiming His Messiahship in
such terms as in the synagogue; but once in one day, and that testimony
immediately silenced, was enough. See on [Mar
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024). After this account of His
miracles of healing, we have in [Mat
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017) this pregnant quotation, "That it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying ([Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)), Himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses."

[Mark 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 1:35</span></span>

And in the morning--that is, of the day after this remarkable sabbath;
or, on the first day of the week. His choosing this day to inaugurate a
new and glorious stage of His public work, should be noted by the
reader.

rising up a great while before day--"while it was yet night," or long
before daybreak.

he went out--all unperceived from Peter's house, where He slept.

and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed--or, "continued in
prayer." He was about to begin His first preaching and healing circuit;
and as on similar solemn occasions ([Luk
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#016); [Luk
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012); [Luk
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018), [Luk
9:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028); [Mar
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#046)), He spent some time in special
prayer, doubtless with a view to it. What would one not give to have
been, during the stillness of those grey morning hours, within
hearing--not of His "strong crying and tears," for He had scarce arrived
at the stage for that--but of His calm, exalted anticipations of the
work which lay immediately before Him, and the outpourings of His soul
about it into the bosom of Him that sent Him! He had doubtless enjoyed
some uninterrupted hours of such communings with His heavenly Father ere
His friends from Capernaum arrived in search of Him. As for them, they
doubtless expected, after such a day of miracles, that the next day
would witness similar manifestations. When morning came, Peter, loath to
break in upon the repose of his glorious Guest, would await His
appearance beyond the usual hour; but at length, wondering at the
stillness, and gently coming to see where the Lord lay, he finds
it--like the sepulchre afterwards--empty! Speedily a party is made up to
go in search of Him, Peter naturally leading the way.

[Mark 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 1:36</span></span>

And Simon and they that were with him followed after him--rather,
"pressed after Him." Luke ([Luk 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042))
says, "The multitudes sought after Him"; but this would be a party from
the town. Mark, having his information from Peter himself, speaks only
of what related directly to him. "They that were with him" would
probably be Andrew his brother, James and John, with a few other choice
brethren.

[Mark 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 1:37</span></span>

And when they had found him--evidently after some search.

they said unto him, All men seek for thee--By this time, "the
multitudes" who, according to Luke ([Luk
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042)), "sought after Him"--and who, on
going to Peter's house, and there learning that Peter and a few more
were gone in search of Him, had set out on the same errand--would have
arrived, and "came unto Him and stayed Him, that He should not depart
from them" ([Luk 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042)); all now urging
His return to their impatient townsmen.

[Mark 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 1:38</span></span>

And he said unto them, Let us go--or, according to another reading, "Let
us go elsewhere."

into the next towns--rather, "unto the neighboring village-towns";
meaning those places intermediate between towns and villages, with which
the western side of the Sea of Galilee was studded.

that I may preach there also; for therefore came I forth--not from
Capernaum, as DE WETTE miserably interprets, nor from His privacy in the
desert place, as MEYER, no better; but from the Father. Compare [Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028), "I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world," &c.--another proof, by the way, that the
lofty phraseology of the Fourth Gospel was not unknown to the authors of
the others, though their design and point of view are different. The
language in which our Lord's reply is given by Luke ([Luk
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043)) expresses the high necessity
under which, in this as in every other step of His work, He acted--"I
must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also; for therefore"--or,
"to this end"--"am I sent." An act of self-denial it doubtless was, to
resist such pleadings to return to Capernaum. But there were
overmastering considerations on the other side.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 2](mar002)

</div>
