<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar001)  [Next](mar004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001)

[Mark 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 2:1</span></span>

HEALING OF A PARALYTIC. ( = [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001); [Luk
5:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)). ([Mar
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001))

And again he entered into Capernaum--"His own city" ([Mat
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)).

and it was noised that he was in the house--no doubt of Simon Peter
([Mar 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029)).

[Mark 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 2:2</span></span>

And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no
room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door--This is one of
Mark's graphic touches. No doubt in this case, as the scene occurred at
his informant's own door, these details are the vivid recollections of
that honored disciple.

and he preached the word unto them--that is, indoors; but in the
hearing, doubtless, of the multitude that pressed around. Had He gone
forth, as He naturally would, the paralytic's faith would have had no
such opportunity to display itself. Luke ([Luk
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)) furnishes an additional and very
important incident in the scene--as follows: "And it came to pass on a
certain day, as He was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors
of the law sitting by, which were come out of every town," or village,
"of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem." This was the highest testimony
yet borne to our Lord's growing influence, and the necessity
increasingly felt by the ecclesiastics throughout the country of coming
to some definite judgment regarding Him. "And the power of the Lord was
\[present\] to heal them"--or, "was \[efficacious\] to heal them," that
is, the sick that were brought before Him. So that the miracle that is
now to be described was among the most glorious and worthy to be
recorded of many then performed; and what made it so was doubtless the
faith which was manifested in connection with it, and the proclamation
of the forgiveness of the patient's sins that immediately preceded it.

[Mark 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 2:3</span></span>

And they come unto him--that is, towards the house where He was.

bringing one sick of the palsy--"lying on a bed" ([Mat
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)).

which was borne of four--a graphic particular of Mark only.

[Mark 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 2:4</span></span>

And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press--or, as in Luke
([Luk 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#019)), "when they could not find
by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude," they
"went upon the housetop"--the flat or terrace-roof, universal in Eastern
houses.

they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up,
they let down the bed--or portable couch

wherein the sick of the palsy lay--Luke ([Luk
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#019)) says, they "let him down through
the tilling with his couch into the midst before Jesus." Their whole
object was to bring the patient into the presence of Jesus; and this not
being possible in the ordinary way, because of the multitude that
surrounded Him, they took the very unusual method here described of
accomplishing their object, and succeeded. Several explanations have
been given of the way in which this was done; but unless we knew the
precise plan of the house, and the part of it from which Jesus
taught--which may have been a quadrangle or open court, within the
buildings of which Peter's house was one, or a gallery covered by a
veranda--it is impossible to determine precisely how the thing was done.
One thing, however, is clear, that we have both the accounts from an
eye-witness.

[Mark 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 2:5</span></span>

When Jesus saw their faith--It is remarkable that all the three
narratives call it "their faith" which Jesus saw. That the patient
himself had faith, we know from the proclamation of his forgiveness,
which Jesus made before all; and we should have been apt to conclude
that his four friends bore him to Jesus merely out of benevolent
compliance with the urgent entreaties of the poor sufferer. But here we
learn, not only that his bearers had the same faith with himself, but
that Jesus marked it as a faith which was not to be defeated--a faith
victorious over all difficulties. This was the faith for which He was
ever on the watch, and which He never saw without marking, and, in those
who needed anything from Him, richly rewarding.

he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son--"be of good cheer" ([Mat
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)).

thy sins be forgiven thee--By the word "be," our translators perhaps
meant "are," as in Luke ([Luk 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#020)).
For it is not a command to his sins to depart, but an authoritative
proclamation of the man's pardoned state as a believer. And yet, as the
Pharisees understood our Lord to be dispensing pardon by this saying,
and Jesus not only acknowledges that they were right, but founds His
whole argument upon the correctness of it, we must regard the saying as
a royal proclamation of the man's forgiveness by Him to whom it belonged
to dispense it; nor could such a style of address be justified on any
lower supposition. (See on [Luk 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041),
&c.).

[Mark 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 2:6</span></span>

But there were certain of the scribes--"and the Pharisees" ([Luk
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021))

sitting there--those Jewish ecclesiastics who, as Luke told us ([Luk
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)), "were come out of every village
of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem," to make their observations upon
this wonderful Person, in anything but a teachable spirit, though as yet
their venomous and murderous feeling had not showed itself.

and reasoning in their hearts.

[Mark 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 2:7</span></span>

Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God
only?--In this second question they expressed a great truth. (See [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018); [Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), &c.). Nor was their first
question altogether unnatural, though in our Lord's sole case it was
unfounded. That a man, to all appearances like one of themselves, should
claim authority and power to forgive sins, they could not, on the first
blush of it, but regard as in the last degree startling; nor were they
entitled even to weigh such a claim, as worthy of a hearing, save on
supposition of resistless evidence afforded by Him in support of the
claim. Accordingly, our Lord deals with them as men entitled to such
evidence, and supplies it; at the same time chiding them for rashness,
in drawing harsh conclusions regarding Himself.

[Mark 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 2:8</span></span>

Why reason ye these things in your hearts--or, as in Matthew, ([Mat
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004)) "Wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts?"

[Mark 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 2:9</span></span>

Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be
forgiven thee--or "are forgiven thee";

or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?--"Is it easier to
command away disease than to bid away sin? If, then, I do the one which
you can see, know thus that I have done the other, which you cannot
see."

[Mark 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 2:10</span></span>

But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive
sins--that forgiving power dwells in the Person of this Man, and is
exercised by Him while on this earth and going out and in with you.

(he saith to the sick of the palsy),

[Mark 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 2:11</span></span>

I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine
house--This taking up the portable couch, and walking home with it, was
designed to prove the completeness of the cure.

[Mark 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 2:12</span></span>

And immediately he arose, took up the bed--"Sweet saying!" says BENGEL:
"The bed had borne the man: now the man bore the bed."

and went forth before them all--proclaiming by that act to the
multitude, whose wondering eyes would follow him as he pressed through
them, that He who could work such a glorious miracle of healing, must
indeed "have power on earth to forgive sins."

We never saw it on this fashion--"never saw it thus," or, as we say,
"never saw the like." In Luke ([Luk
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#026)) it is, "We have seen strange
\[unexpected\] things to-day"--referring both to the miracles wrought
and the forgiveness of sins pronounced by Human Lips. In Matthew ([Mat
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#008)) it is, "They marvelled, and
glorified God, which had given such power unto men." At forgiving power
they wondered not, but that a man, to all appearance like one of
themselves, should possess it!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 4](mar004)

</div>
