<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar008)  [Next](mar010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001)

[Mark 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 9:14</span></span>

HEALING OF A DEMONIAC BOY--SECOND EXPLICIT ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS
APPROACHING DEATH AND RESURRECTION. ( = [Mat
17:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014); [Luk
9:37-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037)). (Mark 9:14-32)

And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them,
and the scribes questioning with them--This was "on the next day, when
they were come down from the hill" ([Luk
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037)). The Transfiguration appears to
have taken place at night. In the morning, as He came down from the hill
on which it took place--with Peter, and James, and John--on approaching
the other nine, He found them surrounded by a great multitude, and the
scribes disputing or discussing with them. No doubt these cavillers were
twitting the apostles of Jesus with their inability to cure the demoniac
boy of whom we are presently to hear, and insinuating doubts even of
their Master's ability to do it; while they, zealous for their Master's
honor, would no doubt refer to His past miracles in proof of the
contrary.

[Mark 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 9:15</span></span>

And straightway all the people--the multitude.

when they beheld him, were greatly amazed--were astounded.

and running to him saluted him--The singularly strong expression of
surprise, the sudden arrest of the discussion,and the rush of the
multitude towards Him, can be accounted for by nothing less than
something amazing in His appearance. There can hardly be any doubt that
His countenance still retained traces of His transfiguration-glory. (See
[Exo 34:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029)). So BENGEL, DE WETTE,
MEYER, TRENCH, ALFORD. No wonder, if this was the case, that they not
only ran to Him, but saluted Him. Our Lord, however, takes no notice of
what had attracted them, and probably it gradually faded away as He drew
near; but addressing Himself to the scribes, He demands the subject of
their discussion, ready to meet them where they had pressed hard upon
His half-instructed and as yet timid apostles.

[Mark 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 9:16</span></span>

And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them?--Ere they had time
to reply, the father of the boy, whose case had occasioned the dispute,
himself steps forward and answers the question; telling a piteous tale
of deafness, and dumbness, and fits of epilepsy--ending with this, that
the disciples, though entreated, could not perform the cure.

[Mark 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 9:17</span></span>

And one of the multitude answered, and said, Master, I have brought unto
thee my son--"mine only child" ([Luk
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#038)).

which hath a dumb spirit--a spirit whose operation had the effect of
rendering his victim speechless, and deaf also ([Mar
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025)). In Matthew's report of the
speech ([Mat 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015)), the father says
"he is lunatic"; this being another and most distressing effect of the
possession.

[Mark 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 9:18</span></span>

And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him; and he foameth, and
gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away--rather, "becomes withered,"
"dried up," or "paralyzed"; as the same word is everywhere else rendered
in the New Testament. Some additional particulars are given by Luke, and
by our Evangelist below. "Lo," says he in [Luk
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#039), "a spirit taketh him, and he
suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth again, and
bruising him hardly \[or with difficulty\] departeth from him."

and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they
could not--Our Lord replies to the father by a severe rebuke to the
disciples. As if wounded at the exposure before such a multitude, of the
weakness of His disciples' faith, which doubtless He felt as a
reflection on Himself, He puts them to the blush before all, but in
language fitted only to raise expectation of what He Himself would do.

[Mark 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 9:19</span></span>

He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation--"and perverse," or
"perverted" ([Mat 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017); [Luk
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#041)).

how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?--language
implying that it was a shame to them to want the faith necessary to
perform this cure, and that it needed some patience to put up with them.
It is to us surprising that some interpreters, as CHRYSOSTOM and CALVIN,
should represent this rebuke as addressed, not to the disciples at all,
but to the scribes who disputed with them. Nor does it much, if at all,
mend the matter to view it as addressed to both, as most expositors seem
to do. With BENGEL, DE WETTE, and MEYER, we regard it as addressed
directly to the nine apostles who were unable to expel this evil spirit.
And though, in ascribing this inability to their "want of faith" and the
"perverted turn of mind" which they had drunk in with their early
training, the rebuke would undoubtedly apply, with vastly greater force,
to those who twitted the poor disciples with their inability, it would
be to change the whole nature of the rebuke to suppose it addressed to
those who had no faith at all, and were wholly perverted. It was because
faith sufficient for curing this youth was to be expected of the
disciples, and because they should by that time have got rid of the
perversity in which they had been reared, that Jesus exposes them thus
before the rest. And who does not see that this was fitted, more than
anything else, to impress upon the by-standers the severe loftiness of
the training He was giving to the Twelve, and the unsophisticated
footing He was on with them?

Bring him unto me--The order to bring the patient to Him was instantly
obeyed; when, lo! as if conscious of the presence of his Divine
Tormentor, and expecting to be made to quit, the foul spirit rages and
is furious, determined to die hard, doing all the mischief he can to
this poor child while yet within his grasp.

[Mark 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 9:20</span></span>

And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the
spirit tare him--Just as the man with the legion of demons, "when he saw
Jesus, ran and worshipped Him" ([Mar
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#006)), so this demon, when he saw Him,
immediately "tare him." The feeling of terror and rage was the same in
both cases.

and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming--Still Jesus does
nothing, but keeps conversing with the father about the case--partly to
have its desperate features told out by him who knew them best, in the
hearing of the spectators; partly to let its virulence have time to show
itself; and partly to deepen the exercise of the father's soul, to draw
out his faith, and thus to prepare both him and the by-standers for what
He was to do.

[Mark 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 9:21</span></span>

And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him?
And he said, Of a child, &c.--Having told briefly the affecting features
of the case, the poor father, half dispirited by the failure of the
disciples and the aggravated virulence of the malady itself in presence
of their Master, yet encouraged too by what he had heard of Christ, by
the severe rebuke He had given to His disciples for not having faith
enough to cure the boy, and by the dignity with which He had ordered him
to be brought to Him--in this mixed state of mind, he closes his
description of the case with these touching words:

[Mark 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 9:22</span></span>

but if thou canst do anything, have compassion on us, and help us--"us,"
says the father; for it was a sore family affliction. Compare the
language of the SyrophÅ“nician woman regarding her daughter, "Lord, help
me." Still nothing is done: the man is but struggling into faith: it
must come a step farther. But he had to do with Him who breaks not the
bruised reed, and who knew how to inspire what He demanded. The man had
said to Him, "If Thou canst do."

[Mark 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 9:23</span></span>

Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe--The man had said, "If Thou
canst do anything." Jesus replies.

all things are possible to him that believeth--"My doing all depends on
thy believing." To impress this still more, He redoubles upon the
believing: "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
believeth." Thus the Lord helps the birth of faith in that struggling
soul; and now, though with pain and sore travail, it comes to the birth,
as TRENCH, borrowing from OLSHAUSEN, expresses it. Seeing the case stood
still, waiting not upon the Lord's power but his own faith, the man
becomes immediately conscious of conflicting principles, and rises into
one of the noblest utterances on record.

[Mark 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 9:24</span></span>

And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears,
Lord, I believe: help thou mine unbelief--that is, "It is useless
concealing from Thee, O Thou mysterious, mighty Healer, the unbelief
that still struggles in this heart of mine; but that heart bears me
witness that I do believe in Thee; and if distrust still remains, I
disown it, I wrestle with it, I seek help from Thee against it." Two
things are very remarkable here: First, The felt and owned presence of
unbelief, which only the strength of the man's faith could have so
revealed to his own consciousness. Second, His appeal to Christ for help
against his felt unbelief--a feature in the case quite unparalleled, and
showing, more than all protestations could have done, the insight he had
attained into the existence of a power in Christ more glorious them any
he had besought for his poor child. The work was done; and as the
commotion and confusion in the crowd was now increasing, Jesus at once,
as Lord of spirits, gives the word of command to the dumb and deaf
spirit to be gone, never again to return to his victim.

[Mark 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 9:26</span></span>

And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him; and he was
as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead--The malignant, cruel
spirit, now conscious that his time was come, gathers up his whole
strength, with intent by a last stroke to kill his victim, and had
nearly succeeded. But the Lord of life was there; the Healer of all
maladies, the Friend of sinners, the Seed of the woman, "the Stronger
than the strong man armed," was there. The very faith which Christ
declared to be enough for everything being now found, it was not
possible that the serpent should prevail. Fearfully is he permitted to
bruise the heel, as in this case; but his own head shall go for it--his
works shall be destroyed ([Jo1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)).

[Mark 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 9:27</span></span>

But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.

[Mark 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 9:28</span></span>

Why could not we cast him out?

[Mark 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 9:29</span></span>

And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing but by prayer
and fasting--that is, as nearly all good interpreters are agreed, "this
kind of evil spirits cannot be expelled," or "so desperate a case of
demoniacal possession cannot be cured, but by prayer and fasting." But
since the Lord Himself says that His disciples could not fast while He
was with them, perhaps this was designed, as ALFORD hints, for their
after-guidance--unless we take it as but a definite way of expressing
the general truth, that great and difficult duties require special
preparation and self-denial. But the answer to their question, as given
in [Mat 17:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020) is fuller: "And Jesus
said unto them, Because of your unbelief. For verily I say unto you, If
ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this
mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing
shall be impossible unto you" ([Mat
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)). See on [Mar
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#023). "Howbeit this kind goeth not
out but by prayer and fasting" ([Mat
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)), that is, though nothing is
impossible to faith, yet such a height of faith as is requisite for such
triumphs is not to be reached either in a moment or without
effort--either with God in prayer or with ourselves in self-denying
exercises. Luke ([Luk 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043)) adds, "And
they were all amazed at the mighty power of God"--"at the majesty" or
"mightiness of God," in this last miracle, in the Transfiguration, &c.;
or, at the divine grandeur of Christ rising upon them daily.

Second Explicit Announcement of His Approaching Death and Resurrection
([Mar 9:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030)).

[Mark 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 9:30</span></span>

And they departed thence, and passed--were passing along.

through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know it--By
comparing [Mat 17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022) and [Luk
9:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043) with this, we gather, that as
our Lord's reason for going through Galilee more privately than usual on
this occasion was to reiterate to them the announcement which had so
shocked them at the first mention of it, and thus familiarize them with
it by little and little, so this was His reason for enjoining silence
upon them as to their present movements.

[Mark 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 9:31</span></span>

For he taught his disciples, and said unto them--"Let these sayings sink
down into your ears" ([Luk 9:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#044)); not
what had been passing between them as to His grandeur, but what He was
now to utter.

The Son of man is delivered--The use of the present tense expresses how
near at hand He would have them to consider it. As BENGEL says, steps
were already in course of being taken to bring it about.

into the hands of men--This remarkable antithesis, "the Son of man shall
be delivered into the hands of men," it is worthy of notice, is in all
the three Evangelists.

and they shall kill him--that is, "Be not carried off your feet by all
that grandeur of Mine which ye have lately witnessed, but bear in mind
what I have already told you and now distinctly repeat, that that Sun in
whose beams ye now rejoice is soon to set in midnight gloom."

and after he is killed, he shall rise the third day.

[Mark 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 9:32</span></span>

But they understood not that saying--"and it was hid from them, \[so\]
that they preceived it not" ([Luk
9:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#045)).

and were afraid to ask him--Their most cherished ideas were so
completely dashed by such announcements, that they were afraid of laying
themselves open to rebuke by asking Him any questions. But "they were
exceeding sorry" ([Mat 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023)). While
the other Evangelists, as WEBSTER and WILKINSON remark, notice their
ignorance and their fear, Matthew, who was one of them, retains a vivid
recollection of their sorrow.

[Mark 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 9:33</span></span>

STRIFE AMONG THE TWELVE WHO SHOULD BE GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN,
WITH RELATIVE TEACHING--INCIDENTAL REBUKE OF JOHN FOR EXCLUSIVENESS. ( =
[Mat 18:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001); [Luk
9:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#046)). (Mark 9:33-50)

What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?--From this we
gather that after the ,painful communication He had made to them, the
Redeemer had allowed them to travel so much of the way by themselves;
partly, no doubt, that He might have privacy for Himself to dwell on
what lay before Him, and partly that they might be induced to weigh
together and prepare themselves for the terrible events which He had
announced to them. But if so, how different was their occupation!

[Mark 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 9:34</span></span>

But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who should be the greatest--From [Mat
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001) we should infer that the subject
was introduced, not by our Lord, but by the disciples themselves, who
came and asked Jesus who should be greatest. Perhaps one or two of them
first referred the matter to Jesus, who put them off till they should
all be assembled together at Capernaum. He had all the while "perceived
the thought of their heart" ([Luk
9:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#047)); but now that they were all
together "in the house," He questions them about it, and they are put to
the blush, conscious of the temper towards each other which it had
kindled. This raised the whole question afresh, and at this point our
Evangelist takes it up. The subject was suggested by the recent
announcement of the Kingdom ([Mat
16:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)), the transfiguration of
their Master, and especially the preference given to three of them at
that scene.

[Mark 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 9:35</span></span>

If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and
servant of all--that is, "let him be" such: he must be prepared to take
the last and lowest place. See on [Mar
10:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#042).

[Mark 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 9:36</span></span>

And he took a child--"a little child" ([Mat
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002)); but the word is the same in
both places, as also in [Luk 9:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#047).

and set him in the midst of them: and when he had taken him in his
arms--This beautiful trait is mentioned by out Evangelist alone.

he said unto them--Here we must go to Matthew ([Mat
18:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)) for the first of this answer:
"Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: " that is,
"Conversion must be thorough; not only must the heart be turned to God
in general, and from earthly to heavenly things, but in particular,
except ye be converted from that carnal ambition which still rankles
within you, into that freedom from all such feelings which ye see in
this child, ye have neither part nor lot in the kingdom at all; and he
who in this feature has most of the child, is highest there." Whosoever,
therefore, shall "humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of heaven": "for he that is \[willing to be\]
least among you all, the same shall be great" ([Luk
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#048)).

[Mark 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 9:37</span></span>

Whosoever shall receive one of such children--so manifesting the spirit
unconsciously displayed by this child.

in my name--from love to Me.

receiveth me; and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but Him
that sent me--(See on [Mat 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)).

Incidental Rebuke of John for Exclusiveness ([Mar
9:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038)).

[Mark 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 9:38</span></span>

And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in
thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbade him, because he
followeth not us--The link of connection here with the foregoing context
lies, we apprehend, in the emphatic words which our Lord had just
uttered, "in My name." "Oh," interposes John--young, warm, but not
sufficiently apprehending Christ's teaching in these matters--"that
reminds me of something that we have just done, and we should like to
know if we did right. We saw one casting out devils "in Thy name," and
we forbade him, because he followeth not us. Were we right, or were we
wrong?" Answer--"Ye were wrong." "But we did it because he followeth not
us." "No matter."

[Mark 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mar 9:39</span></span>

But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a
miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me--soon, that is,
readily "speak evil of me."

[Mark 9:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 9:40</span></span>

For he that is not against us is on our part--Two principles of immense
importance are here laid down: "First, No one will readily speak evil of
Me who has the faith to do a miracle in My name; and second, If such a
person cannot be supposed to be against us, ye are to consider him for
us." Let it be carefully observed that our Lord does not say this man
should not have "followed them," nor yet that it was indifferent whether
he did or not; but simply teaches how such a person was to be regarded,
although he did not--namely, as a reverer of His name and a promoter of
His cause.

[Mark 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 9:41</span></span>

For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because
ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward--(See on [Mat 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)).

Continuation of Teaching Suggested by the Disciple's Strife ([Mar
9:42-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042)).

What follows appears to have no connection with the incidental reproof
of John immediately preceding. As that had interrupted some important
teaching, our Lord hastens back from it, as if no such interruption had
occurred.

[Mark 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 9:42</span></span>

For whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in
me--or, shall cause them to stumble; referring probably to the effect
which such unsavory disputes as they had held would have upon the
inquiring and hopeful who came in contact with them, leading to the
belief that after all they were no better than others.

it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck--The
word here is simply "millstone," without expressing of which kind. But
in [Mat 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006) it is the "ass-turned"
kind, far heavier than the small hand-mill turned by female slaves, as
in [Luk 17:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#035). It is of course the
same which is meant here.

and he were cast into the sea--meaning, that if by such a death that
stumbling were prevented, and so its eternal consequences averted, it
would be a happy thing for them. Here follows a striking verse in [Mat
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007), "Woe unto the world because of
offences!" (There will be stumblings and falls and loss of souls enough
from the world's treatment of disciples, without any addition from you:
dreadful will be its doom in consequence; see that ye share not in it).
"For it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom
the offence cometh!" (The struggle between light and darkness will
inevitably cause stumblings, but not less guilty is he who wilfully
makes any to stumble).

[Mark 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 9:43</span></span>

And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell--See [Mat
5:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). The only difference between
the words there and here is that there they refer to impure
inclinations; here, to an ambitious disposition, an irascible or
quarrelsome temper, and the like: and the injunction is to strike at the
root of such dispositions and cut off the occasions of them.

[Mark 9:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mar 9:47</span></span>

And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
cast into hell-fire--On the words "hell" and "hell-fire," or "the hell
of fire," see on [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022).

[Mark 9:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mar 9:48</span></span>

Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched--See on [Mat
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030); The "unquenchablesness" of this
fire has already been brought before us (see on [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)); and the awfully vivid idea of
an undying worm, everlastingly consuming an unconsumable body, is taken
from the closing words of the evangelical prophet ([Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)), which seem to have furnished
the later Jewish Church with its current phraseology on the subject of
future punishment (see LIGHTFOOT).

[Mark 9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mar 9:49</span></span>

For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be
salted with salt--A difficult verse, on which much has been
written--some of it to little purpose. "Every one" probably means "Every
follower of mine"; and the "fire" with which he "must be salted"
probably means "a fiery trial" to season him. (Compare [Mal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002), &c.). The reference to salting
the sacrifice is of course to that maxim of the Levitical law, that
every acceptable sacrifice must be sprinkled with salt, to express
symbolically its soundness, sweetness, wholesomeness, acceptability. But
as it had to be roasted first, we have here the further idea of a
salting with fire. In this case, "every sacrifice," in the next clause,
will mean, "Every one who would be found an acceptable offering to God";
and thus the whole verse may perhaps be paraphrased as follows: "Every
disciple of Mine shall have a fiery trial to undergo, and everyone who
would be found an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and
well-pleasing to God, must have such a salting, like the Levitical
sacrifices." Another, but, as it seems to us, farfetched as well as
harsh, interpretation--suggested first, we believe, by MICHAELIS, and
adopted by ALEXANDER--takes the "every sacrifice which must be salted
with fire" to mean those who are "cast into hell," and the preservative
effect of this salting to refer to the preservation of the lost not only
in but by means of the fire of hell. Their reason for this is that the
other interpretation changes the meaning of the "fire," and the
characters too, from the lost to the saved, in these verses. But as our
Lord confessedly ends His discourse with the case of His own true
disciples, the transition to them in [Mar
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#048) is perfectly natural; whereas to
apply the preservative salt of the sacrifice to the preserving quality
of hell-fire, is equally contrary to the symbolical sense of salt and
the Scripture representations of future torment. Our Lord has still in
His eye the unseemly jarrings which had arisen among the Twelve, the
peril to themselves of allowing any indulgence to such passions, and the
severe self-sacrifice which salvation would cost them.

[Mark 9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mar 9:50</span></span>

Salt is good; but if the salt have lost his saltness--its power to
season what it is brought into contact with.

wherewith will ye season it?--How is this property to be restored? See
on [Mat 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013).

Have salt in yourselves--See to it that ye retain in yourselves those
precious qualities that will make you a blessing to one another, and to
all around you.

and--with respect to the miserable strife out of which all this
discourse has sprung, in one concluding word.

have peace one with another--This is repeated in [Th1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 10](mar010)

</div>
