<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mat028)  [Next](mar001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 0:0</span></span>

THAT the Second Gospel was written by Mark is universally agreed, though
by what Mark, not so. The great majority of critics take the writer to
be "John whose surname was Mark," of whom we read in the Acts, and who
was "sister's son to Barnabas" ([Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)). But no reason whatever is
assigned for this opinion, for which the tradition, though ancient, is
not uniform; and one cannot but wonder how it is so easily taken for
granted by WETSTEIN, HUG, MEYER, EBRARD, LANGE, ELLICOTT, DAVIDSON,
TREGELLES, &c. ALFORD goes the length of saying it "has been universally
believed that he was the same person with the John Mark of the Gospels.
But GROTIUS thought differently, and so did SCHLEIERMACHER, CAMPBELL,
BURTON, and DA COSTA; and the grounds on which it is concluded that they
were two different persons appear to us quite unanswerable. "Of John,
surnamed Mark," says CAMPBELL, in his Preface to this Gospel, "one of
the first things we learn is, that he attended Paul and Barnabas in
their apostolical journeys, when these two travelled together ([Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025); [Act
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)). And when afterwards there arose
a dispute between them concerning him, insomuch that they separated,
Mark accompanied his uncle Barnabas, and Silas attended Paul. When Paul
was reconciled to Mark, which was probably soon after, we find Paul
again employing Mark's assistance, recommending him, and giving him a
very honorable testimony ([Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010);
[Ti2 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011); [Plm
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024)). But we hear not a syllable of
his attending Peter as his minister, or assisting him in any capacity.
And yet, as we shall presently see, no tradition is more ancient, more
uniform, and better sustained by internal evidence, than that Mark, in
his Gospel, was but "the interpreter of Peter," who, at the close of his
first Epistle speaks of him as "Marcus my son" ([Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)), that is, without doubt, his son
in the Gospel--converted to Christ through his instrumentality. And when
we consider how little the Apostles Peter and Paul were together--how
seldom they even met--how different were their tendencies, and how
separate their spheres of labor, is there not, in the absence of all
evidence of the fact, something approaching to violence in the
supposition that the same Mark was the intimate associate of both? "In
brief," adds CAMPBELL, "the accounts given of Paul's attendant, and
those of Peter's interpreter, concur in nothing but the name, Mark or
Marcus; too slight a circumstance to conclude the sameness of the person
from, especially when we consider how common the name was at Rome, and
how customary it was for the Jews in that age to assume some Roman name
when they went thither."

Regarding the Evangelist Mark, then, as another person from Paul's
companion in travel, all we know of his personal history is that he was
a convert, as we have seen, of the Apostle Peter. But as to his Gospel,
the tradition regarding Peter's hand in it is so ancient, so uniform,
and so remarkably confirmed by internal evidence, that we must regard it
as an established fact. "Mark," says PAPIAS (according to the testimony
of EUSEBIUS, \[Ecclesiastical History, 3.39\]), "becoming the
interpreter of Peter, wrote accurately, though not in order, whatever he
remembered of what was either said or done by Christ; for he was neither
a hearer of the Lord nor a follower of Him, but afterwards, as I said,
\[he was a follower\] of Peter, who arranged the discourses for use, but
not according to the order in which they were uttered by the Lord." To
the same effect IRENÃ†US \[Against Heresies, 3,1\]: "Matthew published a
Gospel while Peter and Paul were preaching and founding the Church at
Rome; and after their departure (or decease), Mark, the disciple and
interpreter of Peter, he also gave forth to us in writing the things
which were preached by Peter." And CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA is still more
specific, in a passage preserved to us by EUSEBIUS \[Ecclesiastical
History, 6.14\]: "Peter having publicly preached the word at Rome, and
spoken forth the Gospel by the Spirit, many of those present exhorted
Mark, as having long been a follower of his, and remembering what he had
said, to write what had been spoken; and that having prepared the
Gospel, he delivered it to those who had asked him for it; which, when
Peter came to the knowledge of, he neither decidedly forbade nor
encouraged him." EUSEBIUS' own testimony, however, from other accounts,
is rather different: that Peter's hearers were so penetrated by his
preaching that they gave Mark, as being a follower of Peter, no rest
till he consented to write his Gospel, as a memorial of his oral
teaching; and "that the apostle, when he knew by the revelation of the
Spirit what had been done, was delighted with the zeal of those men, and
sanctioned the reading of the writing (that is, of this Gospel of Mark)
in the churches" \[Ecclesiastical History, 2.15\]. And giving in another
of his works a similar statement, he says that "Peter, from excess of
humility, did not think himself qualified to write the Gospel; but Mark,
his acquaintance and pupil, is said to have recorded his relations of
the actings of Jesus. And Peter testifies these things of himself; for
all things that are recorded by Mark are said to be memoirs of Peter's
discourses." It is needless to go farther--to ORIGEN, who says Mark
composed his Gospel "as Peter guided" or "directed him, who, in his
Catholic Epistle, calls him his son," &c.; and to JEROME, who but echoes
EUSEBIUS.

This, certainly, is a remarkable chain of testimony; which, confirmed as
it is by such striking internal evidence, may be regarded as
establishing the fact that the Second Gospel was drawn up mostly from
materials furnished by Peter. In DA COSTA'S'S Four Witnesses the reader
will find this internal evidence detailed at length, though all the
examples are not equally convincing. But if the reader will refer to our
remarks on [Mar 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007), and [Joh
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#027), he will have convincing
evidence of a Petrine hand in this Gospel.

It remains only to advert, in a word or two, to the readers for whom
this Gospel was, in the first instance, designed, and the date of it.
That it was not for Jews but Gentiles, is evident from the great number
of explanations of Jewish usages, opinions, and places, which to a Jew
would at that time have been superfluous, but were highly needful to a
Gentile. We can here but refer to [Mar
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#018); [Mar
7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#003); [Mar
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018); [Mar
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003); [Mar
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012); [Mar
15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042), for examples of these.
Regarding the date of this Gospel--about which nothing certain is
known--if the tradition reported by IRENÃ†US can be relied on that it
was written at Rome, "after the departure of Peter and Paul," and if by
that word "departure" we are to understand their death, we may date it
somewhere between the years 64 and 68; but in all likelihood this is too
late. It is probably nearer the truth to date it eight or ten years
earlier.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 1](mar001)

</div>
