<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat025)  [Next](mat028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

[Matthew 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 27:3</span></span>

JESUS LED AWAY TO PILATE--REMORSE AND SUICIDE OF JUDAS. ( = [Mar
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001); [Luk
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001); [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)). ([Mat
27:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001))

Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned--The condemnation, even though not unexpected, might well fill
him with horror. But perhaps this unhappy man expected, that, while he
got the bribe, the Lord would miraculously escape, as He had once and
again done before, out of His enemies power: and if so, his remorse
would come upon him with all the greater keenness.

repented himself--but, as the issue too sadly showed, it was "the sorrow
of the world, which worketh death" ([Co2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)).

and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and
elders--A remarkable illustration of the power of an awakened
conscience. A short time before, the promise of this sordid pelf was
temptation enough to his covetous heart to outweigh the most
overwhelming obligations of duty and love; now, the possession of it so
lashes him that he cannot use it, cannot even keep it!

[Matthew 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 27:4</span></span>

Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood--What a
testimony this to Jesus! Judas had been with Him in all circumstances
for three years; his post, as treasurer to Him and the Twelve ([Joh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)), gave him peculiar opportunity
of watching the spirit, disposition, and habits of his Master; while his
covetous nature and thievish practices would incline him to dark and
suspicious, rather than frank and generous, interpretations of all that
He said and did. If, then, he could have fastened on one questionable
feature in all that he had so long witnessed, we may be sure that no
such speech as this would ever have escaped his lips, nor would he have
been so stung with remorse as not to be able to keep the money and
survive his crime.

And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that--"Guilty or innocent
is nothing to us: We have Him now--begone!" Was ever speech more hellish
uttered?

[Matthew 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 27:5</span></span>

And he cast down the pieces of silver--The sarcastic, diabolical reply
which he had got, in place of the sympathy which perhaps he expected,
would deepen his remorse into an agony.

in the temple--the temple proper, commonly called "the sanctuary," or
"the holy place," into which only the priests might enter. How is this
to be explained? Perhaps he flung the money in after them. But thus were
fulfilled the words of the prophet--"I cast them to the potter in the
house of the Lord" ([Zac 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)).

and departed, and went and hanged himself--For the details, see on [Act
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018).

[Matthew 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 27:6</span></span>

And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful
for to put them into the treasury--"the Corban," or chest containing the
money dedicated to sacred purposes (see on [Mat
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005)).

because it is the price of blood--How scrupulous now! But those
punctilious scruples made them unconsciously fulfil the Scripture.

[Matthew 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 27:9</span></span>

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying--
([Zac 11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)). Never was a
complicated prophecy, otherwise hopelessly dark, more marvellously
fulfilled. Various conjectures have been formed to account for Matthew's
ascribing to Jeremiah a prophecy found in the book of Zechariah. But
since with this book he was plainly familiar, having quoted one of its
most remarkable prophecies of Christ but a few chapters before ([Mat
21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004)), the question is one more of
critical interest than real importance. Perhaps the true explanation is
the following, from LIGHTFOOT: "Jeremiah of old had the first place
among the prophets, and hereby he comes to be mentioned above all the
rest in [Mat 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014); because he stood
first in the volume of the prophets \[as he proves from the learned
DAVID KIMCHI\] therefore he is first named. When, therefore, Matthew
produceth a text of Zechariah under the name of JEREMY, he only cites
the words of the volume of the prophets under his name who stood first
in the volume of the prophets. Of which sort is that also of our Saviour
([Luk 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041)), "All things must be
fulfilled which are written of Me in the Law, and the Prophets, and the
Psalms," or the Book of Hagiographa, in which the Psalms were placed
first."

[Matthew 27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 27:51</span></span>

SIGNS AND CIRCUMSTANCES FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF THE LORD JESUS--HE IS
TAKEN DOWN FROM THE CROSS, AND BURIED--THE SEPULCHRE IS GUARDED. ( =
[Mar 15:38-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#038); [Luk
23:47-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#047); [Joh
19:31-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)). (Mat. 27:51-66)

And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom--This was the thick and gorgeously wrought veil which was
hung between the "holy place" and the "holiest of all," shutting out all
access to the presence of God as manifested "from above the mercy seat
and from between the cherubim"--"the Holy Ghost this signifying, that
the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest" ([Heb
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)). Into this holiest of all none
might enter, not even the high priest, save once a year, on the great
day of atonement, and then only with the blood of atonement in his
hands, which he sprinkled "upon and before the mercy seat seven times"
([Lev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014)) --to signify that access
for sinners to a holy God is only through atoning blood. But as they had
only the blood of bulls and of goats, which could not take away sins
([Heb 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004)), during all the long ages
that preceded the death of Christ the thick veil remained; the blood of
bulls and of goats continued to be shed and sprinkled; and once a year
access to God through an atoning sacrifice was vouchsafed--in a picture,
or rather, was dramatically represented, in those symbolical
actions--nothing more. But now, the one atoning Sacrifice being provided
in the precious blood of Christ, access to this holy God could no longer
be denied; and so the moment the Victim expired on the altar, that thick
veil which for so many ages had been the dread symbol of separation
between God and guilty men was, without a hand touching it, mysteriously
"rent in twain from top to bottom"--"the Holy Ghost this signifying,
that the way into the holiest of all was NOW made manifest!" How
emphatic the statement, from top to bottom; as if to say, Come boldly
now to the Throne of Grace; the veil is clean gone; the mercy seat
stands open to the gaze of sinners, and the way to it is sprinkled with
the blood of Him--"who through the eternal Spirit hath offered Himself
without spot to God!" Before, it was death to go in, now it is death to
stay out. See more on this glorious subject on [Heb
10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019).

An Earthquake--The Rocks Rent--The Graves Opened, that the Saints Which
Slept in Them Might Come Forth after Their Lord's Resurrection ([Mat
27:51-53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)).

and the earth did quake--From what follows it would seem that this
earthquake was local, having for its object the rending of the rocks and
the opening of the graves.

and the rocks rent--"were rent"--the physical creation thus sublimely
proclaiming, at the bidding of its Maker, the concussion which at that
moment was taking place in the moral world at the most critical moment
of its history. Extraordinary rents and fissures have been observed in
the rocks near this spot.

[Matthew 27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 27:52</span></span>

And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept
arose--These sleeping saints (see on [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)) were Old Testament believers,
who--according to the usual punctuation in our version--were quickened
into resurrection life at the moment of their Lord's death, but lay in
their graves till His resurrection, when they came forth. But it is far
more natural, as we think, and consonant with other Scriptures, to
understand that only the graves were opened, probably by the earthquake,
at our Lord's death, and this only in preparation for the subsequent
exit of those who slept in them, when the Spirit of life should enter
into them from their risen Lord, and along with Him they should come
forth, trophies of His victory over the grave. Thus, in the opening of
the graves at the moment of the Redeemer's expiring, there was a
glorious symbolical proclamation that the death which had just taken
place had "swallowed up death in victory"; and whereas the saints that
slept in them were awakened only by their risen Lord, to accompany Him
out of the tomb, it was fitting that "the Prince of Life . . . should be
the First that should rise from the dead" ([Act
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023); [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020), [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023); [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018); [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)).

and went into the holy city--that city where He, in virtue of whose
resurrection they were now alive, had been condemned.

and appeared unto many--that there might be undeniable evidence of their
own resurrection first, and through it of their Lord's. Thus, while it
was not deemed fitting that He Himself should appear again in Jerusalem,
save to the disciples, provision was made that the fact of His
resurrection should be left in no doubt. It must be observed, however,
that the resurrection of these sleeping saints was not like those of the
widow of Nain's son, of Jairus' daughter, of Lazarus, and of the man who
"revived and stood upon his feet," on his dead body touching the bones
of Elisha ([Kg2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021)) --which were
mere temporary recallings of the departed spirit to the mortal body, to
be followed by a final departure of it "till the trumpet shall sound."
But this was a resurrection once for all, to life everlasting; and so
there is no room to doubt that they went to glory with their Lord, as
bright trophies of His victory over death.

The Centurion's Testimony ([Mat
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)).

[Matthew 27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 27:54</span></span>

Now when the centurion--the military superintendent of the execution.

and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the earthquake--or felt
it and witnessed its effects.

and those things that were done--reflecting upon the entire transaction.

they feared greatly--convinced of the presence of a Divine Hand.

saying, Truly this was the Son of God--There cannot be a reasonable
doubt that this expression was used in the Jewish sense, and that it
points to the claim which Jesus made to be the Son of God, and on which
His condemnation expressly turned. The meaning, then, clearly is that He
must have been what He professed to be; in other words, that He was no
impostor. There was no medium between those two. See, the similar
testimony of the penitent thief--"This man hath done nothing amiss"--on
[Luk 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041).

The Galilean Women ([Mat 27:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055)).

[Matthew 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 27:55</span></span>

And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus--The
sense here would be better brought out by the use of the pluperfect,
"which had followed Jesus."

from Galilee, ministering unto him--As these dear women had ministered
to Him during His glorious missionary tours in Galilee (see on [Luk
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001)), so from this statement it
should seem that they accompanied him and ministered to His wants from
Galilee on His final journey to Jerusalem.

[Matthew 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mat 27:56</span></span>

Among which was Mary Magdalene--(See on [Luk
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002)).

and Mary the mother of James and Joses--the wife of Cleophas, or rather
Clopas, and sister of the Virgin ([Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)). See on [Mat
13:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055).

and the mother of Zebedee's children--that is, Salome: compare [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040). All this about the women is
mentioned for the sake of what is afterwards to be related of their
purchasing spices to anoint their Lord's body.

The Taking Down from the Cross and the Burial ([Mat
27:57-60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)).

For the exposition of this portion, see on [Joh
19:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

The Women Mark the Sacred Spot that They Might Recognize It on Coming
Thither to Anoint the Body ([Mat
27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061)).

[Matthew 27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">mat 27:61</span></span>

And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary--"the mother of James
and Joses," mentioned before ([Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056)).

sitting over against the sepulchre--(See on [Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)).

The Sepulchre Guarded ([Mat 27:62-66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)).

[Matthew 27:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mat 27:62</span></span>

Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation--that is,
after six o'clock of our Saturday evening. The crucifixion took place on
the Friday and all was not over till shortly before sunset, when the
Jewish sabbath commenced; and "that sabbath day was an high day" ([Joh
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)), being the first day of the
feast of unleavened bread. That day being over at six on Saturday
evening, they hastened to take their measures.

[Matthew 27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">mat 27:63</span></span>

Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver--Never, remarks BENGEL, will
you find the heads of the people calling Jesus by His own name. And yet
here there is betrayed a certain uneasiness, which one almost fancies
they only tried to stifle in their own minds, as well as crush in
Pilate's, in case he should have any lurking suspicion that he had done
wrong in yielding to them.

said, while he was yet alive--Important testimony this, from the lips of
His bitterest enemies, to the reality of Christ's death; the
corner-stone of the whole Christian religion.

After three days--which, according to the customary Jewish way of
reckoning, need signify no more than "after the commencement of the
third day."

I will rise again--"I rise," in the present tense, thus reporting not
only the fact that this prediction of His had reached their ears, but
that they understood Him to look forward confidently to its occurring on
the very day named.

[Matthew 27:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mat 27:64</span></span>

Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure--by a Roman guard.

until the third day--after which, if He still lay in the grave, the
imposture of His claims would be manifest to all.

and say unto the people, he is risen from the dead--Did they really fear
this?

so the last error shall be worse than the first--the imposture of His
pretended resurrection worse than that of His pretended Messiahship.

[Matthew 27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mat 27:65</span></span>

Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch--The guards had already acted
under orders of the Sanhedrim, with Pilate's consent; but probably they
were not clear about employing them as a night watch without Pilate's
express authority.

go your way, make it as sure as ye can--as ye know how, or in the way ye
deem securest. Though there may be no irony in this speech, it evidently
insinuated that if the event should be contrary to their wish, it would
not be for want of sufficient human appliances to prevent it.

[Matthew 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mat 27:66</span></span>

So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone--which Mark
([Mar 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#004)) says was "very great."

and setting a watch--to guard it. What more could man do? But while they
are trying to prevent the resurrection of the Prince of Life, God makes
use of their precautions for His own ends. Their stone-covered,
seal-secured sepulchre shall preserve the sleeping dust of the Son of
God free from all indignities, in undisturbed, sublime repose; while
their watch shall be His guard of honor until the angels shall come to
take their place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 28](mat028)

</div>
