<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat015)  [Next](mat017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)

[Matthew 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 16:13</span></span>

PETER'S NOBLE CONFESSION OF CHRIST AND THE BENEDICTION PRONOUNCED UPON
HIM--CHRIST'S FIRST EXPLICIT ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS APPROACHING SUFFERINGS,
DEATH, AND RESURRECTION--HIS REBUKE OF PETER AND WARNING TO ALL THE
TWELVE. ( = [Mar 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027); [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001); [Luk
9:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018)). (Mat. 16:13-28)

When Jesus came into the coasts--"the parts," that is, the territory or
region. In Mark ([Mar 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027)) it is "the
towns" or "villages."

of CÃ&brvbr;sarea Philippi--It lay at the foot of Mount Lebanon, near
the sources of the Jordan, in the territory of Dan, and at the northeast
extremity of Palestine. It was originally called Panium (from a cavern
in its neighborhood dedicated to the god Pan) and Paneas. Philip, the
tetrarch, the only good son of Herod the Great, in whose dominions
Paneas lay, having beautified and enlarged it, changed its name to
CÃ&brvbr;sarea, in honor of the Roman emperor, and added Philippi after
his own name, to distinguish it from the other CÃ&brvbr;sarea ([Act
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)) on the northeast coast of the
Mediterranean Sea. \[JOSEPHUS, Antiquities, 15.10,3; 18.2,1\]. This
quiet and distant retreat Jesus appears to have sought with the view of
talking over with the Twelve the fruit of His past labors, and breaking
to them for the first time the sad intelligence of His approaching
death.

he asked his disciples--"by the way," says Mark ([Mar
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027)), and "as He was alone praying,"
says Luke ([Luk 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018)).

saying, Whom--or more grammatically, "Who"

do men say that I the Son of man am?--(or, "that the Son of man is"--the
recent editors omitting here the me of Mark and Luke \[[Mar
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027); [Luk
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018)\]; though the evidence seems
pretty nearly balanced)--that is, "What are the views generally
entertained of Me, the Son of man, after going up and down among them so
long?" He had now closed the first great stage of His ministry, and was
just entering on the last dark one. His spirit, burdened, sought relief
in retirement, not only from the multitude, but even for a season from
the Twelve. He retreated into "the secret place of the Most High,"
pouring out His soul "in supplications and prayers, with strong crying
and tears" ([Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)). On rejoining
His disciples, and as they were pursuing their quiet journey, He asked
them this question.

[Matthew 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 16:14</span></span>

And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist--risen from the
dead. So that Herod Antipas was not singular in his surmise ([Mat
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)).

some, Elias--(Compare [Mar 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#015)).

and others, Jeremias--Was this theory suggested by a supposed
resemblance between the "Man of Sorrows" and "the weeping prophet?"

or one of the prophets--or, as Luke ([Luk
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#008)) expresses it, "that one of the
old prophets is risen again." In another report of the popular opinions
which Mark ([Mar 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#015)) gives us, it is
thus expressed, "That it is a prophet \[or\], as one of the prophets":
in other words, That He was a prophetical person, resembling those of
old.

[Matthew 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 16:15</span></span>

He saith unto them, But whom--rather, "who."

say ye that I am?--He had never put this question before, but the crisis
He was reaching made it fitting that He should now have it from them. We
may suppose this to be one of those moments of which the prophet says,
in His name, "Then I said, I have labored in vain; I have spent my
strength for naught, and in vain" ([Isa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004)): Lo, these three years I come
seeking fruit on this fig tree; and what is it? As the result of all, I
am taken for John the Baptist, for Elias, for Jeremias, for one of the
prophets. Yet some there are that have beheld My glory, the glory as of
the Only-begotten of the Father, and I shall hear their voice, for it is
sweet.

[Matthew 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 16:16</span></span>

And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God--He does not say, "Scribes and Pharisees, rulers and people,
are all perplexed; and shall we, unlettered fishermen, presume to
decide?" But feeling the light of his Master's glory shining in his
soul, he breaks forth--not in a tame, prosaic acknowledgment, "I believe
that Thou art," &c.--but in the language of adoration--such as one uses
in worship, "THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD!" He first
owns Him the promised Messiah (see on [Mat
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016)); then he rises higher, echoing
the voice from heaven--"This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased"; and in the important addition--"Son of the LIVING GOD"--he
recognizes the essential and eternal life of God as in this His
Son--though doubtless without that distinct perception afterwards
vouchsafed.

[Matthew 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 16:17</span></span>

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou--Though it is not
to be doubted that Peter, in this noble testimony to Christ, only
expressed the conviction of all the Twelve, yet since he alone seems to
have had clear enough apprehensions to put that conviction in proper and
suitable words, and courage enough to speak them out, and readiness
enough to do this at the right time--so he only, of all the Twelve,
seems to have met the present want, and communicated to the saddened
soul of the Redeemer at the critical moment that balm which was needed
to cheer and refresh it. Nor is Jesus above giving indication of the
deep satisfaction which this speech yielded Him, and hastening to
respond to it by a signal acknowledgment of Peter in return.

Simon-Barjona--or, "son of Jona" ([Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)), or "Jonas" ([Joh
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)). This name, denoting his humble
fleshly extraction, seems to have been purposely here mentioned, to
contrast the more vividly with the spiritual elevation to which divine
illumination had raised him.

for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee--"This is not the
fruit of human teaching."

but my Father which is in heaven--In speaking of God, Jesus, it is to be
observed, never calls Him, "our Father" (see on [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)), but either "your Father"--when
He would encourage His timid believing ones with the assurance that He
was theirs, and teach themselves to call Him so--or, as here, "My
Father," to signify some peculiar action or aspect of Him as "the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."

[Matthew 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 16:18</span></span>

And I say also unto thee--that is, "As thou hast borne such testimony to
Me, even so in return do I to thee."

That thou art Peter--At his first calling, this new name was announced
to him as an honor afterwards to be conferred on him ([Joh
1:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#043)). Now he gets it, with an
explanation of what it was meant to convey.

and upon this rock--As "Peter" and "Rock" are one word in the dialect
familiarly spoken by our Lord--the Aramaic or Syro-Chaldaic, which was
the mother tongue of the country--this exalted play upon the word can be
fully seen only in languages which have one word for both. Even in the
Greek it is imperfectly represented. In French, as WEBSTER and WILKINSON
remark, it is perfect, Pierre--pierre.

I will build my Church--not on the man Simon-Barjona; but on him as the
heavenly-taught confessor of a faith. "My Church," says our Lord,
calling the Church His OWN; a magnificent expression regarding Himself,
remarks BENGEL--nowhere else occurring in the Gospel.

and the gates of hell--"of Hades," or, the unseen world; meaning, the
gates of Death: in other words, "It shall never perish." Some explain it
of "the assaults of the powers of darkness"; but though that expresses a
glorious truth, probably the former is the sense here.

[Matthew 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 16:19</span></span>

And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven--the kingdom
of God about to be set up on earth

and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven--Whatever
this mean, it was soon expressly extended to all the apostles ([Mat
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)); so that the claim of supreme
authority in the Church, made for Peter by the Church of Rome, and then
arrogated to themselves by the popes as the legitimate successors of St.
Peter, is baseless and impudent. As first in confessing Christ, Peter
got this commission before the rest; and with these "keys," on the day
of Pentecost, he first "opened the door of faith" to the Jews, and then,
in the person of Cornelius, he was honored to do the same to the
Gentiles. Hence, in the lists of the apostles, Peter is always first
named. See on [Mat 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018). One thing is
clear, that not in all the New Testament is there the vestige of any
authority either claimed or exercised by Peter, or conceded to him,
above the rest of the apostles--a thing conclusive against the Romish
claims in behalf of that apostle.

[Matthew 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 16:20</span></span>

Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was
Jesus the Christ--Now that He had been so explicit, they might naturally
think the time come for giving it out openly; but here they are told it
had not.

Announcement of His Approaching Death and Rebuke of Peter ([Mat
16:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)).

The occasion here is evidently the same.

[Matthew 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 16:21</span></span>

From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples--that is,
with an explicitness and frequency He had never observed before.

how that he must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many things--"and be
rejected," ([Mar 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#031); [Luk
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#022)).

of the elders and chief priests and scribes--not as before, merely by
not receiving Him, but by formal deeds.

and be killed, and be raised again the third day--Mark ([Mar
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#032)) adds, that "He spake that saying
openly"--"explicitly," or "without disguise."

[Matthew 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 16:22</span></span>

Then Peter took him--aside, apart from the rest; presuming on the
distinction just conferred on him; showing how unexpected and
distasteful to them all was the announcement.

and began to rebuke him--affectionately, yet with a certain generous
indignation, to chide Him.

saying, Be it far from thee: this shall not be unto thee--that is, "If I
can help it": the same spirit that prompted him in the garden to draw
the sword in His behalf ([Joh 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010)).

[Matthew 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 16:23</span></span>

But he turned, and said--in the hearing of the rest; for Mark ([Mar
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#033)) expressly says, "When He had
turned about and looked on His disciples, He rebuked Peter"; perceiving
that he had but boldly uttered what others felt, and that the check was
needed by them also.

Get thee behind me, Satan--the same words as He had addressed to the
Tempter ([Luk 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)); for He felt in it
a satanic lure, a whisper from hell, to move Him from His purpose to
suffer. So He shook off the Serpent, then coiling around Him, and "felt
no harm" ([Act 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005)). How quickly has
the "rock" turned to a devil! The fruit of divine teaching the Lord
delighted to honor in Peter; but the mouthpiece of hell, which he had in
a moment of forgetfulness become, the Lord shook off with horror.

thou art an offence--a stumbling-block.

unto me--"Thou playest the Tempter, casting a stumbling-block in My way
to the Cross. Could it succeed, where wert thou? and how should the
Serpent's head be bruised?"

for thou savourest not--thou thinkest not.

the things that be of God, but those that be of men--"Thou art carried
away by human views of the way of setting up Messiah's kingdom, quite
contrary to those of God." This was kindly said, not to take off the
sharp edge of the rebuke, but to explain and justify it, as it was
evident Peter knew not what was in the bosom of his rash speech.

[Matthew 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 16:24</span></span>

Then said Jesus unto his disciples--Mark ([Mar
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034)) says, "When He had called the
people unto Him, with His disciples also, He said unto them"--turning
the rebuke of one into a warning to all.

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.

[Matthew 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 16:25</span></span>

For whosoever will save--is minded to save, or bent on saving.

his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake
shall find it--(See on [Mat 10:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)).
"A suffering and dying Messiah liketh you ill; but what if His servants
shall meet the same fate? They may not; but who follows Me must be
prepared for the worst."

[Matthew 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 16:26</span></span>

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul--or forfeit his own soul?

or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?--Instead of these
weighty words, which we find in [Mar
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#036) also, it is thus expressed in
[Luk 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#025) : "If he gain the whole
world, and lose himself, or be cast away," or better, "If he gain the
whole world, and destroy or forfeit himself." How awful is the stake as
here set forth! If a man makes the present world--in its various forms
of riches, honors, pleasures, and such like--the object of supreme
pursuit, be it that he gains the world; yet along with it he forfeits
his own soul. Not that any ever did, or ever will gain the whole
world--a very small portion of it, indeed, falls to the lot of the most
successful of the world's votaries--but to make the extravagant
concession, that by giving himself entirely up to it, a man gains the
whole world; yet, setting over against this gain the forfeiture of his
soul--necessarily following the surrender of his whole heart to the
world--what is he profited? But, if not the whole world, yet possibly
something else may be conceived as an equivalent for the soul. Well,
what is it?--"Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" Thus,
in language the weightiest, because the simplest, does our Lord shut up
His hearers, and all who shall read these words to the end of the world,
to the priceless value to every man of his own soul. In Mark and Luke
([Mar 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038); [Luk
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026)) the following words are added:
"Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of Me and of My words \[shall be
ashamed of belonging to Me, and ashamed of My Gospel\] in this
adulterous and sinful generation" (see on [Mat
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)), "of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed when He cometh in the glory of His Father, with the holy
angels." He will render back to that man his own treatment, disowning
him before the most august of all assemblies, and putting him to "shame
and everlasting contempt" ([Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)).
"O shame," exclaims BENGEL, "to be put to shame before God, Christ, and
angels!" The sense of shame is founded on our love of reputation, which
causes instinctive aversion to what is fitted to lower it, and was given
us as a preservative from all that is properly shameful. To be lost to
shame is to be nearly past hope. ([Zep
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005); [Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015); [Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)). But when Christ and "His words"
are unpopular, the same instinctive desire to stand well with others
begets that temptation to be ashamed of Him which only the expulsive
power of a higher affection can effectually counteract.

[Matthew 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 16:27</span></span>

For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his
angels--in the splendor of His Father's authority and with all His
angelic ministers, ready to execute His pleasure.

and then he shall reward, &c.

[Matthew 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 16:28</span></span>

Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here--"some of those
standing here."

which shall not taste of death, fill they see the Son of man coming in
his kingdom--or, as in Mark ([Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001)), "till they see the kingdom of
God come with power"; or, as in Luke ([Luk
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#027)), more simply still, "till they
see the kingdom of God." The reference, beyond doubt, is to the firm
establishment and victorious progress, in the lifetime of some then
present, of that new kingdom of Christ, which was destined to work the
greatest of all changes on this earth, and be the grand pledge of His
final coming in glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 17](mat017)

</div>
