<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat008)  [Next](mat010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)

[Matthew 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 9:9</span></span>

MATTHEW'S CALL AND FEAST. ( = [Mar
2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#014); [Luk
5:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027)). ([Mat
9:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009))

And as Jesus passed forth from thence--that is, from the scene of the
paralytic's cure in Capernaum, towards the shore of the Sea of Galilee,
on which that town lay. Mark, as usual, pictures the scene more in
detail, thus ([Mar 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#013)): "And He went
forth again by the seaside; and all the multitude resorted unto Him, and
He taught them"--or, "kept teaching them." "And as He passed by"

he saw a man, named Matthew--the writer of this precious Gospel, who
here, with singular modesty and brevity, relates the story of his own
calling. In Mark and Luke he is called Levi, which seems to have been
his family name. In their lists of the twelve apostles, however, Mark
and Luke give him the name of Matthew, which seems to have been the name
by which he was known as a disciple. While he himself sinks his family
name, he is careful not to sink his occupation, the obnoxious
associations with which he would place over against the grace that
called him from it, and made him an apostle. (See on [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003)). Mark alone tells us ([Mar
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#014)) that he was "the son of
AlphÃ&brvbr;us"--the same, probably, with the father of James the Less.
From this and other considerations it is pretty certain that he must at
least have heard of our Lord before this meeting. Unnecessary doubts,
even from an early period, have been raised about the identity of Levi
and Matthew. No capable jury, with the evidence before them which we
have in the Gospels, would hesitate in giving a unanimous verdict of
identity.

sitting at the receipt of custom--as a publican, which Luke ([Luk
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027)) calls him. It means the place of
receipt, the toll house or booth in which the collector sat. Being in
this case by the seaside, it might be the ferry tax for the transit of
persons and goods across the lake, which he collected. (See on [Mat
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)).

and he saith unto him, Follow me--Witching words these, from the lips of
Him who never employed them without giving them resistless efficacy in
the hearts of those they were spoken to.

And he--"left all" ([Luk 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#028)), "arose
and followed him."

The Feast ([Mat 9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)).

[Matthew 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 9:10</span></span>

And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house--The modesty of
our Evangelist signally appears here. Luke says ([Luk
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029)) that "Levi made Him a great
feast," or "reception," while Matthew merely says, "He sat at meat"; and
Mark and Luke say that it was in Levi's "own house," while Matthew
merely says, "He sat at meat in the house." Whether this feast was made
now, or not till afterwards, is a point of some importance in the order
of events, and not agreed among harmonists. The probability is that it
did not take place till a considerable time afterwards. For Matthew, who
ought surely to know what took place while his Lord was speaking at his
own table, tells us that the visit of Jairus, the ruler of the
synagogue, occurred at that moment ([Mat
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)). But we know from Mark and Luke
that this visit of Jairus did not take place till after our Lord's
return, at a later period from the country of the Gadarenes. (See [Mar
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#021), &c., and [Luk
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#040), &c.). We conclude, therefore,
that the feast was not made in the novelty of his discipleship, but
after Matthew had had time to be somewhat established in the faith; when
returning to Capernaum, his compassion for old friends, of his own
calling and character, led him to gather them together that they might
have an opportunity of hearing the gracious words which proceeded out of
His Master's mouth, if haply they might experience a like change.

behold, many publicans and sinners--Luke says, "a great company" ([Luk
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029)) --came and sat down with him and
his disciples. In all such cases the word rendered "sat" is "reclined,"
in allusion to the ancient mode of lying on couches at meals.

[Matthew 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 9:11</span></span>

And when the Pharisees--"and scribes," add Mark and Luke ([Mar
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#006); [Luk
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021)).

saw it, they said--"murmured" or "muttered," says Luke ([Luk
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#030)).

unto his disciples--not venturing to put their question to Jesus
Himself.

Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?--(See on [Luk
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002)).

[Matthew 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 9:12</span></span>

But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them--to the Pharisees and
scribes; addressing Himself to them, though they had shrunk from
addressing Him.

They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick--that
is, "Ye deem yourselves whole; My mission, therefore, is not to you: The
physician's business is with the sick; therefore eat I with publicans
and sinners." Oh, what myriads of broken hearts, of sin-sick souls, have
been bound up by this matchless saying!

[Matthew 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 9:13</span></span>

But go ye and learn what that meaneth-- ([Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)),

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice--that is, the one rather than the
other. "Sacrifice," the chief part of the ceremonial law, is here put
for a religion of literal adherence to mere rules; while "mercy"
expresses such compassion for the fallen as seeks to lift them up. The
duty of keeping aloof from the polluted, in the sense of "having no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness," is obvious enough;
but to understand this as prohibiting such intercourse with them as is
necessary to their recovery, is to abuse it. This was what these
pharisaical religionists did, and this is what our Lord here exposes.

for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance--The
italicized words are of doubtful authority here, and more than doubtful
authority in [Mar 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#017); but in [Luk
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#032) they are undisputed. We have here
just the former statement stripped of its figure. "The righteous" are
the whole; "sinners," the sick. When Christ "called" the latter, as He
did Matthew, and probably some of those publicans and sinners whom he
had invited to meet Him, it was to heal them of their spiritual
maladies, or save their souls: "The righteous," like those miserable
self-satisfied Pharisees, "He sent empty away."

[Matthew 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 9:27</span></span>

TWO BLIND MEN AND A DUMB DEMONIAC HEALED. ([Mat
9:27-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027))

And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him--hearing,
doubtless, as in a later case is expressed, "that Jesus passed by" ([Mat
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)).

crying, and saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us--It is
remarkable that in the only other recorded case in which the blind
applied to Jesus for their sight, and obtained it, they addressed Him,
over and over again, by this one Messianic title, so well known--"Son of
David" ([Mat 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)). Can there be a
doubt that their faith fastened on such great Messianic promises as
this, "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened," &c. ([Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005))? and if so, this appeal to Him,
as the Consolation of Israel, to do His predicted office, would fall
with great weight upon the ears of Jesus.

[Matthew 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 9:28</span></span>

And when he was come into the house--To try their faith and patience, He
seems to have made them no answer. But

the blind men came to Him--which, no doubt, was what He desired.

and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? they
said unto him, Yea, Lord--Doubtless our Lord's design was not only to
put their faith to the test by this question, but to deepen it, to raise
their expectation of a cure, and so prepare them to receive it; and the
cordial acknowledgment, so touchingly simple, which they immediately
made to Him of His power to heal them, shows how entirely that object
was gained.

[Matthew 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 9:29</span></span>

Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto
you--not, Receive a cure proportioned to your faith, but, Receive this
cure as granted to your faith. Thus would they carry about with them, in
their restored vision, a gracious seal of the faith which drew it from
their compassionate Lord.

[Matthew 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 9:30</span></span>

And their eyes were opened: and Jesus straitly charged them--The
expression is very strong, denoting great earnestness.

[Matthew 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 9:31</span></span>

But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
country--(See on [Mat 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004)).

A Dumb Demoniac Healed ([Mat 9:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)).

[Matthew 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 9:32</span></span>

As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with
a devil--"demonized." The dumbness was not natural, but was the effect
of the possession.

[Matthew 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 9:33</span></span>

And when the devil--demon.

was cast out, the dumb spake--The particulars in this case are not
given; the object being simply to record the instantaneous restoration
of the natural faculties on the removal of the malignant oppression of
them, the form which the popular astonishment took, and the very
different effect of it upon another class.

and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel--referring, probably, not to this case only, but to all those
miraculous displays of healing power which seemed to promise a new era
in the history of Israel. Probably they meant by this language to
indicate, as far as they thought it safe to do so, their inclination to
regard Him as the promised Messiah.

[Matthew 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 9:34</span></span>

But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the
devils--"the demons through the prince of the demons." This seems to be
the first muttering of a theory of such miracles which soon became a
fixed mode of calumniating them--a theory which would be ridiculous if
it were not melancholy as an outburst of the darkest malignity. (See on
[Mat 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024), &c.).

[Matthew 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 9:35</span></span>

THIRD GALILEAN CIRCUIT--MISSION OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. (Mat. 9:35-10:5)

And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness and every disease among the people--The italicized words are of
more than doubtful authority here, and were probably introduced here
from [Mat 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023). The language here is
so identical with that used in describing the first circuit ([Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)), that we may presume the work
done on both occasions was much the same. It was just a further
preparation of the soil, and a fresh sowing of the precious seed. (See
on [Mat 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)). To these fruitful
journeyings of the Redeemer, "with healing in His wings," Peter no doubt
alludes, when, in his address to the household of Cornelius, he spoke of
"How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power:
who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
devil: for God was with Him" ([Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)).

Jesus Compassionating the Multitudes, Asks Prayer for Help ([Mat
9:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036)). He had now returned from His
preaching and healing circuit, and the result, as at the close of the
first one, was the gathering of a vast and motley multitude around Him.
After a whole night spent in prayer, He had called His more immediate
disciples, and from them had solemnly chosen the twelve; then, coming
down from the mountain, on which this was transacted, to the multitudes
that waited for Him below, He had addressed to them--as we take it--that
discourse which bears so strong a resemblance to the Sermon on the Mount
that many critics take it to be the same. (See on Luke 6:12-49; and [Mat
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001), Introductory Remarks). Soon after
this, it should seem, the multitudes still hanging on Him, Jesus is
touched with their wretched and helpless condition, and acts as is now
to be described.

[Matthew 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 9:36</span></span>

But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them,
because they fainted--This reading, however, has hardly any authority at
all. The true reading doubtless is, "were harassed."

and were scattered abroad--rather, "lying about," "abandoned," or
"neglected."

as sheep, having no shepherd--their pitiable condition as wearied under
bodily fatigue, a vast disorganized mass, being but a faint picture of
their wretchedness as the victims of pharisaic guidance; their souls
uncared for, yet drawn after and hanging upon Him. This moved the
Redeemer's compassion.

[Matthew 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 9:37</span></span>

Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous--His
eye doubtless rested immediately on the Jewish field, but this he saw
widening into the vast field of "the world" ([Mat
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)), teeming with souls having to
be gathered to Him.

but the labourers--men divinely qualified and called to gather them in.

[Matthew 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 9:38</span></span>

Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest--the great Lord and Proprietor
of all. Compare [Joh 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001), "I am the
true vine, and My Father is the husbandman."

that he will send forth labourers into his harvest--The word properly
means "thrust forth"; but this emphatic sense disappears in some places,
as in [Mat 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025), and [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004) --"When He putteth forth His own
sheep." (See on [Mat 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 10](mat010)

</div>
