<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat010)  [Next](mat012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

[Matthew 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 11:1</span></span>

THE IMPRISONED BAPTIST'S MESSAGE TO HIS MASTER--THE REPLY, AND
DISCOURSE, ON THE DEPARTURE OF THE MESSENGERS, REGARDING JOHN AND HIS
MISSION. ( = Luke 7:18-35). (Mat. 11:1-19)

And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve
disciple--rather, "the twelve disciples,"

he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities--This was
scarcely a fourth circuit--if we may judge from the less formal way in
which it was expressed--but, perhaps, a set of visits paid to certain
places, either not reached at all before, or too rapidly passed through,
in order to fill up the time till the return of the Twelve. As to their
labors, nothing is said of them by our Evangelist. But Luke ([Luk
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#006)) says, "They departed, and went
through, the towns," or "villages," "preaching the Gospel, and healing
everywhere." Mark ([Mar 6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#012)), as
usual, is more explicit: "And they went out, and preached that men
should repent. And they cast out many devils (demons) and anointed with
oil many that were sick, and healed them." Though this "anointing with
oil" was not mentioned in our Lord's instructions--at least in any of
the records of them--we know it to have been practiced long after this
in the apostolic Church (see [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), and compare [Mar
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#012)) --not medicinally, but as a
sign of the healing virtue which was communicated by their hands, and a
symbol of something still more precious. It was unction, indeed, but, as
BENGEL remarks, it was something very different from what Romanists call
extreme unction. He adds, what is very probable, that they do not appear
to have carried the oil about with them, but, as the Jews used oil as a
medicine, to have employed it just as they found it with the sick, in
their own higher way.

[Matthew 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 11:2</span></span>

Now when John had heard in the prison--For the account of this
imprisonment, see on [Mar 6:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017).

the works of Christ, he sent, &c.--On the whole passage, see on Luke
7:18-35.

[Matthew 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 11:20</span></span>

OUTBURST OF FEELING SUGGESTED TO THE MIND OF JESUS BY THE RESULT OF HIS
LABORS IN GALILEE. ([Mat 11:20-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020))

Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works
were done, because they repented not.

[Matthew 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 11:21</span></span>

Woe unto thee, Chorazin!--not elsewhere mentioned, but it must have lain
near Capernaum.

woe unto thee, Bethsaida--"fishing-house," a fishing station--on the
western side of the Sea of Galilee, and to the north of Capernaum; the
birthplace of three of the apostles--the brothers Andrew and Peter, and
Philip. These two cities appear to be singled out to denote the whole
region in which they lay--a region favored with the Redeemer's presence,
teaching, and works above every other.

for if the mighty works--the miracles

which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon--ancient and
celebrated commercial cities, on the northeastern shores of the
Mediterranean Sea, lying north of Palestine, and the latter the
northernmost. As their wealth and prosperity engendered luxury and its
concomitant evils--irreligion and moral degeneracy--their overthrow was
repeatedly foretold in ancient prophecy, and once and again fulfilled by
victorious enemies. Yet they were rebuilt, and at this time were in a
flourishing condition.

they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes--remarkable
language, showing that they had done less violence to conscience, and
so, in God's sight, were less criminal than the region here spoken of.

[Matthew 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 11:22</span></span>

But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
day of judgment, than for you--more endurable.

[Matthew 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 11:23</span></span>

And thou, Capernaum--(See on [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013)).

which art exalted unto heaven--Not even of Chorazin and Bethsaida is
this said. For since at Capernaum Jesus had His stated abode during the
whole period of His public life which He spent in Galilee, it was the
most favored spot upon earth, the most exalted in privilege.

shall be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been
done in thee, had been done in Sodom--destroyed for its pollutions.

it would have remained until this day--having done no such violence to
conscience, and so incurred speakably less guilt.

[Matthew 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 11:24</span></span>

But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee--"It has been indeed," says
DR. STANLEY, "more tolerable, in one sense, in the day of its earthly
judgment, for the land of Sodom than for Capernaum; for the name, and
perhaps even the remains of Sodom are still to be found on the shores of
the Dead Sea; while that of Capernaum has, on the Lake of Gennesareth,
been utterly lost." But the judgment of which our Lord here speaks is
still future; a judgment not on material cities, but their responsible
inhabitants--a judgment final and irretrievable.

[Matthew 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 11:25</span></span>

At that time Jesus answered and said--We are not to understand by this,
that the previous discourse had been concluded, and that this is a
record only of something said about the same period. For the connection
is most close, and the word "answered"--which, when there is no one to
answer, refers to something just before said, or rising in the mind of
the speaker in consequence of something said--confirms this. What Jesus
here "answered" evidently was the melancholy results of His ministry,
lamented over in the foregoing verses. It is as if He had said, "Yes;
but there is a brighter side to the picture; even in those who have
rejected the message of eternal life, it is the pride of their own
hearts only which has blinded them, and the glory of the truth does but
the more appear in their inability to receive it. Nor have all rejected
it even here; souls thirsting for salvation have drawn water with joy
from the wells of salvation; the weary have found rest; the hungry have
been filled with good things, while the rich have been sent empty away."

I thank thee--rather, "I assent to thee." But this is not strong enough.
The idea of "full" or "cordial" concurrence is conveyed by the
preposition. The thing expressed is adoring acquiescence, holy
satisfaction with that law of the divine procedure about to be
mentioned. And as, when He afterwards uttered the same words, He
"exulted in spirit" (see on [Luk
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)), probably He did the same now,
though not recorded.

O Father, Lord of heaven and earth--He so styles His Father here, to
signify that from Him of right emanates all such high arrangements.

because thou hast hid these things--the knowledge of these saving
truths.

from the wise and prudent--The former of these terms points to the men
who pride themselves upon their speculative or philosophical
attainments; the latter to the men of worldly shrewdness--the clever,
the sharp-witted, the men of affairs. The distinction is a natural one,
and was well understood. (See [Co1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), &c.). But why had the Father hid
from such the things that belonged to their peace, and why did Jesus so
emphatically set His seal to this arrangement? Because it is not for the
offending and revolted to speak or to speculate, but to listen to Him
from whom we have broken loose, that we may learn whether there be any
recovery for us at all; and if there be, on what principles--of what
nature--to what ends. To bring our own "wisdom and prudence" to such
questions is impertinent and presumptuous; and if the truth regarding
them, or the glory of it, be "hid" from us, it is but a fitting
retribution, to which all the right-minded will set their seal along
with Jesus.

hast revealed them unto babes--to babe-like men; men of unassuming
docility, men who, conscious that they know nothing, and have no right
to sit in judgment on the things that belong to their peace, determine
simply to "hear what God the Lord will speak." Such are well called
"babes." (See [Heb 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013); [Co1
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011); [Co1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020), &c.).

[Matthew 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 11:26</span></span>

Even so, Father; for so it seemed good--the emphatic and chosen term for
expressing any object of divine complacency; whether Christ Himself (see
on [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)), or God's gracious
eternal arrangements (see on [Phi
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)).

in thy sight--This is just a sublime echo of the foregoing words; as if
Jesus, when He uttered them, had paused to reflect on it, and as if the
glory of it--not so much in the light of its own reasonableness as of
God's absolute will that so it should be--had filled His soul.

[Matthew 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 11:27</span></span>

All things are delivered unto me of my Father--He does not say, They are
revealed--as to one who knew them not, and was an entire stranger to
them save as they were discovered to Him--but, They are "delivered
over," or "committed," to Me of My Father; meaning the whole
administration of the kingdom of grace. So in [Joh
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035), "The Father loveth the Son, and
hath given all things into His hand" (see on [Joh
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)). But though the "all things" in
both these passages refer properly to the kingdom of grace, they of
course include all things necessary to the full execution of that
trust--that is, unlimited power. (So [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002); [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)).

and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will--willeth

to reveal him--What a saying is this, that "the Father and the Son are
mutually and exclusively known to each other!" A higher claim to
equality with the Father cannot be conceived. Either, then, we have here
one of the revolting assumptions ever uttered, or the proper divinity of
Christ should to Christians be beyond dispute. "But, alas for me!" may
some burdened soul, sighing for relief, here exclaim. If it be thus with
us, what can any poor creature do but lie down in passive despair,
unless he could dare to hope that he may be one of the favored class "to
whom the Son is willing to reveal the Father." But nay. This testimony
to the sovereignty of that gracious "will," on which alone men's
salvation depends, is designed but to reveal the source and enhance the
glory of it when once imparted--not to paralyze or shut the soul up in
despair. Hear, accordingly, what follows:

[Matthew 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 11:28</span></span>

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest--Incomparable, ravishing sounds these--if ever such were heard
in this weary, groaning world! What gentleness, what sweetness is there
in the very style of the invitation--"Hither to Me"; and in the words,
"All ye that toil and are burdened," the universal wretchedness of man
is depicted, on both its sides--the active and the passive forms of it.

[Matthew 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 11:29</span></span>

Take my yoke upon you--the yoke of subjection to Jesus.

and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find
rest unto your souls--As Christ's willingness to empty Himself to the
uttermost of His Father's requirements was the spring of ineffable
repose to His own Spirit, so in the same track does He invite all to
follow Him, with the assurance of the same experience.

[Matthew 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 11:30</span></span>

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light--Matchless paradox, even
among the paradoxically couched maxims in which our Lord delights! That
rest which the soul experiences when once safe under Christ's wing makes
all yokes easy, all burdens light.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 12](mat012)

</div>
