<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat003)  [Next](mat005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)

[Matthew 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 4:1</span></span>

TEMPTATION OF CHRIST. ( = [Mar
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012); [Luk
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)). ([Mat
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001))

Then--an indefinite note of sequence. But Mark's word ([Mar
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012)) fixes what we should have
presumed was meant, that it was "immediately" after His baptism; and
with this agrees the statement of Luke ([Luk
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)).

was Jesus led up--that is, from the low Jordan valley to some more
elevated spot.

of the Spirit--that blessed Spirit immediately before spoken of as
descending upon Him at His baptism, and abiding upon Him. Luke,
connecting these two scenes, as if the one were but the sequel of the
other, says, "Jesus, being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan,
and was led," &c. Mark's expression has a startling sharpness about
it--"Immediately the Spirit driveth Him" ([Mar
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012)), "putteth," or "hurrieth Him
forth," or "impelleth Him." (See the same word in [Mar
1:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#043); [Mar
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#040); [Mat
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025); [Mat
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052); [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004)). The thought thus strongly
expressed is the mighty constraining impulse of the Spirit under which
He went; while Matthew's more gentle expression, "was led up," intimates
how purely voluntary on His own part this action was.

into the wilderness--probably the wild Judean desert. The particular
spot which tradition has fixed upon has hence got the name of Quarantana
or Quarantaria, from the forty days--"an almost perpendicular wall of
rock twelve or fifteen hundred feet above the plain" \[ROBINSON,
Palestine\]. The supposition of those who incline to place the
temptation amongst the mountains of Moab is, we think, very improbable.

to be tempted--The Greek word (peirazein) means simply to try or make
proof of; and when ascribed to God in His dealings with men, it means,
and can mean no more than this. Thus, [Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001), "It came to pass that God did
tempt Abraham," or put his faith to a severe proof. (See [Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)). But for the most part in
Scripture the word is used in a bad sense, and means to entice, solicit,
or provoke to sin. Hence the name here given to the wicked one--"the
tempter" ([Mat 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)). Accordingly "to
be tempted" here is to be understood both ways. The Spirit conducted Him
into the wilderness simply to have His faith tried; but as the agent in
this trial was to be the wicked one, whose whole object would be to
seduce Him from His allegiance to God, it was a temptation in the bad
sense of the term. The unworthy inference which some would draw from
this is energetically repelled by an apostle ([Jam
1:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013)).

of the devil. The word signifies a slanderer--one who casts imputations
upon another. Hence that other name given him ([Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)), "The accuser of the brethren,
who accuseth them before our God day and night." Mark ([Mar
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#013)) says, "He was forty days tempted
of Satan," a word signifying an adversary, one who lies in wait for, or
sets himself in opposition to another. These and other names of the same
fallen spirit point to different features in his character or
operations. What was the high design of this? First, as we judge, to
give our Lord a taste of what lay before Him in the work He had
undertaken; next, to make trial of the glorious equipment for it which
He had just received; further, to give Him encouragement, by the victory
now to be won, to go forward spoiling principalities and powers, until
at length He should make a show of them openly, triumphing over them in
His cross: that the tempter, too, might get a taste, at the very outset,
of the new kind of material in man which he would find he had here to
deal with; finally, that He might acquire experimental ability "to
succor them that are tempted" ([Heb
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018)). The temptation evidently
embraced two stages: the one continuing throughout the forty days' fast;
the other, at the conclusion of that period.

FIRST STAGE:

[Matthew 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 4:2</span></span>

And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights--Luke says "When they
were quite ended" ([Luk 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002)).

he was afterward an hungered--evidently implying that the sensation of
hunger was unfelt during all the forty days; coming on only at their
close. So it was apparently with Moses ([Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)) and Elijah ([Kg1
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008)) for the same period. A
supernatural power of endurance was of course imparted to the body, but
this probably operated through a natural law--the absorption of the
Redeemer's Spirit in the dread conflict with the tempter. (See on [Act
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#009)). Had we only this Gospel, we
should suppose the temptation did not begin till after this. But it is
clear, from Mark's statement, that "He was in the wilderness forty days
tempted of Satan" ([Mar 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#013)), and
Luke's, "being forty days tempted of the devil" ([Luk
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002)), that there was a forty days'
temptation before the three specific temptations afterwards recorded.
And this is what we have called the First Stage. What the precise nature
and object of the forty days' temptation were is not recorded. But two
things seem plain enough. First, the tempter had utterly failed of his
object, else it had not been renewed; and the terms in which he opens
his second attack imply as much. But further, the tempter's whole object
during the forty days evidently was to get Him to distrust the heavenly
testimony borne to Him at His baptism as THE SON OF GOD--to persuade Him
to regard it as but a splendid illusion--and, generally, to dislodge
from His breast the consciousness of His Sonship. With what plausibility
the events of His previous history from the beginning would be urged
upon Him in support of this temptation it is easy to imagine. And it
makes much in support of this view of the forty days' temptation that
the particulars of it are not recorded; for how the details of such a
purely internal struggle could be recorded it is hard to see. If this be
correct, how naturally does the SECOND STAGE of the temptation open! In
Mark's brief notice of the temptation there is one expressive particular
not given either by Matthew or by Luke--that "He was with the wild
beasts" ([Mar 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012)), no doubt to add
terror to solitude, and aggravate the horrors of the whole scene.

[Matthew 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 4:3</span></span>

And when the tempter came to him--Evidently we have here a new scene.

he said, if thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made
bread--rather, "loaves," answering to "stones" in the plural; whereas
Luke, having said, "Command this stone," in the singular, adds, "that it
be made bread," in the singular ([Luk
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#003)). The sensation of hunger, unfelt
during all the forty days, seems now to have come on in all its
keenness--no doubt to open a door to the tempter, of which he is not
slow to avail himself; "Thou still clingest to that vainglorious
confidence that Thou art the Son of God, carried away by those illusory
scenes at the Jordan. Thou wast born in a stable; but Thou art the Son
of God! hurried off to Egypt for fear of Herod's wrath; but Thou art the
Son of God! a carpenter's roof supplied Thee with a home, and in the
obscurity of a despicable town of Galilee Thou hast spent thirty years,
yet still Thou art the Son of God! and a voice from heaven, it seems,
proclaimed it in Thine ears at the Jordan! Be it so; but after that,
surely Thy days of obscurity and trial should have an end. Why linger
for weeks in this desert, wandering among the wild beasts and craggy
rocks, unhonored, unattended, unpitied, ready to starve for want of the
necessaries of life? Is this befitting "the Son of God?" At the bidding
of "the Son of God" surely those stones shall all be turned into loaves,
and in a moment present an abundant repast."

[Matthew 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 4:4</span></span>

But he answered and said, It is written-- ([Deu
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)).

Man shall not live by bread alone--more emphatically, as in the Greek,
"Not by bread alone shall man live."

but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God--Of all
passages in Old Testament Scripture, none could have been pitched upon
more apposite, perhaps not one so apposite, to our Lord's purpose. "The
Lord . . . led thee (said Moses to Israel, at the close of their
journeyings) these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to
prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep
His commandments, or no. And He humbled thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy
fathers know; that He might make thee know that man doth not live by
bread only," &c., "Now, if Israel spent, not forty days, but forty years
in a waste, howling wilderness, where there were no means of human
subsistence, not starving, but divinely provided for, on purpose to
prove to every age that human support depends not upon bread, but upon
God's unfailing word of promise and pledge of all needful providential
care, am I, distrusting this word of God, and despairing of relief, to
take the law into My own hand? True, the Son of God is able enough to
turn stones into bread: but what the Son of God is able to do is not the
present question, but what is man's duty under want of the necessaries
of life. And as Israel's condition in the wilderness did not justify
their unbelieving murmurings and frequent desperation, so neither would
Mine warrant the exercise of the power of the Son of God in snatching
despairingly at unwarranted relief. As man, therefore, I will await
divine supply, nothing doubting that at the fitting time it will
arrive." The second temptation in this Gospel is in Luke's the third.
That Matthew's order is the right one will appear, we think, quite
clearly in the sequel.

[Matthew 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 4:5</span></span>

Then the devil taketh him up--rather, "conducteth Him."

into the holy city--so called (as in [Isa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#002); [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001)) from its being "the city of the
Great King," the seat of the temple, the metropolis of all Jewish
worship.

and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple--rather, "the pinnacle"--a
certain well-known projection. Whether this refers to the highest summit
of the temple, which bristled with golden spikes \[JOSEPHUS,
Antiquities, 5.5,6\]; or whether it refers to another peak, on Herod's
royal portico, overhanging the ravine of Kedron, at the valley of
Hinnom--an immense tower built on the very edge of this precipice, from
the top of which dizzy height JOSEPHUS says one could not look to the
bottom \[Antiquities, 15.11,5\]--is not certain; but the latter is
probably meant.

[Matthew 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 4:6</span></span>

And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God--As this temptation starts
with the same point as the first--our Lord's determination not to be
disputed out of His Sonship--it seems to us clear that the one came
directly after the other; and as the remaining temptation shows that the
hope of carrying that point was abandoned, and all was staked upon a
desperate venture, we think that remaining temptation is thus shown to
be the last; as will appear still more when we come to it.

cast thyself down--"from hence" ([Luk
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#009)).

for it is written-- ([Psa 91:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)).
"But what is this I see?" exclaims stately BISHOP HALL. "Satan himself
with a Bible under his arm and a text in his mouth!" Doubtless the
tempter, having felt the power of God's Word in the former temptation,
was eager to try the effect of it from his own mouth ([Co2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)).

He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their
hands--rather, "on their hands."

they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a
stone--The quotation is, precisely as it stands in the Hebrew and the
Septuagint, save that after the first clause the words, "to keep thee in
all thy ways," are here omitted. Not a few good expositors have thought
that this omission was intentional, to conceal the fact that this would
not have been one of "His ways," that is, of duty. But as our Lord's
reply makes no allusion to this, but seizes on the great principle
involved in the promise quoted, so when we look at the promise itself,
it is plain that the sense of it is precisely the same whether the
clause in question be inserted or not.

[Matthew 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 4:7</span></span>

Jesus said unto him, It is written again-- ([Deu
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016)), as if he should say, "True, it
is so written, and on that promise I implicitly rely; but in using it
there is another Scripture which must not be forgotten."

Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God--"Preservation in danger is
divinely pledged: shall I then create danger, either to put the promised
security skeptically to the proof, or wantonly to demand a display of
it? That were 'to tempt the Lord my God,' which, being expressly
forbidden, would forfeit the right to expect preservation."

[Matthew 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 4:8</span></span>

Again, the devil taketh him up--"conducteth him," as before.

into--or "unto"

an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them--Luke ([Luk
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#005)) adds the important clause, "in a
moment of time"; a clause which seems to furnish a key to the true
meaning. That a scene was presented to our Lord's natural eye seems
plainly expressed. But to limit this to the most extensive scene which
the natural eye could take in, is to give a sense to the expression,
"all the kingdoms of the world," quite violent. It remains, then, to
gather from the expression, "in a moment of time"-- which manifestly is
intended to intimate some supernatural operation--that it was permitted
to the tempter to extend preternaturally for a moment our Lord's range
of vision, and throw a "glory" or glitter over the scene of vision: a
thing not inconsistent with the analogy of other scriptural statements
regarding the permitted operations of the wicked one. In this case, the
"exceeding height" of the "mountain" from which this sight was beheld
would favor the effect to be produced.

[Matthew 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 4:9</span></span>

And saith unto him, All these things will I give thee--"and the glory of
them," adds Luke ([Luk 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#006)). But
Matthew having already said that this was "showed Him," did not need to
repeat it here. Luke ([Luk 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#006)) adds
these other very important clauses, here omitted--"for that is," or "has
been," "delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it." Was this
wholly false? That were not like Satan's unusual policy, which is to
insinuate his lies under cover of some truth. What truth, then, is there
here? We answer, Is not Satan thrice called by our Lord Himself, "the
prince of this world" ([Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031);
[Joh 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011))? Does not the apostle call him
"the god of this world" ([Co2 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004))?
And still further, is it not said that Christ came to destroy by His
death "him that hath the power of death, that is, the devil" ([Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014))? No doubt these passages only
express men's voluntary subjection to the rule of the wicked one while
they live, and his power to surround death to them, when it comes, with
all the terrors of the wages of sin. But as this is a real and terrible
sway, so all Scripture represents men as righteously sold under it. In
this sense he speaks what is not devoid of truth, when he says, "All
this is delivered unto me." But how does he deliver this "to whomsoever
he will?" As employing whomsoever he pleases of his willing subjects in
keeping men under his power. In this case his offer to our Lord was that
of a deputed supremacy commensurate with his own, though as his gift and
for his ends.

if thou wilt fall down and worship me--This was the sole but monstrous
condition. No Scripture, it will be observed, is quoted now, because
none could be found to support so blasphemous a claim. In fact, he has
ceased now to present his temptations under the mask of piety, and he
stands out unblushingly as the rival of God Himself in his claims on the
homage of men. Despairing of success as an angel of light, he throws off
all disguise, and with a splendid bribe solicits divine honor. This
again shows that we are now at the last of the temptations, and that
Matthew's order is the true one.

[Matthew 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 4:10</span></span>

Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan--Since the tempter has
now thrown off the mask, and stands forth in his true character, our
Lord no longer deals with him as a pretended friend and pious
counsellor, but calls him by his right name--His knowledge of which from
the outset He had carefully concealed till now--and orders him off. This
is the final and conclusive evidence, as we think, that Matthew's must
be the right order of the temptations. For who can well conceive of the
tempter's returning to the assault after this, in the pious character
again, and hoping still to dislodge the consciousness of His Sonship,
while our Lord must in that case be supposed to quote Scripture to one
He had called the devil to his face--thus throwing His pearls before
worse than swine?

for it is written-- ([Deu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)). Thus
does our Lord part with Satan on the rock of Scripture.

Thou shalt worship--In the Hebrew and the Septuagint it is, "Thou shalt
fear"; but as the sense is the same, so "worship" is here used to show
emphatically that what the tempter claimed was precisely what God had
forbidden.

the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve--The word "serve" in the
second clause, is one never used by the Septuagint of any but religious
service; and in this sense exclusively is it used in the New Testament,
as we find it here. Once more the word "only," in the second clause--not
expressed in the Hebrew and the Septuagint--is here added to bring out
emphatically the negative and prohibitory feature of the command. (See
[Gal 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010) for a similar supplement of
the word "all" in a quotation from [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)).

[Matthew 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 4:11</span></span>

Then the devil leaveth him--Luke says, "And when the devil had
exhausted"--or "quite ended," as in [Luk
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002) --"every (mode of) temptation, he
departed from him till a season." The definite "season" here indicated
is expressly referred to by our Lord in [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Luk
22:52-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#052).

and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him--or supplied Him with
food, as the same expression means in [Mar
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#031); [Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003). Thus did angels to Elijah ([Kg1
19:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#005)). Excellent critics think that
they ministered, not food only, but supernatural support and cheer also.
But this would be the natural effect rather than the direct object of
the visit, which was plainly what we have expressed. And after having
refused to claim the illegitimate ministration of angels in His behalf,
oh, with what deep joy would He accept their services when sent,
unasked, at the close of all this temptation, direct from Him whom He
had so gloriously honored! What "angels' food" would this repast be to
Him! and as He partook of it, might not a Voice from heaven be heard
again, by any who could read the Father's mind, "Said I not well, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased?"

[Matthew 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 4:12</span></span>

CHRIST BEGINS HIS GALILEAN MINISTRY--CALLING OF PETER AND ANDREW, JAMES
AND JOHN--HIS FIRST GALILEAN CIRCUIT. ( = [Mar
1:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014), [Mar
1:35-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035); [Luk
4:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)). ([Mat
4:12-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012))

Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison--more simply,
"was delivered up," as recorded in [Mat
14:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003); [Mar
6:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017); [Luk
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019).

he departed--rather, "withdrew."

into Galilee--as recorded, in its proper place, in [Joh
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001).

[Matthew 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 4:13</span></span>

And leaving Nazareth--The prevalent opinion is that this refers to a
first visit to Nazareth after His baptism, whose details are given by
Luke ([Luk 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016), &c.); a second visit
being that detailed by our Evangelist ([Mat
13:54-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054)), and by Mark ([Mar
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)). But to us there seem all but
insuperable difficulties in the supposition of two visits to Nazareth
after His baptism; and on the grounds stated in [Luk
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016), &c., we think that the one only
visit to Nazareth is that recorded by Matthew ([Mat
13:53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053)), Mark ([Mar
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)), and Luke (Luke 4:14-30). But
how, in that case, are we to take the word "leaving Nazareth" here? We
answer, just as the same word is used in [Act
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#003), "Now when we had sighted Cyprus,
and left it on the left, we sailed into Syria,"--that is, without
entering Cyprus at all, but merely "sighting" it, as the nautical phrase
is, they steered southeast of it, leaving it on the northwest. So here,
what we understand the Evangelist to say is, that Jesus, on His return
to Galilee, did not, as might have been expected, make Nazareth the
place of His stated residence, but, "leaving for passing by Nazareth,"

he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the seacoast--maritime
Capernaum, on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee; but the precise
spot is unknown. (See on [Mat 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)).
Our Lord seems to have chosen it for several reasons. Four or five of
the Twelve lived there; it had a considerable and mixed population,
securing some freedom from that intense bigotry which even to this day
characterizes all places where Jews in large numbers dwell nearly alone;
it was centrical, so that not only on the approach of the annual
festivals did large numbers pass through it or near it, but on any
occasion multitudes could easily be collected about it; and for crossing
and recrossing the lake, which our Lord had so often occasion to do, no
place could be more convenient. But one other high reason for the choice
of Capernaum remains to be mentioned, the only one specified by our
Evangelist.

in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim--the one lying to the west of
the Sea of Galilee, the other to the north of it; but the precise
boundaries cannot now be traced out.

[Matthew 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 4:14</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet--
([Isa 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) or, as in Hebrew, [Isa
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#023), and [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)).

saying--as follows:

[Matthew 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 4:15</span></span>

The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the
sea--the coast skirting the Sea of Galilee westward--beyond Jordan--a
phrase commonly meaning eastward of Jordan; but here and in several
places it means westward of the Jordan. The word seems to have got the
general meaning of "the other side"; the nature of the case determining
which side that was.

Galilee of the Gentiles--so called from its position, which made it the
frontier between the Holy Land and the external world. While Ephraim and
Judah, as STANLEY says, were separated from the world by the Jordan
valley on one side and the hostile Philistines on another, the northern
tribes were in the direct highway of all the invaders from the north, in
unbroken communication with the promiscuous races who have always
occupied the heights of Lebanon, and in close and peaceful alliance with
the most commercial nation of the ancient world, the PhÅ“nicians. Twenty
of the cities of Galilee were actually annexed by Solomon to the
adjacent kingdom of Tyre, and formed, with their territory, the
"boundary" or "offscouring" (Gebul or Cabul) of the two dominions--at a
later time still known by the general name of "the boundaries (coasts or
borders) of Tyre and Sidon." In the first great transportation of the
Jewish population, Naphtali and Galilee suffered the same fate as the
trans-jordanic tribes before Ephraim or Judah had been molested ([Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)). In the time of the Christian
era this original disadvantage of their position was still felt; the
speech of the Galileans "bewrayed them" by its uncouth pronunciation
([Mat 26:73](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#073)); and their distance from
the seats of government and civilization at Jerusalem and CÃ&brvbr;sarea
gave them their character for turbulence or independence, according as
it was viewed by their friends or their enemies.

[Matthew 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 4:16</span></span>

The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat
in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up--The prophetic
strain to which these words belong commences with the seventh chapter of
Isaiah, to which the sixth chapter is introductory, and goes down to the
end of the twelfth chapter, which hymns the spirit of that whole strain
of prophecy. It belongs to the reign of Ahaz and turns upon the combined
efforts of the two neighboring kingdoms of Syria and Israel to crush
Judah. In these critical circumstances Judah and her king were, by their
ungodliness, provoking the Lord to sell them into the hands of their
enemies. What, then, is the burden of this prophetic strain, on to the
passage here quoted? First, Judah shall not, cannot perish, because
IMMANUEL, the Virgin's Son, is to come forth from his loins. Next, one
of the invaders shall soon perish, and the kingdoms of neither be
enlarged. Further, while the Lord will be the Sanctuary of such as
confide in these promises and await their fulfilment, He will drive to
confusion, darkness, and despair the vast multitude of the nation who
despised His oracles, and, in their anxiety and distress, betook
themselves to the lying oracles of the heathen. This carries us down to
the end of the eighth chapter. At the opening of the ninth chapter a
sudden light is seen breaking in upon one particular part of the
country, the part which was to suffer most in these wars and
devastations--"the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, the way of
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee and the Gentiles." The rest of the
prophecy stretches over both the Assyrian and the Chaldean captivities
and terminates in the glorious Messianic prophecy of the eleventh
chapter and the choral hymn of the twelfth chapter. Well, this is the
point seized on by our Evangelist. By Messiah's taking up His abode in
those very regions of Galilee, and shedding His glorious light upon
them, this prediction, He says, of the Evangelical prophet was now
fulfilled; and if it was not thus fulfilled, we may confidently affirm
it was not fulfilled in any age of the Jewish ceremony, and has received
no fulfilment at all. Even the most rationalistic critics have
difficulty in explaining it in any other way.

[Matthew 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 4:17</span></span>

From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent; for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand--Thus did our Lord not only take up the
strain, but give forth the identical summons of His honored forerunner.
Our Lord sometimes speaks of the new kingdom as already come--in His own
Person and ministry; but the economy of it was only "at hand" until the
blood of the cross was shed, and the Spirit on the day of Pentecost
opened the fountain for sin and for uncleanness to the world at large.

Calling of Peter and Andrew James and John ([Mat
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)).

[Matthew 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 4:18</span></span>

And Jesus, walking--The word "Jesus" here appears not to belong to the
text, but to have been introduced from those portions of it which were
transcribed to be used as church lessons; where it was naturally
introduced as a connecting word at the commencement of a lesson.

by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter and Andrew
his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishers--"called
Peter" for the reason mentioned in [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018).

[Matthew 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 4:19</span></span>

And he saith unto them, Follow me--rather, as the same expression is
rendered in Mark, "Come ye after Me" ([Mar
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#017)).

and I will make you fishers of men--raising them from a lower to a
higher fishing, as David was from a lower to a higher feeding ([Psa
78:70-72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)).

[Matthew 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 4:20</span></span>

And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.

[Matthew 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 4:21</span></span>

And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship--rather, "in the ship," their
fishing boat.

with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called them.

[Matthew 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 4:22</span></span>

And they immediately left the ship and their father--Mark adds an
important clause: "They left their father Zebedee in the ship with the
hired servants" ([Mar 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#020)); showing
that the family were in easy circumstances.

and followed him--Two harmonistic questions here arise: First, Was this
the same calling as that recorded in [Joh
1:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035)? Clearly not. For, (1) That
call was given while Jesus was yet in Judea: this, after His return to
Galilee. (2) Here, Christ calls Andrew: there, Andrew solicits an
interview with Christ. (3) Here, Andrew and Peter are called together:
there, Andrew having been called, with an unnamed disciple, who was
clearly the beloved disciple (see on [Joh
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040)), goes and fetches Peter his
brother to Christ, who then calls him. (4) Here, John is called along
with James his brother: there, John is called along with Andrew, after
having at their own request had an interview with Jesus; no mention
being made of James, whose call, if it then took place, would not likely
have been passed over by his own brother. Thus far nearly all are
agreed. But on the next question opinion is divided: Was this the same
calling as that recorded in [Luk
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)? Many able critics think so.
But the following considerations are to us decisive against it. First
here, the four are called separately, in pairs: in Luke, all together.
Next, in Luke, after a glorious miracle: here, the one pair are casting
their net, the other are mending theirs. Further, here, our Lord had
made no public appearance in Galilee, and so had gathered none around
Him; He is walking solitary by the shores of the lake when He accosts
the two pairs of fishermen: in Luke, the multitude are pressing upon
Him, and hearing the word of God, as He stands by the Lake of
Gennesaret--a state of things implying a somewhat advanced stage of His
early ministry, and some popular enthusiasm. Regarding these successive
callings, see on [Luk 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001).

First Galilean Circuit ([Mat 4:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)).

[Matthew 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 4:23</span></span>

And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues--These
were houses of local worship. It cannot be proved that they existed
before the Babylonish captivity; but as they began to be erected soon
after it, probably the idea was suggested by the religious
inconveniences to which the captives had been subjected. In our Lord's
time, the rule was to have one wherever ten learned men or professed
students of the law resided; and they extended to Syria, Asia Minor,
Greece, and most places of the dispersion. The larger towns had several,
and in Jerusalem the number approached five hundred. In point of
officers and mode of worship, the Christian congregations are modelled
after the synagogue.

and preaching the gospel of the kingdom--proclaiming the glad tidings of
the kingdom,

and healing all manner of sickness--every disease.

and all manner of disease among the people--every complaint. The word
means any incipient malady causing "softness."

[Matthew 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 4:24</span></span>

And his fame went throughout all Syria--reaching first to the part of it
adjacent to Galilee, called Syro-PhÅ“nicia ([Mar
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#026)), and thence extending far and
wide.

and they brought unto him all sick people--all that were ailing or
unwell. Those

that were taken--for this is a distinct class, not an explanation of the
"unwell" class, as our translators understood it.

with divers diseases and torments--that is, acute disorders.

and those which were possessed with devils--that were demonized or
possessed with demons.

and those which were lunatic--moon-struck.

and those that had the palsy--paralytics, a word not naturalized when
our version was made.

and he healed them--These healings were at once His credentials and
illustrations of "the glad tidings" which He proclaimed. After reading
this account of our Lord's first preaching tour, can we wonder at what
follows?

[Matthew 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 4:25</span></span>

And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from
Decapolis--a region lying to the east of the Jordan, so called as
containing ten cities, founded and chiefly inhabited by Greek settlers.

and from Jerusalem, and from beyond Jordan--meaning from Perea. Thus not
only was all Palestine upheaved, but all the adjacent regions. But the
more immediate object for which this is here mentioned is, to give the
reader some idea both of the vast concourse and of the varied complexion
of eager attendants upon the great Preacher, to whom the astonishing
discourse of the next three chapters was addressed. On the importance
which our Lord Himself attached to this first preaching circuit, and the
preparation which He made for it, see on [Mar
1:35-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035).

SERMON ON THE MOUNT.

That this is the same Discourse as that in Luke 6:17-49--only reported
more fully by Matthew, and less fully, as well as with considerable
variation, by Luke--is the opinion of many very able critics (of the
Greek commentators; of CALVIN, GROTIUS, MALDONATUS--Who stands almost
alone among Romish commentators; and of most moderns, as THOLUCK, MEYER,
DE WETTE, TISCHENDORF, STIER, WIESELER, ROBINSON). The prevailing
opinion of these critics is that Luke's is the original form of the
discourse, to which Matthew has added a number of sayings, uttered on
other occasions, in order to give at one view the great outlines of our
Lord's ethical teaching. But that they are two distinct discourses--the
one delivered about the close of His first missionary tour, and the
other after a second such tour and the solemn choice of the Twelve--is
the judgment of others who have given much attention to such matters (of
most Romish commentators, including ERASMUS; and among the moderns, of
LANGE, GRESWELL, BIRKS, WEBSTER and WILKINSON. The question is left
undecided by ALFORD). AUGUSTINE'S opinion--that they were both delivered
on one occasion, Matthew's on the mountain, and to the disciples; Luke's
in the plain, and to the promiscuous multitude--is so clumsy and
artificial as hardly to deserve notice. To us the weight of argument
appears to lie with those who think them two separate discourses. It
seems hard to conceive that Matthew should have put this discourse
before his own calling, if it was not uttered till long after, and was
spoken in his own hearing as one of the newly chosen Twelve. Add to
this, that Matthew introduces his discourse amidst very definite
markings of time, which fix it to our Lord's first preaching tour; while
that of Luke, which is expressly said to have been delivered immediately
after the choice of the Twelve, could not have been spoken till long
after the time noted by Matthew. It is hard, too, to see how either
discourse can well be regarded as the expansion or contraction of the
other. And as it is beyond dispute that our Lord repeated some of His
weightier sayings in different forms, and with varied applications, it
ought not to surprise us that, after the lapse of perhaps a year--when,
having spent a whole night on the hill in prayer to God, and set the
Twelve apart, He found Himself surrounded by crowds of people, few of
whom probably had heard the Sermon on the Mount, and fewer still
remembered much of it--He should go over its principal points again,
with just as much sameness as to show their enduring gravity, but at the
same time with that difference which shows His exhaustless fertility as
the great Prophet of the Church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 5](mat005)

</div>
