<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat023)  [Next](mat027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)

[Matthew 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 25:1</span></span>

PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS. ([Mat
25:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001))

Then--at the time referred to at the close of the preceding chapter, the
time of the Lord's Second Coming to reward His faithful servants and
take vengeance on the faithless. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be
likened unto ten virgins, which took

their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom--This supplies a key
to the parable, whose object is, in the main, the same as that of the
last parable--to illustrate the vigilant and expectant attitude of
faith, in respect of which believers are described as "they that look
for Him" ([Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028)), and "love His
appearing" ([Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)). In the last
parable it was that of servants waiting for their absent Lord; in this
it is that of virgin attendants on a Bride, whose duty it was to go
forth at night with lamps, and be ready on the appearance of the
Bridegroom to conduct the Bride to his house, and go in with him to the
marriage. This entire and beautiful change of figure brings out the
lesson of the former parable in quite a new light. But let it be
observed that, just as in the parable of the Marriage Supper, so in
this--the Bride does not come into view at all in this parable; the
Virgins and the Bridegroom holding forth all the intended instruction:
nor could believers be represented both as Bride and Bridal Attendants
without incongruity.

[Matthew 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 25:2</span></span>

And five of them were wise, and five were foolish--They are not
distinguished into good and bad, as TRENCH observes, but into "wise" and
"foolish"--just as in [Mat 7:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025)
those who reared their house for eternity are distinguished into "wise"
and "foolish builders"; because in both cases a certain degree of
goodwill towards the truth is assumed. To make anything of the equal
number of both classes would, we think, be precarious, save to warn us
how large a portion of those who, up to the last, so nearly resemble
those that love Christ's appearing will be disowned by Him when He
comes.

[Matthew 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 25:3</span></span>

They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:

[Matthew 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 25:4</span></span>

But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps--What are these
"lamps" and this "oil"? Many answers have been given. But since the
foolish as well as the wise took their lamps and went forth with them to
meet the Bridegroom, these lighted lamps and this advance a certain way
in company with the wise, must denote that Christian profession which is
common to all who bear the Christian name; while the insufficiency of
this without something else, of which they never possessed themselves,
shows that "the foolish" mean those who, with all that is common to them
with real Christians, lack the essential preparation for meeting Christ.
Then, since the wisdom of "the wise" consisted in their taking with
their lamps a supply of oil in their vessels, keeping their lamps
burning till the Bridegroom came, and so fitting them to go in with Him
to the marriage, this supply of oil must mean that inward reality of
grace which alone will stand when He appears whose eyes are as a flame
of fire. But this is too general; for it cannot be for nothing that this
inward grace is here set forth by the familiar symbol of oil, by which
the Spirit of all grace is so constantly represented in Scripture.
Beyond all doubt, this was what was symbolized by that precious
anointing oil with which Aaron and his sons were consecrated to the
priestly office ([Exo 30:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023), [Exo
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#030)); by "the oil of gladness above
His fellows" with which Messiah was to be anointed ([Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009)), even as it is expressly said,
that "God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto Him" ([Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)); and by the bowl full of golden
oil, in Zechariah's vision, which, receiving its supplies from the two
olive trees on either side of it, poured it through seven golden pipes
into the golden lamp-stand to keep it continually burning bright ([Zac
4:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001)) --for the prophet is expressly
told that it was to proclaim the great truth, "Not by might, nor by
power, but by MY SPIRIT, saith the Lord of hosts \[shall this temple be
built\]. Who art thou, O great mountain \[of opposition to this issue\]?
Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain \[or, be swept out of the
way\], and he shall bring forth the head stone \[of the temple\], with
shoutings \[crying\], GRACE, GRACE unto it." This supply of oil, then,
representing that inward grace which distinguishes the wise, must
denote, more particularly, that "supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,"
which, as it is the source of the new spiritual life at the first, is
the secret of its enduring character. Everything short of this may be
possessed by "the foolish"; while it is the possession of this that
makes "the wise" to be "ready" when the Bridegroom appears, and fit to
"go in with Him to the marriage." Just so in the parable of the Sower,
the stony-ground hearers, "having no deepness of earth" and "no root in
themselves," though they spring up and get even into ear, never ripen,
while they in the good ground bear the precious grain.

[Matthew 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 25:5</span></span>

While the bridegroom tarried--So in [Mat
24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048), "My Lord delayeth His coming";
and so Peter says sublimely of the ascended Saviour, "Whom the heaven
must receive until the times of restitution of all things" ([Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021), and compare [Luk
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)). Christ "tarries," among
other reasons, to try the faith and patience of His people.

they all slumbered and slept--the wise as well as the foolish. The world
"slumbered" signifies, simply, "nodded," or, "became drowsy"; while the
world "slept" is the usual word for lying down to sleep, denoting two
stages of spiritual declension--first, that half-involuntary lethargy or
drowsiness which is apt to steal over one who falls into inactivity; and
then a conscious, deliberate yielding to it, after a little vain
resistance. Such was the state alike of the wise and the foolish
virgins, even till the cry of the Bridegroom's approach awoke them. So
likewise in the parable of the Importunate Widow: "When the Son of man
cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?" ([Luk
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)).

[Matthew 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 25:6</span></span>

And at midnight--that is, the time when the Bridegroom will be least
expected; for "the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night"
([Th1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002)).

there was a cry made, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet
him--that is, Be ready to welcome Him.

[Matthew 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 25:7</span></span>

Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps--the foolish
virgins as well as the wise. How very long do both parties seem the
same--almost to the moment of decision! Looking at the mere form of the
parable, it is evident that the folly of "the foolish" consisted not in
having no oil at all; for they must have had oil enough in their lamps
to keep them burning up to this moment: their folly consisted in not
making provision against its exhaustion, by taking with their lamp an
oil-vessel wherewith to replenish their lamp from time to time, and so
have it burning until the Bridegroom should come. Are we, then--with
some even superior expositors--to conclude that the foolish virgins must
represent true Christians as well as do the wise, since only true
Christians have the Spirit, and that the difference between the two
classes consists only in the one having the necessary watchfulness which
the other wants? Certainly not. Since the parable was designed to hold
forth the prepared and the unprepared to meet Christ at His coming, and
how the unprepared might, up to the very last, be confounded with the
prepared--the structure of the parable behooved to accommodate itself to
this, by making the lamps of the foolish to burn, as well as those of
the wise, up to a certain point of time, and only then to discover their
inability to burn on for want of a fresh supply of oil. But this is
evidently just a structural device; and the real difference between the
two classes who profess to love the Lord's appearing is a radical
one--the possession by the one class of an enduring principle of
spiritual life, and the want of it by the other.

[Matthew 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 25:8</span></span>

And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps
are gone out--rather, as in the Margin, "are going out"; for oil will
not light an extinguished lamp, though it will keep a burning one from
going out. Ah! now at length they have discovered not only their own
folly, but the wisdom of the other class, and they do homage to it. They
did not perhaps despise them before, but they thought them righteous
overmuch; now they are forced, with bitter mortification, to wish they
were like them.

[Matthew 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 25:9</span></span>

But the wise answered, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and
you--The words "Not so," it will be seen, are not in the original, where
the reply is very elliptical--"In case there be not enough for us and
you." A truly wise answer this. "And what, then, if we shall share it
with you? Why, both will be undone."

but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves--Here again
it would be straining the parable beyond its legitimate design to make
it teach that men may get salvation even after they are supposed and
required to have it already gotten. It is merely a friendly way of
reminding them of the proper way of obtaining the needed and precious
article, with a certain reflection on them for having it now to seek.
Also, when the parable speaks of "selling" and "buying" that valuable
article, it means simply, "Go, get it in the only legitimate way." And
yet the word "buy" is significant; for we are elsewhere bidden, "buy
wine and milk without money and without price," and "buy of Christ gold
tried in the fire," ([Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001); [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018)). Now, since what we pay the
demanded price for becomes thereby our own property, the salvation which
we thus take gratuitously at God's hands, being bought in His own sense
of that word, becomes ours thereby in inalienable possession. (Compare
for the language, [Pro 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#023); [Mat
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)).

[Matthew 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 25:10</span></span>

And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came; and they that were
ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut--They are
sensible of their past folly; they have taken good advice: they are in
the act of getting what alone they lacked: a very little more, and they
also are ready. But the Bridegroom comes; the ready are admitted; "the
door is shut," and they are undone. How graphic and appalling this
picture of one almost saved--but lost!

[Matthew 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 25:11</span></span>

Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to
us--In [Mat 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022) this reiteration of
the name was an exclamation rather of surprise; here it is a piteous cry
of urgency, bordering on despair. Ah! now at length their eyes are wide
open, and they realize all the consequences of their past folly.

[Matthew 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 25:12</span></span>

But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not--The
attempt to establish a difference between "I know you not" here, and "I
never knew you" in [Mat 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023) --as if
this were gentler, and so implied a milder fate, reserved for "the
foolish" of this parable--is to be resisted, though advocated by such
critics as OLSHAUSEN, STIER, and ALFORD. Besides being inconsistent with
the general tenor of such language, and particularly the solemn moral of
the whole ([Mat 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)), it is a kind
of criticism which tampers with some of the most awful warnings
regarding the future. If it be asked why unworthy guests were admitted
to the marriage of the King's Son, in a former parable, and the foolish
virgins are excluded in this one, we may answer, in the admirable words
of GERHARD, quoted by TRENCH, that those festivities are celebrated in
this life, in the Church militant; these at the last day, in the Church
triumphant; to those, even they are admitted who are not adorned with
the wedding garment; but to these, only they to whom it is granted to be
arrayed in fine linen clean and white, which is the righteousness of
saints ([Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)); to those, men are
called by the trumpet of the Gospel; to these by the trumpet of the
Archangel; to those, who enters may go out from them, or be cast out;
who is once introduced to these never goes out, nor is cast out, from
them any more: wherefore it is said, "The door is shut."

[Matthew 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 25:13</span></span>

Watch therefore; for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the
Son of man cometh--This, the moral or practical lesson of the whole
parable, needs no comment.

[Matthew 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 25:14</span></span>

PARABLE OF THE TALENTS. (Mat. 25:14-30)

For the kingdom of heaven is as a man--The ellipsis is better supplied
by our translators in the corresponding passage of Mark ([Mar
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#034)), "\[For the Son of man is\] as
a man"

travelling into a far country--or more simply, "going abroad." The idea
of long "tarrying" is certainly implied here, since it is expressed in
[Mat 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#019).

who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods--Between
master and slaves this was not uncommon in ancient times. Christ's
"servants" here mean all who, by their Christian profession, stand in
the relation to Him of entire subjection. His "goods" mean all their
gifts and endowments, whether original or acquired, natural or
spiritual. As all that slaves have belongs to their master, so Christ
has a claim to everything which belongs to His people, everything which,
may be turned to good, and He demands its appropriation to His service,
or, viewing it otherwise, they first offer it up to Him; as being "not
their own, but bought with a price" ([Co1
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)), and He "delivers it to them"
again to be put to use in His service.

[Matthew 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 25:15</span></span>

And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another
one--While the proportion of gifts is different in each, the same
fidelity is required of all, and equally rewarded. And thus there is
perfect equity.

to every man according to his several ability--his natural capacity as
enlisted in Christ's service, and his opportunities in providence for
employing the gifts bestowed on him.

and straightway took his journey--Compare [Mat
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033), where the same departure is
ascribed to God, after setting up the ancient economy. In both cases, it
denotes the leaving of men to the action of all those spiritual laws and
influences of Heaven under which they have been graciously placed for
their own salvation and the advancement of their Lord's kingdom.

[Matthew 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 25:16</span></span>

Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the
same--expressive of the activity which he put forth and the labor he
bestowed.

and made them other five talents.

[Matthew 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 25:17</span></span>

And likewise he that had received two he also gained other two--each
doubling what he received, and therefore both equally faithful.

[Matthew 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 25:18</span></span>

But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his
lord's money--not misspending, but simply making no use of it. Nay, his
action seems that of one anxious that the gift should not be misused or
lost, but ready to be returned, just as he got it.

[Matthew 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 25:19</span></span>

After a long time the lord of those servants cometh and reckoneth with
them--That any one--within the lifetime of the apostles at least--with
such words before them, should think that Jesus had given any reason to
expect His Second Appearing within that period, would seem strange, did
we not know the tendency of enthusiastic, ill-regulated love of His
appearing ever to take this turn.

[Matthew 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 25:20</span></span>

Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents; behold, I have gained
besides them five talents more--How beautifully does this illustrate
what the beloved disciple says of "boldness in the day of judgment," and
his desire that "when He shall appear we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before Him at His coming!" ([Jo1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017); [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028)).

[Matthew 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 25:21</span></span>

His lord said unto him, Well done--a single word, not of bare
satisfaction, but of warm and delighted commendation. And from what
Lips!

thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
many things, &c.

[Matthew 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 25:22</span></span>

He also that had received two talents came . . . good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things--Both are commended in the same terms, and the
reward of both is precisely the same. (See on [Mat
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)). Observe also the contrasts:
"Thou hast been faithful as a servant; now be a ruler--thou hast been
entrusted with a few things; now have dominion over many things."

enter thou into the joy of thy lord--thy Lord's own joy. (See [Joh
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011); [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)).

[Matthew 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 25:24</span></span>

Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew
thee that thou art an hard man--harsh. The word in Luke ([Luk
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021)) is "austere."

reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not
strawed--The sense is obvious: "I knew thou wast one whom it was
impossible to serve, one whom nothing would please: exacting what was
impracticable, and dissatisfied with what was attainable." Thus do men
secretly think of God as a hard Master, and virtually throw on Him the
blame of their fruitlessness.

[Matthew 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 25:25</span></span>

And I was afraid--of making matters worse by meddling with it at all.

and went and hid thy talent in the earth--This depicts the conduct of
all those who shut up their gifts from the active service of Christ,
without actually prostituting them to unworthy uses. Fitly, therefore,
may it, at least, comprehend those, to whom TRENCH refers, who, in the
early Church, pleaded that they had enough to do with their own souls,
and were afraid of losing them in trying to save others; and so, instead
of being the salt of the earth, thought rather of keeping their own
saltness by withdrawing sometimes into caves and wildernesses, from all
those active ministries of love by which they might have served their
brethren.

Thou wicked and slothful servant--"Wicked" or "bad" means
"falsehearted," as opposed to the others, who are emphatically styled
"good servants." The addition of "slothful" is to mark the precise
nature of his wickedness: it consisted, it seems, not in his doing
anything against, but simply nothing for his master.

Thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not
strawed--He takes the servant's own account of his demands, as
expressing graphically enough, not the hardness which he had basely
imputed to him, but simply his demand of a profitable return for the
gift entrusted.

[Matthew 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 25:27</span></span>

thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers--the
banker.

and then at my coming I should have received mine own with
usury--interest.

[Matthew 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 25:29</span></span>

For unto every one that hath shall be given, &c.--See on [Mat
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012).

[Matthew 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 25:30</span></span>

And cast ye--cast ye out.

the unprofitable servant--the useless servant, that does his Master no
service.

into outer darkness--the darkness which is outside. On this expression
see on [Mat 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013).

there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth--See on [Mat
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042).

[Matthew 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 25:31</span></span>

THE LAST JUDGMENT. (Mat. 25:31-46)

When the Son of man shall come in his glory--His personal glory.

and all the holy angels with him--See [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Dan
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014); with [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006); [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022).

then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory--the glory of His
judicial authority.

[Matthew 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 25:32</span></span>

And before him shall be gathered all nations--or, "all the nations."
That this should be understood to mean the heathen nations, or all
except believers in Christ, will seem amazing to any simple reader. Yet
this is the exposition of OLSHAUSEN, STIER, KEIL, ALFORD (though
latterly with some diffidence), and of a number, though not all, of
those who hold that Christ will come the second time before the
millennium, and that the saints will be caught up to meet Him in the air
before His appearing. Their chief argument is, the impossibility of any
that ever knew the Lord Jesus wondering, at the Judgment Day, that they
should be thought to have done--or left undone--anything "unto Christ."
To that we shall advert when we come to it. But here we may just say,
that if this scene does not describe a personal, public, final judgment
on men, according to the treatment they have given to Christ--and
consequently men within the Christian pale--we shall have to consider
again whether our Lord's teaching on the greatest themes of human
interest does indeed possess that incomparable simplicity and
transparency of meaning which, by universal consent, has been ascribed
to it. If it be said, But how can this be the general judgment, if only
those within the Christian pale be embraced by it?--we answer, What is
here described, as it certainly does not meet the case of all the family
of Adam, is of course so far not general. But we have no right to
conclude that the whole "judgment of the great day" will be limited to
the point of view here presented. Other explanations will come up in the
course of our exposition.

and he shall separate them--now for the first time; the two classes
having been mingled all along up to this awful moment.

as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats--(See [Eze
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#017)).

[Matthew 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 25:33</span></span>

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand--the side of honor ([Kg1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#019); [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009); [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001), &c.).

but the goats on the left--the side consequently of dishonor.

[Matthew 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 25:34</span></span>

Then shall the King--Magnificent title, here for the first and only
time, save in parabolical language, given to Himself by the Lord Jesus,
and that on the eve of His deepest humiliation! It is to intimate that
in then addressing the heirs of the kingdom, He will put on all His
regal majesty.

say unto them on his right hand, Come--the same sweet word with which He
had so long invited all the weary and heavy laden to come unto Him for
rest. Now it is addressed exclusively to such as have come and found
rest. It is still, "Come," and to "rest" too; but to rest in a higher
style, and in another region.

ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world--The whole story of this their blessedness is
given by the apostle, in words which seem but an expression of these:
"Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ;
according as He hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love."
They were chosen from everlasting to the possession and enjoyment of all
spiritual blessings in Christ, and so chosen in order to be holy and
blameless in love. This is the holy love whose practical manifestations
the King is about to recount in detail; and thus we see that their whole
life of love to Christ is the fruit of an eternal purpose of love to
them in Christ.

[Matthew 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 25:35</span></span>

For I was an hungered . . . thirsty . . . a stranger, &c.

[Matthew 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 25:36</span></span>

Naked . . . sick . . . prison, and ye came unto me.

[Matthew 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 25:37</span></span>

Then shall the righteous answer him, &c.

[Matthew 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 25:40</span></span>

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
&c.--Astonishing dialogue this between the King, from the Throne of His
glory, and His wondering people! "I was an hungered, and ye gave Me
meat," &c.--"Not we," they reply. "We never did that, Lord: We were born
out of due time, and enjoyed not the privilege of ministering unto
Thee." "But ye did it to these My brethren, now beside you, when cast
upon your love." "Truth, Lord, but was that doing it to Thee? Thy name
was indeed dear to us, and we thought it a great honor to suffer shame
for it. When among the destitute and distressed we discerned any of the
household of faith, we will not deny that our hearts leapt within us at
the discovery, and when their knock came to our dwelling, our bowels
were moved, as though 'our Beloved Himself had put in His hand by the
hole of the door.' Sweet was the fellowship we had with them, as if we
had 'entertained angels unawares'; all difference between giver and
receiver somehow melted away under the beams of that love of Thine which
knit us together; nay, rather, as they left us with gratitude for our
poor givings, we seemed the debtors--not they. But, Lord, were we all
that time in company with Thee? . . . Yes, that scene was all with Me,"
replies the King--"Me in the disguise of My poor ones. The door shut
against Me by others was opened by you--'Ye took Me in.' Apprehended and
imprisoned by the enemies of the truth, ye whom the truth had made free
sought Me out diligently and found Me; visiting Me in My lonely cell at
the risk of your own lives, and cheering My solitude; ye gave Me a coat,
for I shivered; and then I felt warm. With cups of cold water ye
moistened My parched lips; when famished with hunger ye supplied Me with
crusts, and my spirit revived--"YE DID IT UNTO ME." What thoughts crowd
upon us as we listen to such a description of the scenes of the Last
Judgment! And in the light of this view of the heavenly dialogue, how
bald and wretched, not to say unscriptural, is that view of it to which
we referred at the outset, which makes it a dialogue between Christ and
heathens who never heard of His name, and of course never felt any
stirrings of His love in their hearts! To us it seems a poor,
superficial objection to the Christian view of this scene, that
Christians could never be supposed to ask such questions as the "blessed
of Christ's Father" are made to ask here. If there were any difficulty
in explaining this, the difficulty of the other view is such as to make
it, at least, insufferable. But there is no real difficulty. The
surprise expressed is not at their being told that they acted from love
to Christ, but that Christ Himself was the Personal Object of all their
deeds: that they found Him hungry, and supplied Him with food: that they
brought water to Him, and slaked His thirst; that seeing Him naked and
shivering, they put warm clothing upon Him, paid Him visits when lying
in prison for the truth, and sat by His bedside when laid down with
sickness. This is the astonishing interpretation which Jesus says "the
King" will give to them of their own actions here below. And will any
Christian reply, "How could this astonish them? Does not every Christian
know that He does these very things, when He does them at all, just as
they are here represented?" Nay, rather, is it conceivable that they
should not be astonished, and almost doubt their own ears, to hear such
an account of their own actions upon earth from the lips of the Judge?
And remember, that Judge has come in His glory, and now sits upon the
throne of His glory, and all the holy angels are with Him; and that it
is from those glorified Lips that the words come forth, "Ye did all this
unto ME." Oh, can we imagine such a word addressed to ourselves, and
then fancy ourselves replying, "Of course we did--To whom else did we
anything? It must be others than we that are addressed, who never knew,
in all their good deeds, what they were about?" Rather, can we imagine
ourselves not overpowered with astonishment, and scarcely able to credit
the testimony borne to us by the King?

[Matthew 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 25:41</span></span>

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, &c.--As for you on the left hand, ye did nothing for Me. I came
to you also, but ye knew Me not: ye had neither warm affections nor kind
deeds to bestow upon Me: I was as one despised in your eyes." "In our
eyes, Lord? We never saw Thee before, and never, sure, behaved we so to
Thee." "But thus ye treated these little ones that believe in Me and now
stand on My right hand. In the disguise of these poor members of Mine I
came soliciting your pity, but ye shut up your bowels of compassion from
Me: I asked relief, but ye had none to give Me. Take back therefore your
own coldness, your own contemptuous distance: Ye bid Me away from your
presence, and now I bid you from Mine--Depart from Me, ye cursed!"

[Matthew 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 25:46</span></span>

And these shall go away--these "cursed" ones. Sentence, it should seem,
was first pronounced--in the hearing of the wicked--upon the righteous,
who thereupon sit as assessors in the judgment upon the wicked ([Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)); but sentence is first executed,
it should seem, upon the wicked, in the sight of the righteous--whose
glory will thus not be beheld by the wicked, while their descent into
"their own place" will be witnessed by the righteous, as BENGEL notes.

into everlasting punishment--or, as in [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), "everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels." Compare [Mat
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042); [Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009), &c. This is said to be "prepared
for the devil and his angels," because they were "first in
transgression." But both have one doom, because one unholy character.

but the righteous into life eternal--that is, "life everlasting." The
word in both clauses, being in the original the same, should have been
the same in the translation also. Thus the decisions of this awful day
will be final, irreversible, unending.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 27](mat027)

</div>
