<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat012)  [Next](mat014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

[Matthew 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 13:1</span></span>

JESUS TEACHES BY PARABLES. ( = Mark 4:1-34; [Luk
8:4-18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#004); [Luk
13:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)). (Mat. 13:1-52)

The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the seaside.

[Matthew 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 13:2</span></span>

And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went
into a ship--the article in the received text lacks authority

and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore--How graphic this
picture!--no doubt from the pen of an eye-witness, himself impressed
with the scene. It was "the same day" on which the foregoing solemn
discourse was delivered, when His kindred thought Him "beside Himself"
for His indifference to food and repose--that same day retiring to the
seashore of Galilee; and there seating Himself, perhaps for coolness and
rest, the crowds again flock around Him, and He is fain to push off from
them, in the boat usually kept in readiness for Him; yet only to begin,
without waiting to rest, a new course of teaching by parables to the
eager multitudes that lined the shore. To the parables of our Lord there
is nothing in all language to be compared, for simplicity, grace,
fulness, and variety of spiritual teaching. They are adapted to all
classes and stages of advancement, being understood by each according to
the measure of his spiritual capacity.

[Matthew 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 13:3</span></span>

And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, &c.--These
parables are SEVEN in number; and it is not a little remarkable that
while this is the sacred number, the first FOUR of them were spoken to
the mixed multitude, while the remaining THREE were spoken to the Twelve
in private--these divisions, four and three, being themselves notable in
the symbolical arithmetic of Scripture. Another thing remarkable in the
structure of these parables is, that while the first of the Seven--that
of the Sower--is of the nature of an Introduction to the whole, the
remaining Six consist of three pairs--the Second and Seventh, the Third
and Fourth, and the Fifth and Sixth, corresponding to each other; each
pair setting forth the same general truths, but with a certain diversity
of aspect. All this can hardly be accidental.

First Parable: THE SOWER ([Mat 13:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003),
[Mat 13:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#018)).

This parable may be entitled, THE EFFECT OF THE WORD DEPENDENT ON THE
STATE OF THE HEART. For the exposition of this parable, see on [Mar
4:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001), [Mar
4:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#014).

Reason for Teaching in Parables ([Mat
13:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010)).

[Matthew 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 13:10</span></span>

And the disciples came, and said unto him--"they that were with Him,
when they were alone" ([Mar 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#010)).

Why speakest thou to them in parables?--Though before this He had
couched some things in the parabolic form, for more vivid illustration,
it would appear that He now, for the first time, formally employed this
method of teaching.

[Matthew 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 13:11</span></span>

He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven--The word "mysteries" in Scripture is
not used in its classical sense--of religious secrets, nor yet of things
incomprehensible, or in their own nature difficult to be understood--but
in the sense of things of purely divine revelation, and, usually, things
darkly announced under the ancient economy, and during all that period
darkly understood, but fully published under the Gospel ([Co1
2:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006); [Eph
3:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003), [Eph
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)). "The mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven," then, mean those glorious Gospel truths which at that time
only the more advanced disciples could appreciate, and they but
partially.

but to them it is not given--(See on [Mat
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)). Parables serve the double
purpose of revealing and concealing; presenting "the mysteries of the
kingdom" to those who know and relish them, though in never so small a
degree, in a new and attractive light; but to those who are insensible
to spiritual things yielding only, as so many tales, some temporary
entertainment.

[Matthew 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 13:12</span></span>

For whosoever hath--that is, keeps; as a thing which he values.

to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance--He will be
rewarded by an increase of what he so much prizes.

but whosoever hath not--who lets this go or lie unused, as a thing on
which he sets no value.

from him shall be taken away even that he hath--or as it is in Luke
([Luk 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018)), "what he seemeth to
have," or, thinketh he hath. This is a principle of immense importance,
and, like other weighty sayings, appears to have been uttered by our
Lord on more than one occasion, and in different connections. (See on
[Mat 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)). As a great ethical
principle, we see it in operation everywhere, under the general law of
habit; in virtue of which moral principles become stronger by exercise,
while by disuse, or the exercise of their contraries, they wax weaker,
and at length expire. The same principle reigns in the intellectual
world, and even in the animal--if not in the vegetable also--as the
facts of physiology sufficiently prove. Here, however, it is viewed as a
divine ordination, as a judicial retribution in continual operation
under the divine administration.

[Matthew 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 13:13</span></span>

Therefore speak I to them in parables--which our Lord, be it observed,
did not begin to do till His miracles were malignantly ascribed to
Satan.

because they seeing, see not--They "saw," for the light shone on them as
never light shone before; but they "saw not," for they closed their
eyes.

and hearing, they hear not; neither do they understand--They "heard,"
for He taught them who "spake as never man spake"; but they "heard not,"
for they took nothing in, apprehending not the soul-penetrating,
life-giving words addressed to them. In Mark and Luke ([Mar
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012); [Luk
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010)), what is here expressed as a
human fact is represented as the fulfilment of a divine purpose--"that
seeing they may see, and not perceive," &c. The explanation of this lies
in the statement of the foregoing verse--that, by a fixed law of the
divine administration, the duty men voluntarily refuse to do, and in
point of fact do not do, they at length become morally incapable of
doing.

[Matthew 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 13:14</span></span>

And in them is fulfilled--rather, "is fulfilling," or "is receiving its
fulfilment."

the prophecy of Esaias, which saith-- ([Isa
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009) --here quoted according to the
Septuagint).

By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, &c.--They were thus
judicially sealed up under the darkness and obduracy which they
deliberately preferred to the light and healing which Jesus brought nigh
to them.

[Matthew 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 13:16</span></span>

But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your cars, for they
hear--that is, "Happy ye, whose eyes and ears, voluntarily and gladly
opened, are drinking in the light divine."

[Matthew 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 13:17</span></span>

For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have
desired--rather, "coveted."

to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them--Not only were the
disciples blessed above the blinded just spoken of, but favored above
the most honored and the best that lived under the old economy, who had
but glimpses of the things of the new kingdom, just sufficient to kindle
in them desires not to be fulfilled to any in their day. In [Luk
10:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023), where the same saying is
repeated on the return of the Seventy--the words, instead of "many
prophets and righteous men," are "many prophets and kings"; for several
of the Old Testament saints were kings.

Second and Seventh Parables or First Pair:

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES, and THE GOOD AND BAD FISH ([Mat
13:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024), [Mat
13:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036), [Mat
13:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)).

The subject of both these parables--which teach the same truth, with a
slight diversity of aspect--is: THE MIXED CHARACTER OF THE KINGDOM IN
ITS PRESENT STATE, AND THE FINAL ABSOLUTE SEPARATION OF THE TWO CLASSES.

The Tares and the Wheat ([Mat
13:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024), [Mat
13:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036)).

[Matthew 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 13:24</span></span>

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field--Happily for us,
these exquisite parables are, with like charming simplicity and
clearness, expounded to us by the Great Preacher Himself. Accordingly,
we pass to: [Mat 13:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036). See on [Mat
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036); [Mat
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)

[Matthew 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 13:25</span></span>

But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way--(See on [Mat 13:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)).

[Matthew 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 13:26</span></span>

But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also--the growth in both cases running parallel, as
antagonistic principles are seen to do.

[Matthew 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 13:27</span></span>

So the servants of the householder came--that is, Christ's ministers.

and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then hath it tares?--This well expresses the surprise,
disappointment, and anxiety of Christ's faithful servants and people at
the discovery of "false brethren" among the members of the Church.

[Matthew 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 13:28</span></span>

He said unto them, An enemy hath done this--Kind words these from a good
Husbandman, honorably clearing His faithful servants of the wrong done
to his field.

The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them
up?--Compare with this the question of James and John ([Luk
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054)), "Lord, wilt Thou that we
command fire to come down from heaven and consume" those Samaritans? In
this kind of zeal there is usually a large mixture of carnal heat. (See
[Jam 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)).

[Matthew 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 13:29</span></span>

But he said, Nay--"It will be done in due time, but not now, nor is it
your business."

lest, while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with
them--Nothing could more clearly or forcibly teach the difficulty of
distinguishing the two classes, and the high probability that in the
attempt to do so these will be confounded.

[Matthew 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 13:30</span></span>

Let both grow together--that is, in the visible Church.

until the harvest--till the one have ripened for full salvation, the
other for destruction. (See on [Mat
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)).

and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers--(See on [Mat
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)).

Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them--"in the fire" ([Mat 13:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#040)).

but gather the wheat into my barn--Christ, as the Judge, will separate
the two classes (as in [Mat 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)). It
will be observed that the tares are burned before the wheat is housed;
in the exposition of the parable ([Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041), [Mat
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)) the same order is observed: and
the same in [Mat 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046) --as if, in
some literal sense, "with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the
reward of the wicked" ([Psa 91:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#008)).

Third and Fourth Parables or Second Pair:

THE MUSTARD SEED and THE LEAVEN ([Mat
13:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)).

The subject of both these parables, as of the first pair, is the same,
but under a slight diversity of aspect, namely--

THE GROWTH OF THE KINGDOM FROM THE SMALLEST BEGINNINGS TO ULTIMATE
UNIVERSALITY.

The Mustard Seed ([Mat 13:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)).

[Matthew 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 13:31</span></span>

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his
field;

[Matthew 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 13:32</span></span>

Which indeed is the least of all seeds--not absolutely, but popularly
and proverbially, as in [Luk 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#006), "If
ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed," that is, "never so little
faith."

but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs--not absolutely,
but in relation to the small size of the seed, and in warm latitudes
proverbially great.

and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the
branches thereof--This is added, no doubt, to express the amplitude of
the tree. But as this seed has a hot, fiery vigor, gives out its best
virtues when bruised, and is grateful to the taste of birds, which are
accordingly attracted to its branches both for shelter and food, is it
straining the parable, asks TRENCH, to suppose that, besides the
wonderful growth of His kingdom, our Lord selected this seed to
illustrate further the shelter, repose and blessedness it is destined to
afford to the nations of the world?

The Leaven ([Mat 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)).

[Matthew 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 13:33</span></span>

Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto
leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
whole was leavened--This parable, while it teaches the same general
truth as the foregoing one, holds forth, perhaps, rather the inward
growth of the kingdom, while "the Mustard Seed" seems to point chiefly
to the outward. It being a woman's work to knead, it seems a refinement
to say that "the woman" here represents the Church, as the instrument of
depositing the leaven. Nor does it yield much satisfaction to understand
the "three measures of meal" of that threefold division of our nature
into "spirit, soul, and body," alluded to in [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023), or of the threefold partition of
the world among the three sons of Noah ([Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032)), as some do. It yields more
real satisfaction to see in this brief parable just the all-penetrating
and assimilating quality of the Gospel, by virtue of which it will yet
mould all institutions and tribes of men, and exhibit over the whole
earth one "kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ."

[Matthew 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 13:34</span></span>

All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without
a parable spake he not unto them--that is, on this occasion; refraining
not only from all naked discourse, but even from all interpretation of
these parables to the mixed multitude.

[Matthew 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 13:35</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying--
([Psa 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002), nearly as in the
Septuagint).

I will open my mouth in parables, &c.--Though the Psalm seems to contain
only a summary of Israelitish history, the Psalmist himself calls it "a
parable," and "dark sayings from of old"--as containing, underneath the
history, truths for all time, not fully brought to light till the Gospel
day.

[Matthew 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 13:36</span></span>

Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his
disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the
tares of the field, &c.--In the parable of the Sower, "the seed is the
word of God" ([Luk 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#011)). But here
that word has been received into the heart, and has converted him that
received it into a new creature, a "child of the kingdom," according to
that saying of James ([Jam 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)), "Of
His own will begat He us with the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first-fruits of His creatures." It is worthy of notice that this
vast field of the world is here said to be Christ's own--"His field,"
says the parable. (See [Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)).

[Matthew 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 13:38</span></span>

The tares are the children of the wicked one--As this sowing could only
be "while men slept," no blame seems intended, and certainly none is
charged upon "the servants"; it is probably just the dress of the
parable.

[Matthew 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 13:39</span></span>

The enemy that sowed them is the devil--emphatically "His enemy" ([Mat
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)). (See [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Jo1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)). By "tares" is meant, not what in
our husbandry is so called, but some noxious plant, probably darnel.
"The tares are the children of the wicked one"; and by their being sown
"among the wheat" is meant their being deposited within the territory of
the visible Church. As they resemble the children of the kingdom, so
they are produced, it seems, by a similar process of "sowing"--the seeds
of evil being scattered and lodging in the soil of those hearts upon
which falls the seed of the world. The enemy, after sowing his "tares,"
"went his way"--his dark work soon done, but taking time to develop its
true character.

The harvest is the end of the world--the period of Christ's second
coming, and of the judicial separation of the righteous and the wicked.
Till then, no attempt is to be made to effect such separation. But to
stretch this so far as to justify allowing openly scandalous persons to
remain in the communion of the Church, is to wrest the teaching of this
parable to other than its proper design, and go in the teeth of
apostolic injunctions (1Co. 5).

And the reapers are the angels--But whose angels are they? "The Son of
man shall send forth His angels" ([Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041)). Compare [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022), "Who is gone into heaven, and is
on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made
subject unto him."

[Matthew 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 13:41</span></span>

The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom--to which they never really belonged. They usurped their
place and name and outward privileges; but "the ungodly shall not stand
in the judgment, nor sinners \[abide\] in the congregation of the
righteous" ([Psa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)).

all things that offend--all those who have proved a stumbling-block to
others

and them which do iniquity--The former class, as the worst, are
mentioned first.

[Matthew 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 13:42</span></span>

And shall cast them into a furnace of fire--rather, "the furnace of
fire":

there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth--What terrific strength of
language--the "casting" or "flinging" expressive of indignation,
abhorrence, contempt (compare [Psa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017); [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)): "the furnace of fire" denoting
the fierceness of the torment: the "wailing" signifying the anguish this
causes; while the "gnashing of teeth" is a graphic way of expressing the
despair in which its remedilessness issues (see [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012))!

[Matthew 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 13:43</span></span>

Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father--as if they had been under a cloud during the present association
with ungodly pretenders to their character, and claimants of their
privileges, and obstructors of their course.

Who hath ears to hear, let him hear--(See [Mar
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#009)).

Fifth and Sixth Parables or Third Pair: THE HIDDEN TREASURE and THE
PEARL OF GREAT PRICE ([Mat 13:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)).

The subject of this last pair, as of the two former, is the same, but
also under a slight diversity of aspect: namely--

THE PRICELESS VALUE OF THE BLESSINGS OF THE KINGDOM. And while the one
parable represents the Kingdom as "found without seeking," the other
holds forth the Kingdom as "sought and found."

The Hidden Treasure ([Mat 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)).

[Matthew 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 13:44</span></span>

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field--no
uncommon thing in unsettled and half-civilized countries, even now as
well as in ancient times, when there was no other way of securing it
from the rapacity of neighbors or marauders. ([Jer
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#008); [Job
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021); [Pro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004)).

the which when a man hath found--that is, unexpectedly found.

he hideth, and for joy thereof--on perceiving what a treasure he had
lighted on, surpassing the worth of all he possessed.

goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field--in which
case, by Jewish law, the treasure would become his own.

The Pearl of Great Price ([Mat
13:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045)).

[Matthew 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 13:45</span></span>

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking goodly
pearls.

[Matthew 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 13:46</span></span>

Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that
he had, and bought it--The one pearl of great price, instead of being
found by accident, as in the former case, is found by one whose business
it is to seek for such, and who finds it just in the way of searching
for such treasures. But in both cases the surpassing value of the
treasure is alike recognized, and in both all is parted with for it.

The Good and Bad Fish ([Mat 13:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)).

The object of this brief parable is the same as that of the Tares and
Wheat. But as its details are fewer, so its teaching is less rich and
varied.

[Matthew 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 13:47</span></span>

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the
sea, and gathered of every kind--The word here rendered "net" signifies
a large drag-net, which draws everything after it, suffering nothing to
escape, as distinguished from a casting-net ([Mar
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016), [Mar
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#018)). The far-reaching efficacy of
the Gospel is thus denoted. This Gospel net "gathered of every kind,"
meaning every variety of character.

[Matthew 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 13:48</span></span>

Which, when it was full, they drew to shore--for the separation will not
be made till the number of the elect is accomplished.

and sat down--expressing the deliberateness with which the judicial
separation will at length be made.

and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away--literally,
"the rotten," but here meaning, "the foul" or "worthless" fish:
corresponding to the "tares" of the other parable.

[Matthew 13:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 13:49</span></span>

So shall it be at the end of the world, &c.--(See on [Mat
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042)). We have said that each of
these two parables holds forth the same truth under a slight diversity
of aspect. What is that diversity? First, the bad, in the former
parable, are represented as vile seed sown among the wheat by the enemy
of souls; in the latter, as foul fish drawn forth out of the great sea
of human beings by the Gospel net itself. Both are important
truths--that the Gospel draws within its pale, and into the communion of
the visible Church, multitudes who are Christians only in name; and that
the injury thus done to the Church on earth is to be traced to the
wicked one. But further, while the former parable gives chief prominence
to the present mixture of good and bad, in the latter, the prominence is
given to the future separation of the two classes.

[Matthew 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 13:51</span></span>

Jesus saith unto them--that is, to the Twelve. He had spoken the first
four in the hearing of the mixed multitude: the last three He reserved
till, on the dismissal of the mixed audience, He and the Twelve were
alone ([Mat 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036), &c.).

Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.

[Matthew 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 13:52</span></span>

Then said he unto them, Therefore--or as we should say, "Well, then."

every scribe--or Christian teacher: here so called from that well-known
class among the Jews. (See [Mat
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)).

which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven--himself taught in the
mysteries of the Gospel which he has to teach to others.

is like unto a man that is an householder which bringeth
forth--"turneth" or "dealeth out."

out of his treasure--his store of divine truth.

things new and old--old truths in ever new forms, aspects, applications,
and with ever new illustrations.

[Matthew 13:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mat 13:53</span></span>

HOW JESUS WAS REGARDED BY HIS RELATIVES. ( = [Mar
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001); [Luk
4:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016)). ([Mat
13:53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053))

And it came to pass, that, when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence.

[Matthew 13:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 13:54</span></span>

And when he was come into his own country--that is, Nazareth; as is
plain from [Mar 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001). See on [Joh
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#043), where also the same phrase
occurs. This, according to the majority of Harmonists, was the second of
two visits which our Lord paid to Nazareth during His public ministry;
but in our view it was His first and only visit to it. See on [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013); and for the reasons, see [Luk
4:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016).

Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?--"these
miracles." These surely are not like the questions of people who had
asked precisely the same questions before, who from astonishment had
proceeded to rage, and in their rage had hurried Him out of the
synagogue, and away to the brow of the hill whereon their city was
built, to thrust Him down headlong, and who had been foiled even in that
object by His passing through the midst of them, and going His way. But
see on [Luk 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016), &c.

[Matthew 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 13:55</span></span>

Is not this the carpenter's son?--In Mark ([Mar
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003)) the question is, "Is not this the
carpenter?" In all likelihood, our Lord, during His stay under the roof
of His earthly parents, wrought along with His legal father.

is not his mother called Mary?--"Do we not know all about His parentage?
Has He not grown up in the midst of us? Are not all His relatives our
own townsfolk? Whence, then, such wisdom and such miracles?" These
particulars of our Lord's human history constitute the most valuable
testimony, first, to His true and real humanity--for they prove that
during all His first thirty years His townsmen had discovered nothing
about Him different from other men; secondly, to the divine character of
His mission--for these Nazarenes proclaim both the unparalleled
character of His teaching and the reality and glory of His miracles, as
transcending human ability; and thirdly, to His wonderful humility and
self-denial--in that when He was such as they now saw Him to be, He yet
never gave any indications of it for thirty years, because "His hour was
not yet come."

And his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?

[Matthew 13:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mat 13:56</span></span>

And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then hath this man all
these things? An exceedingly difficult question here arises--What were
these "brethren" and "sisters" to Jesus? Were they, First, His full
brothers and sisters? or, Secondly, Were they His step-brothers and
step-sisters, children of Joseph by a former marriage? or, Thirdly, Were
they cousins, according to a common way of speaking among the Jews
respecting persons of collateral descent? On this subject an immense
deal has been written, nor are opinions yet by any means agreed. For the
second opinion there is no ground but a vague tradition, arising
probably from the wish for some such explanation. The first opinion
undoubtedly suits the text best in all the places where the parties are
certainly referred to ([Mat 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046); and
its parallels, [Mar 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031); [Luk
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#019); our present passage, and its
parallels, [Mar 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003); [Joh
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012); [Joh
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003), [Joh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005), [Joh
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010); [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014)). But, in addition to other
objections, many of the best interpreters, thinking it in the last
degree improbable that our Lord, when hanging on the cross, would have
committed His mother to John if He had had full brothers of His own then
alive, prefer the third opinion; although, on the other hand, it is not
to be doubted that our Lord might have good reasons for entrusting the
guardianship of His doubly widowed mother to the beloved disciple in
preference even to full brothers of His own. Thus dubiously we prefer to
leave this vexed question, encompassed as it is with difficulties. As to
the names here mentioned, the first of them, "JAMES," is afterwards
called "the Lord's brother" (see on [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)), but is perhaps not to be
confounded with "James the son of AlphÃ&brvbr;us," one of the Twelve,
though many think their identity beyond dispute. This question also is
one of considerable difficulty, and not without importance; since the
James who occupies so prominent a place in the Church of Jerusalem, in
the latter part of the Acts, was apparently the apostle, but is by many
regarded as "the Lord's brother," while others think their identity best
suits all the statements. The second of those here named, "JOSES" (or
Joseph), must not be confounded with "Joseph called Barsabas, who was
surnamed Justus" ([Act 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)); and the
third here named, "SIMON," is not to be confounded with Simon the
Kananite or Zealot (see on [Mat 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004)).
These three are nowhere else mentioned in the New Testament. The fourth
and last-named, "JUDAS," can hardly be identical with the apostle of
that name--though the brothers of both were of the name of "James"--nor
(unless the two be identical, was this Judas) with the author of the
catholic Epistle so called.

[Matthew 13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 13:58</span></span>

And he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief--"save
that He laid His hands on a few sick folk, and healed them" ([Mar
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005)). See on [Luk
4:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 14](mat014)

</div>
