<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh003)  [Next](neh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 4:1</span></span>

WHILE THE ENEMIES SCOFF, NEHEMIAH PRAYS TO GOD, AND CONTINUES THE WORK.
([Neh 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001))

when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth--The
Samaritan faction showed their bitter animosity to the Jews on
discovering the systematic design of refortifying Jerusalem. Their
opposition was confined at first to scoffs and insults, in heaping which
the governors made themselves conspicuous, and circulated all sorts of
disparaging reflections that might increase the feelings of hatred and
contempt for them in their own party. The weakness of the Jews in
respect of wealth and numbers, the absurdity of their purpose apparently
to reconstruct the walls and celebrate the feast of dedication in one
day, the idea of raising the walls on their old foundations, as well as
using the charred and mouldering debris of the ruins as the materials
for the restored buildings, and the hope of such a parapet as they could
raise being capable of serving as a fortress of defense--these all
afforded fertile subjects of hostile ridicule.

[Nehemiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 4:3</span></span>

if a fox go up--The foxes were mentioned because they were known to
infest in great numbers the ruined and desolate places in the mount and
city of Zion ([Lam 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#018)).

[Nehemiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 4:4</span></span>

Hear, O our God; for we are despised--The imprecations invoked here may
seem harsh, cruel, and vindictive; but it must be remembered that
Nehemiah and his friends regarded those Samaritan leaders as enemies to
the cause of God and His people, and therefore as deserving to be
visited with heavy judgments. The prayer, therefore, is to be considered
as emanating from hearts in which neither hatred, revenge, nor any
inferior passion, but a pious and patriotic zeal for the glory of God
and the success of His cause, held the ascendant sway.

[Nehemiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 4:6</span></span>

all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof--The whole
circuit of the wall had been distributed in sections to various
companies of the people, and was completed to the half of the intended
height.

[Nehemiah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 4:7</span></span>

HE SETS A WATCH. (Neh. 4:7-23)

But . . . when Sanballat . . . heard that the walls . . . were made up,
and . . . the breaches . . . stopped--The rapid progress of the
fortifications, despite all their predictions to the contrary, goaded
the Samaritans to frenzy. So they, dreading danger from the growing
greatness of the Jews, formed a conspiracy to surprise them, demolish
their works, and disperse or intimidate the builders. The plot being
discovered, Nehemiah adopted the most energetic measures for ensuring
the common safety, as well as the uninterrupted building of the walls.
Hitherto the governor, for the sake of despatch, had set all his
attendants and guards on the work--now half of them were withdrawn to be
constantly in arms. The workmen labored with a trowel in one hand and a
sword in the other; and as, in so large a circuit, they were far removed
from each other, Nehemiah (who was night and day on the spot, and, by
his pious exhortations and example, animated the minds of his people)
kept a trumpeter by his side, so that, on any intelligence of a surprise
being brought to him, an alarm might be immediately sounded, and
assistance rendered to the most distant detachment of their brethren. By
these vigilant precautions, the counsels of the enemy were defeated, and
the work was carried on apace. God, when He has important public work to
do, never fails to raise up instruments for accomplishing it, and in the
person of Nehemiah, who, to great natural acuteness and energy added
fervent piety and heroic devotion, He provided a leader, whose high
qualities fitted him for the demands of the crisis. Nehemiah's vigilance
anticipated every difficulty, his prudent measures defeated every
obstruction, and with astonishing rapidity this Jerusalem was made again
"a city fortified."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 5](neh005)

</div>
