<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh010)  [Next](neh012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 11:1</span></span>

THE RULERS, VOLUNTARY MEN, AND EVERY TENTH MAN CHOSEN BY LOT, DWELL AT
JERUSALEM. ([Neh 11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001))

the rulers . . . dwelt at Jerusalem--That city being the metropolis of
the country, it was right and proper that the seat of government should
be there. But the exigency of the times required that special measures
should be taken to insure the residence of an adequate population for
the custody of the buildings and the defense of the city. From the
annoyances of restless and malignant enemies, who tried every means to
demolish the rising fortifications, there was some danger attending a
settlement in Jerusalem. Hence the greater part of the returned exiles,
in order to earn as well as secure the rewards of their duty, preferred
to remain in the country or the provincial towns. To remedy this state
of things, it was resolved to select every tenth man of the tribes of
Judah and Benjamin by lot, to become a permanent inhabitant of the
capital. The necessity of such an expedient commended it to the general
approval. It was the more readily submitted to because the lot was
resorted to on all the most critical conjunctures of the Jewish history,
and regarded by the people as a divine decision ([Pro
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018)). This awakened strongly the
national spirit; and patriotic volunteers came forward readily to meet
the wishes of the authorities, a service which, implying great
self-denial as well as courage, was reckoned in the circumstances of so
much importance as entitled them to the public gratitude. No wonder that
the conduct of these volunteers drew forth the tribute of public
admiration; for they sacrificed their personal safety and comfort for
the interests of the community because Jerusalem was at that time a
place against which the enemies of the Jews were directing a thousand
plots. Therefore, residence in it at such a juncture was attended with
expense and various annoyances from which a country life was entirely
free.

[Nehemiah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 11:3</span></span>

THEIR NAMES. (Neh. 11:3-36)

the chief of the province--that is, Judea. Nehemiah speaks of it, as it
then was, a small appendix of the Persian empire.

in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their
cities--The returned exiles, who had come from Babylon, repaired
generally, and by a natural impulse, to the lands and cities throughout
the country which had been anciently assigned them.

Israel--This general name, which designated the descendants of Jacob
before the unhappy division of the two kingdoms under Rehoboam, was
restored after the captivity, the Israelites being then united with the
Jews, and all traces of their former separation being obliterated.
Although the majority of the returned exiles belonged to the tribes of
Judah and Benjamin, they are here called Israel because a large number
out of all the tribes were now intermingled, and these were principally
the occupiers of the rural villages, while none but those of Judah and
Benjamin resided in Jerusalem.

the Levites--These took possession of the cities allotted to them
according as they had opportunity.

the Nethinims--A certain order of men, either Gibeonites or persons
joined with them, who were devoted to the service of God.

[Nehemiah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 11:4</span></span>

at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah--The discrepancy
that is apparent between this \[Neh. 11:4-36\] and the list formerly
given in [Ch1 9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001), arose not only
from the Jewish and Oriental practice of changing or modifying the names
of persons from a change of circumstances, but from the alterations that
must have been produced in the course of time. The catalogue in
Chronicles contains those who came with the first detachment of returned
exiles, while the list in this passage probably included also those who
returned with Ezra and Nehemiah; or it was most probably made out
afterwards, when several had died, or some, who had been inserted as
going on the journey, remained, and others came in their stead.

[Nehemiah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 11:9</span></span>

overseer--that is, "captain" or "chief."

[Nehemiah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 11:11</span></span>

the ruler of the house of God--assistant of the high priest ([Num
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#032); [Ch1
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#011); [Ch2
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#011)).

[Nehemiah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 11:16</span></span>

the oversight of the outward business of the house of God--that is,
those things which were done outside, or in the country, such as the
collecting of the provisions ([Ch1
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#029)).

[Nehemiah 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 11:17</span></span>

the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer--that is, the leader
of the choir which chanted the public praise at the time of the morning
and evening sacrifice. That service was always accompanied by some
appropriate psalm, the sacred music being selected and guided by the
person named.

[Nehemiah 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 11:22</span></span>

the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house of
God--They were selected to take charge of providing those things which
were required for the interior of the temple and its service, while to
others was committed the care of the "outward business of the house of
God" ([Neh 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#016)). This duty was very
properly assigned to the sons of Asaph; for, though they were Levites,
they did not repair in rotation to Jerusalem, as the other ministers of
religion. Being permanent residents, and employed in duties which were
comparatively light and easy, they were very competent to undertake this
charge.

[Nehemiah 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 11:23</span></span>

it was the king's commandment--It was the will of the Persian monarch in
issuing his edict that the temple service should be revived in all its
religious fulness and solemnity. As this special provision for the
singers is said to have been by the king's commandment, the order was
probably given at the request or suggestion of Ezra or Nehemiah.

[Nehemiah 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 11:24</span></span>

Pethahiah . . . was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the
people--This person was entrusted with judicial power, either for the
interest, or by the appointment, of the Persian monarch, and his duty
consisted either in adjusting cases of civil dispute, or in regulating
fiscal concerns.

[Nehemiah 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 11:25</span></span>

some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjath-arba--The whole region in
which the villages here mentioned were situated had been completely
devastated by the Chaldean invasion; and, therefore, it must be assumed,
that these villages had been rebuilt before "the children dwelt in
them."

[Nehemiah 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">neh 11:36</span></span>

And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin--Rather,
there were divisions for the Levites; that is, those who were not
resident in Jerusalem were distributed in settlements throughout the
provinces of Judah and Benjamin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 12](neh012)

</div>
