<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh005)  [Next](neh007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 6:2</span></span>

SANBALLAT PRACTISES AGAINST NEHEMIAH BY INSIDIOUS ATTEMPTS. (Neh.
6:1-19)

Then Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me--The Samaritan leaders, convinced
that they could not overcome Nehemiah by open arms, resolved to gain
advantage over him by deceit and stratagem. With this in view, under
pretext of terminating their differences in an amicable manner, they
invited him to a conference. The place of rendezvous was fixed "in some
one of the villages in the plain of Ono." "In the villages" is, Hebrew,
"in Cephirim," or "Chephirah," the name of a town in the territory of
Benjamin ([Jos 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017); [Jos
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026)). Nehemiah, however,
apprehensive of some intended mischief, prudently declined the
invitation. Though it was repeated four times, \[Nehemiah's\] uniform
answer was that his presence could not be dispensed with from the
important work in which he was engaged. This was one, though not the
only, reason. The principal ground of his refusal was that his seizure
or death at their hands would certainly put a stop to the further
progress of the fortifications.

[Nehemiah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 6:5</span></span>

Then sent Sanballat his servant . . . the fifth time with an open letter
in his hand--In Western Asia, letters, after being rolled up like a map,
are flattened to the breadth of an inch; and instead of being sealed,
they are pasted at the ends. In Eastern Asia, the Persians make up their
letters in the form of a roll about six inches long, and a bit of paper
is fastened round it with gum, and sealed with an impression of ink,
which resembles our printers' ink, but it is not so thick. Letters were,
and are still, sent to persons of distinction in a bag or purse, and
even to equals they are enclosed--the tie being made with a colored
ribbon. But to inferiors, or persons who are to be treated
contemptuously, the letters were sent open--that is, not enclosed in a
bag. Nehemiah, accustomed to the punctillious ceremonial of the Persian
court, would at once notice the want of the usual formality and know
that it was from designed disrespect. The strain of the letter was
equally insolent. It was to this effect: The fortifications with which
he was so busy were intended to strengthen his position in the view of a
meditated revolt: he had engaged prophets to incite the people to enter
into his design and support his claim to be their native king; and, to
stop the circulation of such reports, which would soon reach the court,
he was earnestly besought to come to the wished-for conference.
Nehemiah, strong in the consciousness of his own integrity, and
penetrating the purpose of this shallow artifice, replied that there
were no rumors of the kind described, that the idea of a revolt and the
stimulating addresses of hired demagogues were stories of the writer's
own invention, and that he declined now, as formerly, to leave his work.

[Nehemiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 6:10</span></span>

Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah, &c.--This man was the son
of a priest, who was an intimate and confidential friend of Nehemiah.
The young man claimed to be endowed with the gift of prophecy. Having
been secretly bribed by Sanballat, he, in his pretended capacity of
prophet, told Nehemiah that his enemies were that night to make an
attempt upon his life. He advised him, at the same time, to consult his
safety by concealing himself in the sanctuary, a crypt which, from its
sanctity, was strong and secure. But the noble-minded governor
determined at all hazards to remain at his post, and not bring discredit
on the cause of God and religion by his unworthy cowardice in leaving
the temple and city unprotected. This plot, together with a secret
collusion between the enemy and the nobles of Judah who were favorably
disposed towards the bad Samaritan in consequence of his Jewish
connections ([Neh 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#018)), the undaunted
courage and vigilance of Nehemiah were enabled, with the blessing of
God, to defeat, and the erection of the walls thus built in troublous
times ([Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)) was happily
completed ([Neh 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015)) in the brief
space of fifty-two days. So rapid execution, even supposing some parts
of the old wall standing, cannot be sufficiently accounted for, except
by the consideration that the builders labored with the ardor of
religious zeal, as men employed in the work of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 7](neh007)

</div>
