<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh001)  [Next](neh003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 2:1</span></span>

ARTAXERXES, UNDERSTANDING THE CAUSE OF NEHEMIAH'S SADNESS, SENDS HIM
WITH LETTERS AND A COMMISSION TO BUILD AGAIN THE WALLS OF JERUSALEM.
(Neh. 2:1-20)

it came to pass in the month Nisan--This was nearly four months after he
had learned the desolate and ruinous state of Jerusalem ([Neh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)). The reasons for so long a delay
cannot be ascertained.

I took up the wine, and gave it unto the king--XENOPHON has particularly
remarked about the polished and graceful manner in which the cupbearers
of the Median, and consequently the Persian, monarchs performed their
duty of presenting the wine to their royal master. Having washed the cup
in the king's presence and poured into their left hand a little of the
wine, which they drank in his presence, they then handed the cup to him,
not grasped, but lightly held with the tips of their thumb and fingers.
This description has received some curious illustrations from the
monuments of Assyria and Persia, on which the cupbearers are frequently
represented in the act of handing wine to the king.

[Nehemiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 2:2</span></span>

the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad?--It was deemed highly
unbecoming to appear in the royal presence with any weeds or signs of
sorrow ([Est 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002)); and hence it was no
wonder that the king was struck with the dejected air of his cupbearer,
while that attendant, on his part, felt his agitation increased by his
deep anxiety about the issue of the conversation so abruptly begun. But
the piety and intense earnestness of the man immediately restored
\[Nehemiah\] to calm self-possession and enabled him to communicate,
first, the cause of his sadness ([Neh
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003)), and next, the patriotic wish of
his heart to be the honored instrument of reviving the ancient glory of
the city of his fathers.

[Nehemiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 2:6</span></span>

the queen also sitting by him--As the Persian monarchs did not admit
their wives to be present at their state festivals, this must have been
a private occasion. The queen referred to was probably Esther, whose
presence would tend greatly to embolden Nehemiah in stating his request;
and through her influence, powerfully exerted it may be supposed, also
by her sympathy with the patriotic design, his petition was granted, to
go as deputy governor of Judea, accompanied by a military guard, and
invested with full powers to obtain materials for the building in
Jerusalem, as well as to get all requisite aid in promoting his
enterprise.

I set him a time--Considering the great despatch made in raising the
walls, it is probable that this leave of absence was limited at first to
a year or six months, after which he returned to his duties in Shushan.
The circumstance of fixing a set time for his return, as well as
entrusting so important a work as the refortification of Jerusalem to
his care, proves the high favor and confidence Nehemiah enjoyed at the
Persian court, and the great estimation in which his services were held.
At a later period he received a new commission for the better settlement
of the affairs of Judea and remained governor of that province for
twelve years ([Neh 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)).

[Nehemiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 2:7</span></span>

letters be given me to the governors beyond the river--The Persian
empire at this time was of vast extent, reaching from the Indus to the
Mediterranean. The Euphrates was considered as naturally dividing it
into two parts, eastern and western (see on [Ezr
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003)).

[Nehemiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 2:8</span></span>

according to the good hand of my God upon me--The piety of Nehemiah
appears in every circumstance. The conception of his patriotic design,
the favorable disposition of the king, and the success of the
undertaking are all ascribed to God.

[Nehemiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 2:10</span></span>

Sanballat the Horonite--Horonaim being a town in Moab, this person, it
is probable, was a Moabite.

Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite--The term used indicates him to have
been a freed slave, elevated to some official dignity. These were
district magistrates under the government of the satrap of Syria; and
they seem to have been leaders of the Samaritan faction.

[Nehemiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 2:11</span></span>

So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days--Deeply affected with
the desolations of Jerusalem, and uncertain what course to follow, he
remained three days before informing any one of the object of his
mission \[[Neh 2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#017)\]. At the end
of the third day, accompanied with a few attendants, he made, under
covert of night, a secret survey of the walls and gates \[[Neh
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013)\].

[Nehemiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 2:13</span></span>

I went out by night by the gate of the valley--that is, the Jaffa gate,
near the tower of Hippicus.

even before the dragon well--that is, fountain on the opposite side of
the valley.

and to the dung port--the gate on the east of the city, through which
there ran a common sewer to the brook Kedron and the valley of Hinnom.

[Nehemiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 2:14</span></span>

Then--that is, after having passed through the gate of the Essenes.

I went on to the gate of the fountain--that is, Siloah, from which
turning round the fount of Ophel.

to the king's pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under
me to pass--that is, by the sides of this pool (Solomon's) there being
water in the pool, and too much rubbish about it to permit the passage
of the beast.

[Nehemiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 2:15</span></span>

Then went I up . . . by the brook--that is, Kedron.

and entered by the gate of the valley, and so returned--the gate leading
to the valley of Jehoshaphat, east of the city. He went out by this
gate, and having made the circuit of the city, went in by it again
\[BARCLAY, City of the Great King\].

[Nehemiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 2:16</span></span>

the rulers knew not--The following day, having assembled the elders,
Nehemiah produced his commission and exhorted them to assist in the
work. The sight of his credentials, and the animating strain of his
address and example, so revived their drooping spirits that they
resolved immediately to commence the building, which they did, despite
the bitter taunts and scoffing ridicule of some influential men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 3](neh003)

</div>
