<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

[Numbers 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 16:1</span></span>

THE REBELLION OF KORAH. (Num. 16:1-30)

Now Korah, the son of Izhar--Izhar, brother of Amram ([Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018)), was the second son of Kohath,
and for some reason unrecorded he had been supplanted by a descendant of
the fourth son of Kohath, who was appointed prince or chief of the
Kohathites ([Num 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030)). Discontent
with the preferment over him of a younger relative was probably the
originating cause of this seditious movement on the part of Korah.

Dathan and Abiram, . . . and On--These were confederate leaders in the
rebellion, but On seems to have afterwards withdrawn from the conspiracy
\[compare [Num 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012), [Num
16:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#024), [Num
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027); [Num
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#009); [Deu
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#006); [Psa
106:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017)\].

took men--The latter mentioned individuals, being all sons of Reuben,
the eldest of Jacob's family, had been stimulated to this insurrection
on the pretext that Moses had, by an arbitrary arrangement, taken away
the right of primogeniture, which had vested the hereditary dignity of
the priesthood in the first-born of every family, with a view of
transferring the hereditary exercise of the sacred functions to a
particular branch of his own house; and that this gross instance of
partiality to his own relations, to the permanent detriment of others,
was a sufficient ground for refusing allegiance to his government. In
addition to this grievance, another cause of jealousy and
dissatisfaction that rankled in the breasts of the Reubenites was the
advancement of Judah to the leadership among the tribes. These
malcontents had been incited by the artful representations of Korah
([Jde 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011)), with whom the position of
their camp on the south side afforded them facilities of frequent
intercourse. In addition to his feeling of personal wrongs, Korah
participated in their desire (if he did not originate the attempt) to
recover their lost rights of primogeniture. When the conspiracy was
ripe, they openly and boldly declared its object, and at the head of two
hundred fifty princes, charged Moses with an ambitious and unwarrantable
usurpation of authority, especially in the appropriation of the
priesthood, for they disputed the claim of Aaron also to pre-eminence
\[[Num 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003)\].

[Numbers 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 16:3</span></span>

they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron--The
assemblage seems to have been composed of the whole band of
conspirators; and they grounded their complaint on the fact that the
whole people, being separated to the divine service ([Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), were equally qualified to
present offerings on the altar, and that God, being graciously, present
among them by the tabernacle and the cloud, evinced His readiness to
receive sacrifices from the hand of any others as well as from theirs.

[Numbers 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 16:4</span></span>

when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face--This attitude of prostration
indicated not only his humble and earnest desire that God would
interpose to free him from the false and odious imputation, but also his
strong sense of the daring sin involved in this proceeding. Whatever
feelings may be entertained respecting Aaron, who had formerly headed a
sedition himself \[[Num 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)\], it is
impossible not to sympathize with Moses in this difficult emergency. But
he was a devout man, and the prudential course he adopted was probably
the dictate of that heavenly wisdom with which, in answer to his
prayers, he was endowed.

[Numbers 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 16:5</span></span>

he spake unto Korah and unto all his company--They were first addressed,
not only because they were a party headed by his own cousin and Moses
might hope to have more influence in that quarter, but because they were
stationed near the tabernacle; and especially because an expostulation
was the more weighty coming from him who was a Levite himself, and who
was excluded along with his family from the priesthood. But to bring the
matter to an issue, he proposed a test which would afford a decisive
evidence of the divine appointment.

Even to-morrow--literally, "in the morning," the usual time of meeting
in the East for the settlement of public affairs.

the Lord will show who are his, . . . even him whom he hath chosen will
he cause to come near unto him--that is, will bear attestation to his
ministry by some visible or miraculous token of His approval.

[Numbers 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 16:6</span></span>

Take your censers, Korah, and all his company, &c.--that is, since you
aspire to the priesthood, then go, perform the highest function of the
office--that of offering incense; and if you are accepted well. How
magnanimous the conduct of Moses, who was now as willing that God's
people should be priests, as formerly that they should be prophets ([Num
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#029)). But he warned them that they
were making a perilous experiment.

[Numbers 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 16:12</span></span>

Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram--in a separate interview, the
ground of their mutiny being different; for while Korah murmured against
the exclusive appropriation of the priesthood to Aaron and his family,
they were opposed to the supremacy of Moses in civil power. They refused
to obey the summons; and their refusal was grounded on the plausible
pretext that their stay in the desert was prolonged for some secret and
selfish purposes of the leader, who was conducting them like blind men
wherever it suited him.

[Numbers 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 16:15</span></span>

Moses was very wroth--Though the meekest of all men \[[Num
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)\], he could not restrain his
indignation at these unjust and groundless charges; and the highly
excited state of his feeling was evinced by the utterance of a brief
exclamation in the mixed form of a prayer and an impassioned assertion
of his integrity. (Compare [Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)).

and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their offering--He calls it
their offering, because, though it was to be offered by Korah and his
Levitical associates, it was the united appeal of all the mutineers for
deciding the contested claims of Moses and Aaron.

[Numbers 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 16:16</span></span>

Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the Lord--that
is, at "the door of the tabernacle" ([Num
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#018)), that the assembled people
might witness the experiment and be properly impressed by the issue.

[Numbers 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 16:17</span></span>

two hundred fifty censers--probably the small platters, common in
Egyptian families, where incense was offered to household deities and
which had been among the precious things borrowed at their departure
\[[Exo 12:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035)\].

[Numbers 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 16:20</span></span>

the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, Separate yourselves from
among this congregation--Curiosity to witness the exciting spectacle
attracted a vast concourse of the people, and it would seem that the
popular mind had been incited to evil by the clamors of the mutineers
against Moses and Aaron. There was something in their behavior very
offensive to God; for after His glory had appeared--as at the
installation of Aaron ([Lev 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023)), so
now for his confirmation in the sacred office--He bade Moses and Aaron
withdraw from the assembly "that He might consume them in a moment."

[Numbers 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 16:22</span></span>

they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of
all flesh--The benevolent importunity of their prayer was the more
remarkable that the intercession was made for their enemies.

[Numbers 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 16:24</span></span>

Speak unto the congregation, . . . Get you up from about the
tabernacle--Moses was attended in the execution of this mission by the
elders. The united and urgent entreaties of so many dignified personages
produced the desired effect of convincing the people of their crime, and
of withdrawing them from the company of men who were doomed to
destruction, lest, being partakers of their sins, they should perish
along with them.

[Numbers 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 16:27</span></span>

the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram--Korah being a Kohathite,
his tent could not have been in the Reubenite camp, and it does not
appear that he himself was on the spot where Dathan and Abiram stood
with their families. Their attitude of defiance indicated their daring
and impenitent character, equally regardless of God and man.

[Numbers 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 16:28</span></span>

Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to do all
these works--The awful catastrophe of the earthquake which, as predicted
by Moses, swallowed up those impious rebels in a living tomb, gave the
divine attestation to the mission of Moses and struck the spectators
with solemn awe.

[Numbers 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 16:35</span></span>

there came out a fire from the Lord--that is, from the cloud. This seems
to describe the destruction of Korah and those Levites who with him
aspired to the functions of the priesthood. (See [Num
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011), [Num
26:58](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#058); [Ch1
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#022), [Ch1
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#037)).

[Numbers 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 16:37</span></span>

Speak unto Eleazar--He was selected lest the high priest might contract
defilement from going among the dead carcasses.

[Numbers 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 16:39</span></span>

the brazen censers . . . made broad plates to be a memorial--The altar
of burnt offerings, being made of wood and covered with brass, this
additional covering of broad plates not only rendered it doubly secure
against the fire, but served as a warning beacon to deter all from
future invasions of the priesthood.

[Numbers 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 16:41</span></span>

the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying,
Ye have killed the people of the Lord--What a strange exhibition of
popular prejudice and passion--to blame the leaders for saving the
rebels! Yet Moses and Aaron interceded for the people--the high priest
perilling his own life in doing good to that perverse race.

[Numbers 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 16:48</span></span>

he stood between the living and the dead--The plague seems to have begun
in the extremities of the camp. Aaron, in this remarkable act, was a
type of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017)

</div>
