<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num031)  [Next](num033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

[Numbers 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 32:1</span></span>

THE REUBENITES AND GADITES ASK FOR AN INHERITANCE. (Num. 32:1-42)

the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead--A complete conquest had been
made of the country east of the Jordan, comprising "the land of Jazer,"
which formed the southern district between the Arnon and Jabbok and "the
land of Gilead," the middle region between the Jabbok and Jarmouk, or
Hieromax, including Bashan, which lay on the north of that river. The
whole of this region is now called the Belka. It has always been famous
for its rich and extensive pastures, and it is still the favorite resort
of the Bedouin shepherds, who frequently contend for securing to their
immense flocks the benefit of its luxuriant vegetation. In the camp of
ancient Israel, Reuben and Gad were pre-eminently pastoral; and as these
two tribes, being placed under the same standard, had frequent
opportunities of conversing and arranging about their common concerns,
they united in preferring a request that the trans-jordanic region, so
well suited to the habits of a pastoral people, might be assigned to
them.

[Numbers 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 32:6</span></span>

Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shall
your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here--Their language was
ambiguous; and Moses, suspicious that this proposal was an act of
unbelief, a scheme of self-policy and indolence to escape the perils of
warfare and live in ease and safety, addressed to them a reproachful and
passionate remonstrance. Whether they had really meditated such a
withdrawal from all share in the war of invasion, or the effect of their
leader's expostulation was to drive them from their original purpose,
they now, in answer to his impressive appeal, declared it to be their
sincere intention to co-operate with their brethren; but, if so, they
ought to have been more explicit at first.

[Numbers 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 32:16</span></span>

they came near--The narrative gives a picturesque description of this
scene. The suppliants had shrunk back, dreading from the undisguised
emotions of their leader that their request would be refused. But,
perceiving, from the tenor of his discourse, that his objection was
grounded only on the supposition that they would not cross the Jordan to
assist their brethren, they became emboldened to approach him with
assurances of their goodwill.

We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little
ones--that is, rebuild, repair. It would have been impossible within two
months to found new cities, or even to reconstruct those which had been
razed to the ground. Those cities of the Amorites were not absolutely
demolished, and they probably consisted only of mud-built, or dry-stone
walls.

[Numbers 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 32:17</span></span>

and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the
inhabitants of the land--There was good policy in leaving a sufficient
force to protect the conquered region lest the enemy should attempt
reprisals; and as only forty thousand of the Reubenites and the Gadites,
and a half of Manasseh, passed over the Jordan ([Jos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013)), there were left for the
security of the new possessions 70,580 men, besides women and children
under twenty years (compare [Num 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#007),
[Num 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#018), [Num
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#034)).

We ourselves will go ready armed--that is, all of us in a collective
body, or as many as may be deemed necessary, while the rest of our
number shall remain at home to provide for the sustenance and secure the
protection of our families and flocks. (See on [Jos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012)).

[Numbers 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 32:20</span></span>

Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing--with sincerity and zeal.

go before the Lord to war--The phrase was used in allusion to the order
of march in which the tribes of Reuben and Gad immediately preceded the
ark (see on Num. 2:10-31), or to the passage over the Jordan, in which
the ark stood in mid-channel, while all the tribes marched by in
succession ([Jos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#004)), of course
including those of Reuben and Gad, so that, literally, they passed over
before the Lord and before the rest of Israel ([Jos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013)). Perhaps, however, the phrase is
used merely in a general sense to denote their marching on an
expedition, the purpose of which was blessed with the presence, and
destined to promote the glory, of God. The displeasure which Moses had
felt on the first mention of their proposal had disappeared on the
strength of their solemn assurances. But a lurking suspicion of their
motives seems still to have been lingering in his mind--he continued to
speak to them in an admonitory strain; and he concluded by warning them
that in case of their failing to redeem their pledge, the judgments of
an offended God would assuredly fall upon them. This emphatic caution
against such an eventuality throws a strong doubt on the honesty of
their first intentions; and yet, whether through the opposing attitude
or the strong invectives of Moses they had been brought to a better
state of mind, their final reply showed that now all was right.

[Numbers 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 32:28</span></span>

concerning them Moses commanded--The arrangement itself, as well as the
express terms on which he assented to it, was announced by the leader to
the public authorities. The pastoral country the two tribes had desired
was to be granted them on condition that they would lend their aid to
their brethren in the approaching invasion of Canaan. If they refused or
failed to perform their promise, those possessions should be forfeited,
and they themselves compelled to go across the Jordan and fight for a
settlement like the rest of their brethren.

[Numbers 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 32:33</span></span>

half the tribe of Manasseh--It is nowhere explained in the record how
they were incorporated with the two tribes, or what broke this great
tribe into two parts, of which one was left to follow the fortunes of
its brethren in the settled life of the western hills, while the other
was allowed to wander as a nomadic tribe over the pasture lands of
Gilead and Bashan. They are not mentioned as accompanying Reuben and Gad
in their application to Moses \[[Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)\]; neither were they included in
his first directions ([Num 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)); but
as they also were a people addicted to pastoral pursuits and possessed
as immense flocks as the other two, Moses invited the half of them to
remain, in consequence, probably, of finding that this region was more
than sufficient for the pastoral wants of the others, and he may have
given them the preference, as some have conjectured, for their valorous
conduct in the contests with the Amorites (compare [Num
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039), with [Jos
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)).

[Numbers 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 32:34</span></span>

And the children of Gad built--(See on [Num
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)).

Dibon--identified with Dheban, now in ruins, an hour's distance from the
Arnon (Mojeb).

Ataroth (Hebrew, "crowns")--There are several towns so called in
Scripture, but this one in the tribe of Gad has not been identified.

Aroer--now Arair, standing on a precipice on the north bank of the
Arnon.

[Numbers 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 32:35</span></span>

Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, &c.--Jaazer, near a famed fountain, Ain
Hazier, the waters of which flow into Wady Schaib, about fifteen miles
from Hesbon. Beth-nimrah, now Nimrin; Heshbon, now Hesban; Elealeh
(Hebrew, "the high"), now Elaal; Kirjathaim (Hebrew, "the double city");
Nebo, now Neba, near the mountain of that name; Baal-meon, now Myoun, in
ruins, where was a temple of Baal ([Jos
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017); [Jer
48:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#023)); Shibmah, or Shebam ([Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003)), near Heshbon, famous for vines
([Isa 16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009); [Jer
48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032)).

[Numbers 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 32:38</span></span>

(their names being changed)--either because it was the general custom of
conquerors to do so; or, rather, because from the prohibition to mention
the names of other gods ([Exo 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#013)),
as Nebo and Baal were, it was expedient on the first settlement of the
Israelites to obliterate all remembrance of those idols. (See [Jos
13:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017)).

[Numbers 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 32:39</span></span>

Gilead--now Jelud.

[Numbers 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 32:41</span></span>

Havoth-jair--that is, "tent-villages." Jair, who captured them, was a
descendant of Manasseh on his mother's side ([Ch1
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#021)).

[Numbers 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 32:42</span></span>

Nobah--also a distinguished person connected with the eastern branch of
the tribe of Manasseh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 33](num033)

</div>
