<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num002)  [Next](num004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001)

[Numbers 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 3:1</span></span>

THE LEVITES' SERVICE. (Num. 3:1-51)

These . . . are the generations of Aaron and Moses, &c.--This chapter
contains an account of their families; and although that of Moses is not
detailed like his brother's, his children are included under the general
designation of the Amramites ([Num
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#027)), a term which comprehends all
the descendants of their common father Amram. The reason why the family
of Moses was so undistinguished in this record is that they were in the
private ranks of the Levites, the dignity of the priesthood being
conferred exclusively on the posterity of Aaron; and hence, as the
sacerdotal order is the subject of this chapter, Aaron, contrary to the
usual style of the sacred history, is mentioned before Moses.

in the day that the Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai--This is added,
because at the date of the following record the family of Aaron was
unbroken.

[Numbers 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 3:2</span></span>

And these are the names of the sons of Aaron--All the sons of Aaron,
four in number, were consecrated to minister in the priest's office. The
two oldest enjoyed but a brief term of office ([Lev
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001); [Num
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#004); [Num
26:61](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#061)); but Eleazar and Ithamar, the
other two, were dutiful, and performed the sacred service during the
lifetime of their father, as his assistants, and under his
superintendence.

[Numbers 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 3:5</span></span>

Bring the tribe of Levi near--The Hebrew word "bring near" is a
sacrificial term, denoting the presentation of an offering to God; and
the use of the word, therefore, in connection with the Levites,
signifies that they were devoted as an offering to the sanctuary, no
longer to be employed in any common offices. They were subordinate to
the priests, who alone enjoyed the privilege of entering the holy place;
but they were employed in discharging many of the humbler duties which
belonged to the sanctuary, as well as in various offices of great
utility and importance to the religion and morals of the people.

[Numbers 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 3:9</span></span>

they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel, &c.--The
priests hold the place of God, and the Levites are the servants of God
in the obedience they render to the priests.

[Numbers 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 3:11</span></span>

I have taken the Levites, &c.--The consecration of this tribe did not
originate in the legislative wisdom of Moses, but in the special
appointment of God, who chose them as substitutes for the first-born. By
an appointment made in memory of the last solemn judgment on Egypt (from
which the Israelitish households were miraculously exempt) all the
first-born were consecrated to God ([Exo
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012); [Exo
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)), who thus, under peculiar
circumstances, seemed to adopt the patriarchal usage of appointing the
oldest to act as the priest of the family. But the privilege of
redemption that was allowed the first-born opened the way for a change;
and accordingly, on the full organization of the Mosaic economy, the
administration of sacred things formerly committed to the first-born was
transferred from them to the Levites, who received that honor partly as
a tribute to Moses and Aaron, partly because this tribe had
distinguished themselves by their zeal in the affair of the golden calf
([Exo 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029)), and also because, being
the smallest of the tribes, they could ill find suitable employment and
support in the work. (See on [Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)). The designation of a special
class for the sacred offices of religion was a wise arrangement; for, on
their settlement in Canaan, the people would be so occupied that they
might not be at leisure to wait on the service of the sanctuary, and
sacred things might, from various causes, fall into neglect. But the
appointment of an entire tribe to the divine service ensured the regular
performance of the rites of religion. The subsequent portion of the
chapter relates to the formal substitution of this tribe.

I am the Lord--that is, I decree it to be so; and being possessed of
sovereign authority, I expect full obedience.

[Numbers 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 3:14</span></span>

Number the children of Levi--They were numbered as well as the other
tribes; but the enumeration was made on a different principle--for while
in the other tribes the number of males was calculated from twenty years
and upward \[[Num 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003)\], in that of
Levi they were counted "from a month old and upward." The reason for the
distinction is obvious. In the other tribes the survey was made for
purposes of war \[[Num 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003)\], from
which the Levites were totally exempt. But the Levites were appointed to
a work on which they entered as soon as they were capable of
instruction. They are mentioned under the names of Gershon, Kohath, and
Merari, sons of Levi, and chiefs or ancestral heads of three
subdivisions into which this tribe was distributed. Their duties were to
assist in the conveyance of the tabernacle when the people were removing
the various encampments, and to form its guard while stationary--the
Gershonites being stationed on the west, the Kohathites on the south,
and the families of Merari on the north. The Kohathites had the
principal place about the tabernacle, and charge of the most precious
and sacred things--a distinction with which they were honored, probably,
because the Aaronic family belonged to this division of the Levitical
tribe. The Gershonites, being the oldest, had the next honorable post
assigned them, while the burden of the drudgery was thrown on the
division of Merari.

[Numbers 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 3:32</span></span>

chief--rather, "chiefs" of the Levites. Three persons are mentioned as
chiefs of these respective divisions \[[Num
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#024), [Num
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030), [Num
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#035)\]. And Eleazar presided over
them; whence he is called "the second priest" ([Kg2
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018)); and in the case of the high
priest's absence from illness or other necessary occasions, he performed
the duties ([Kg1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#004)).

[Numbers 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 3:38</span></span>

those that encamp, &c.--That being the entrance side, it was the post of
honor, and consequently reserved to Moses and the priestly family. But
the sons of Moses had no station here.

[Numbers 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 3:39</span></span>

twenty and two thousand--The result of this census, though made on
conditions most advantageous to Levi, proved it to be by far the
smallest in Israel. The separate numbers stated in [Num
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#022), [Num
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#028), [Num
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#034), when added together, amount to
twenty-two thousand three hundred. The omission of the three hundred is
variously accounted for--by some, because they might be first-born who
were already devoted to God and could not be counted as substitutes; and
by others, because in Scripture style, the sum is reckoned in round
numbers. The most probable conjecture is, that as Hebrew letters are
employed for figures, one letter was, in the course of transcription,
taken for another of like form but smaller value.

[Numbers 3:40](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 3:40</span></span>

Number all the first-born of the males of the children of Israel,
&c.--The principle on which the enumeration of the Levites had been made
was now to be applied to the other tribes. The number of their male
children, from a month old and upward, was to be reckoned, in order that
a comparison might be instituted with that of the Levites, for the
formal adoption of the latter as substitutes for the first-born. The
Levites, amounting to twenty-two thousand, were given in exchange for an
equal number of the first-born from the other tribes, leaving an excess
of two hundred seventy-three; and as there were no substitutes for
these, they were redeemed at the rate of five shekels for each ([Num
18:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015)). Every Israelite would
naturally wish that his son might be redeemed by a Levite without the
payment of this tax, and yet some would have to incur the expense, for
there were not Levites enough to make an equal exchange. Jewish writers
say the matter was determined by lot, in this manner: Moses put into an
urn twenty-two thousand pieces of parchment, on each of which he wrote
"a son of Levi," and two hundred seventy-three more, containing the
words, "five shekels." These being shaken, he ordered each of the
first-born to put in his hand and take out a slip. If it contained the
first inscription, the boy was redeemed by a Levite; if the latter, the
parent had to pay. The ransom-money, which, reckoning the shekel at half
a crown, would amount to 12s. 6d. each, was appropriated to the use of
the sanctuary. The excess of the general over the Levitical first-born
is so small, that the only way of accounting for it is, by supposing
those first-born only were counted as were males remaining in their
parents' household, or that those first-born only were numbered which
had been born since the departure from Egypt, when God claimed all the
first-born as his special property.

[Numbers 3:41](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 3:41</span></span>

the cattle of the Levites--These, which they kept to graze on the glebes
and meadows in the suburbs of their cities, to supply their families
with dairy produce and animal food, were also taken as an equivalent for
all the firstlings of the cattle which the Israelites at that time
possessed. In consequence of this exchange the firstlings were not
brought then, as afterwards, to the altar and the priests.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 4](num004)

</div>
