<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num001)  [Next](num003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001)

[Numbers 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 2:2</span></span>

THE ORDER OF THE TRIBES IN THEIR TENTS. (Num. 2:1-34)

Every man . . . shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of
their father's house--Standards were visible signs of a certain
recognized form for directing the movements of large bodies of people.
As the Israelites were commanded to encamp "each by his own standard,
with the ensign of their father's house," the direction has been
considered as implying that they possessed three varieties: (1) the
great tribal standards, which served as rallying points for the twelve
large clans of the people; (2) the standards of the subdivided portions;
and, (3) those of families or houses. The latter must have been
absolutely necessary, as one ensign only for a tribe would not have been
visible at the extremities of so large a body. We possess no authentic
information as to their forms, material, colors, and devices. But it is
probable that they might bear some resemblance to those of Egypt, only
stripped of any idolatrous symbols. These were of an umbrella or a
fanlike form, made of ostrich feathers, shawls, &c., lifted on the
points of long poles, which were borne, either like the sacred central
one, on a car, or on men's shoulders, while others might be like the
beacon lights which are set on poles by Eastern pilgrims at night.
Jewish writers say that the standards of the Hebrew tribes were symbols
borrowed from the prophetic blessing of Jacob--Judah's being a lion,
Benjamin's a wolf, &c. \[Gen. 49:3-24\]; and that the ensigns or banners
were distinguished by their colors--the colors of each tribe being the
same as that of the precious stone representing that tribe in the
breastplate of the high priest \[[Exo
28:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017)\].

far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch--that
is, "over against," at a reverential distance. The place of every tribe
is successively and specifically described because each had a certain
part assigned both in the order of march and the disposition of the
encampment.

[Numbers 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 2:3</span></span>

on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard
of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies--Judah, placed at the
head of a camp composed of three tribes rallying under its standard, was
said to have combined the united colors in the high priest's
breastplate, but called by the name of Judah. They were appointed to
occupy the east side and to take the lead in the march, which, for the
most part, was in an easterly direction.

Nahshon--or Naasson ([Mat 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#004); [Luk
3:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#032)).

shall be captain--It appears that the twelve men who were called to
superintend the census were also appointed to be the captains of their
respective tribes--a dignity which they owed probably to the
circumstances, formerly noticed, of their holding the hereditary office
of head or "prince."

[Numbers 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 2:5</span></span>

those that pitch next unto him--that is, on the one side.

[Numbers 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 2:7</span></span>

Then the tribe of Zebulun--on the other side. While Judah's tribe was
the most numerous, those of Issachar and Zebulun were also very
numerous; so that the association of those three tribes formed a strong
and imposing van.

[Numbers 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 2:10</span></span>

On the south side the standard of the camp of Reuben--The description
given of the position of Reuben and his attendant tribes on the south,
of Ephraim and his associates on the west, of Dan and his confederates
on the north, with that of Judah on the east, suggests the idea of a
square or quadrangle, which, allowing one square cubit to each soldier
while remaining close in the ranks, has been computed to extend over an
area of somewhat more than twelve square miles. But into our
calculations of the occupied space must be taken not only the fighting
men, whose numbers are here given, but also the families, tents, and
baggage. The tabernacle or sacred tent of their Divine King, with the
camp of the Levites around it (see on [Num
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#038)), formed the center, as does the
chief's in the encampment of all nomad people. In marching, this order
was adhered to, with some necessary variations. Judah led the way,
followed, it is most probable, by Issachar and Zebulun \[[Num
10:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014)\]. Reuben, Simeon, and Gad
formed the second great division \[[Num
10:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#018)\]. They were followed by the
central company, composed of the Levites, bearing the tabernacle \[[Num
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#021)\]. Then the third and posterior
squadron consisted of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin \[[Num
10:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#022)\], while the hindmost place
was assigned to Dan, Asher, and Naphtali \[[Num
10:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#025)\]. Thus Judah's, which was
the most numerous, formed the van: and Dan's, which was the next in
force, brought up the rear; while Reuben's and Ephraim's, with the
tribes associated with them respectively, being the smallest and
weakest, were placed in the center. (See on [Num
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#013)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 3](num003)

</div>
