<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Obadiah Index](oba)  
  [Previous](oba000)  [Next](jon000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

[Obadiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">oba 1:1</span></span>

DOOM OF EDOM FOR CRUELTY TO JUDAH, EDOM'S BROTHER; RESTORATION OF THE
JEWS. (Oba. 1:1-21)

Obadiah--that is, servant of Jehovah; same as Abdeel and Arabic
Abd-allah.

We--I and my people.

heard-- ().

and an ambassador is sent--Yea, an ambassador is already sent, namely,
an angel, to stir up the Assyrians (and afterwards the Chaldeans)
against Edom. The result of the ambassador's message on the heathen is,
they simultaneously exclaim, "Arise ye, and let us (with united
strength) rise," &c. quotes this.

[Obadiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">oba 1:2</span></span>

I have made thee small--Thy reduction to insignificance is as sure as if
it were already accomplished; therefore the past tense is used
\[MAURER\]. Edom then extended from Dedan of Arabia to Bozrah in the
north (, ). CALVIN explains it, "Whereas thou wast made by Me an
insignificant people, why art thou so proud" ()? But if so, why should
the heathen peoples be needed to subdue one so insignificant? , confirms
MAURER'S view.

[Obadiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">oba 1:3</span></span>

clefts of . . . rock-- (; ). The cities of Edom, and among them Petra
(Hebrew, sela, meaning "rock," , Margin), the capital, in the Wady Musa,
consisted of houses mostly cut in the rocks.

[Obadiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">oba 1:4</span></span>

exalt thyself--or supply from the second clause, "thy nest" \[MAURER\]
(Compare ; ; ).

set . . . nest among . . . stars--namely, on the loftiest hills which
seem to reach the very stars. Edom is a type of Antichrist (; ; ).

thence will I bring thee down--in spite of thy boast (), "Who shall
bring me down?"

[Obadiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">oba 1:5</span></span>

The spoliation which thou shalt suffer shall not be such as that which
thieves cause, bad as that is, for these when they have seized enough,
or all they can get in a hurry, leave the rest--nor such as
grape-gatherers cause in a vineyard, for they, when they have gathered
most of the grapes, leave gleanings behind--but it shall be utter, so as
to leave thee nothing. The exclamation, "How art thou cut off!" bursting
in amidst the words of the image, marks strongly excited feeling. The
contrast between Edom where no gleanings shall be left, and Israel where
at the worst a gleaning is left (; ), is striking.

[Obadiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">oba 1:6</span></span>

How are the things of Esau searched out!--by hostile soldiers seeking
booty. Compare with here, .

hidden things--or "places." Edom abounded in such hiding-places, as
caves, clefts in the rock, &c. None of these would be left unexplored by
the foe.

[Obadiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">oba 1:7</span></span>

Men of thy confederacy--that is, thy confederates.

brought thee . . . to the border--that is, when Idumean ambassadors
shall go to confederate states seeking aid, these latter shall conduct
them with due ceremony to their border, giving them empty compliments,
but not the aid required \[DRUSIUS\]. This view agrees with the context,
which speaks of false friends deceiving Edom: that is, failing to give
help in need (compare ). CALVIN translates, "have driven," that is,
shall drive thee; shall help to drive thee to thy border on thy way into
captivity in foreign lands.

the men that were at peace with thee--literally, "the men of thy peace."
Compare ; , Margin, where also the same formula occurs, "prevailed
against thee."

they that eat thy bread--the poorer tribes of the desert who subsisted
on the bounty of Edom. Compare again , which seems to have been before
Obadiah's mind, as his words were before Jeremiah's.

have laid a wound under thee--"laid" implies that their intimacy was
used as a SNARE laid with a view to wound; also, these guest friends of
Edom, instead of the cushions ordinarily laid under guests at table,
laid snares to wound, that is, had a secret understanding with Edom's
foe for that purpose. MAURER translates, "a snare." But English Version
agrees with the Hebrew, which means, literally, "a bandage for a wound."

none understanding--none of the wisdom for which Edom was famed (see )
to extricate him from his perilous position.

in him--instead of "in thee." The change implies the alienation of God
from Edom: Edom has so estranged himself from God, that He speaks now of
him, not to him.

[Obadiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">oba 1:8</span></span>

(; compare ; ; ).

in that day . . . even destroy--Heretofore Edom, through its intercourse
with Babylon and Egypt, and from its means of information through the
many caravans passing to and fro between Europe and India, has been
famed for knowledge; but in that day at last ("even") I will destroy its
wise men.

mount of Esau--that is, Idumea, which was a mountainous region.

[Obadiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">oba 1:9</span></span>

cut off by slaughter--MAURER translates, "on account of the slaughter,"
namely, that inflicted on Judea by Edom (compare ). The Septuagint,
Syriac, and Vulgate connect these words with , "for the slaughter, for
the violence (of which thou art guilty) against thy brother Jacob."
English Version, "cut off by slaughter" (that is, an utter cutting off),
answers well to "cut off for ever" (). However, the arrangement of the
Septuagint gives a better parallelism in . "For the slaughter" (1) being
balanced in just retribution by "thou shalt be cut off for ever" (4); as
"For thy violence (not so bad as slaughter) against thy brother Jacob"
(2) is balanced by "shame (not so bad as being cut off) shall cover
thee" (3). Shame and extinction shall repay violence and slaughter (; ).
Compare as to Edom's violence, ; ; .

[Obadiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">oba 1:10</span></span>

against thy brother--This aggravates the sin of Esau, that it was
against him who was his brother by birth and by circumcision. The
posterity of Esau followed in the steps of their father's hatred to
Jacob by violence against Jacob's seed ().

Jacob--not merely his own brother, but his twin brother; hence the name
Jacob, not Israel, is here put emphatically. Compare for the opposite
feeling which Jacob's seed was commanded to entertain towards Edom's.

shame . . . cover thee-- (; ).

for ever-- (; ; ). Idumea, as a nation, should be "cut off for ever,"
though the land should be again inhabited.

[Obadiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">oba 1:11</span></span>

thou stoodest on the other side--in an attitude of hostility, rather
than the sympathy which became a brother, feasting thine eyes (see )
with the misery of Jacob, and eagerly watching for his destruction. So
Messiah, the antitype to Jerusalem, abandoned by His kinsmen ().

strangers--the Philistines, Arabians in the reign of Jehoram, &c. ();
the Syrians in the reign of Joash of Judah (); the Chaldeans (2Ch.
36:1-23).

carried . . . captive his forces--his "host" (): the multitude of
Jerusalem's inhabitants.

cast lots upon Jerusalem-- (). So Messiah, Jerusalem's antitype, had
lots cast for His only earthly possessions ().

[Obadiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">oba 1:12</span></span>

looked on--with malignant pleasure, and a brutal stare. So the
antitypes, Messiah's foes (). MAURER translates, as the Margin, "thou
shouldest not look" any more. English Version agrees with the context
better.

the day of thy brother--his day of calamity.

became a stranger--that is, was banished as an alien from his own land.
God sends heavy calamities on those who rejoice in the calamities of
their enemies (; ). Contrast the opposite conduct of David and of the
divine Son of David in a like case ().

spoken proudly--literally, "made great the mouth"; proudly insulting the
fallen (, Margin; compare ; ).

[Obadiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">oba 1:13</span></span>

substance--translated "forces" in .

[Obadiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">oba 1:14</span></span>

stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his--Judah's.

that did escape--The Jews naturally fled by the crossways. (MAURER
translates, "narrow mountain passes") well known to them, to escape to
the desert, and through Edom to Egypt; but the Edomites stood ready to
intercept the fugitives and either kill or "deliver them up" to the foe.

[Obadiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">oba 1:15</span></span>

For--resumptive in connection with , wherein Edom was threatened with
cutting off for ever.

the day of the Lord--the day in which He will manifest Himself as the
Righteous Punisher of the ungodly peoples (). The "all" shows that the
fulfilment is not exhausted in the punishment inflicted on the
surrounding nations by the instrumentality of Nebuchadnezzar; but, as in
, and , that the last judgment to come on the nations confederate
against Jerusalem is referred to.

as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee--the righteous principle
of retribution in kind (; ; compare ; ; ).

thy reward--the reward of thy deed (compare ).

[Obadiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">oba 1:16</span></span>

ye . . . upon my holy mountain--a periphrasis for, "ye Jews" \[MAURER\],
whom Obadiah now by a sudden apostrophe addresses. The clause, "upon My
holy mountain," expresses the reason of the vengeance to be taken on
Judah's foes; namely, that Jerusalem is God's holy mountain, the seat of
His temple, and Judah His covenant-people. , which is copied from
Obadiah, establishes this view (compare ).

as ye have drunk, &c.--namely, the cup of wrath, being dispossessed of
your goods and places as a nation, by Edom and all the heathen; so shall
all the heathen (Edom included) drink the same cup (; , ; ; Jer.
25:15-33; ; ; ; ).

continually--whereas Judah's calamity shall be temporary (). The foes of
Judah shall never regain their former position ().

swallow down--so as not to leave anything in the cup of calamity; not
merely "drink" ().

be as though they had not been--not a trace left of their national
existence (; ; ).

[Obadiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">oba 1:17</span></span>

upon . . . Zion . . . deliverance--both in the literal sense and
spiritual sense (; ; ; ). MAURER as the Margin explains it, "there shall
be a remnant that shall escape." Compare ; to the deliverance from
Sennacherib there described GROTIUS thinks Obadiah here refers.
"Jerusalem shall not be taken, and many of the neighboring peoples also
shall find deliverance there." Unlike Judah's heathen foes of whom no
remnant shall escape (, ), a remnant of Jews shall escape when the rest
of the nation has perished, and shall regain their ancient
"possessions."

there shall be holiness--that is, Zion shall be sacrosanct or
inviolable: no more violated by foreign invaders (; ).

[Obadiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">oba 1:18</span></span>

fire--See the same figure, ; ; .

house of Jacob . . . Joseph--that is, the two kingdoms, Judah and
Ephraim or Israel \[JEROME\]. The two shall form one kingdom, their
former feuds being laid aside (; ; ; ). The Jews returned with some of
the Israelites from Babylon; and, under John Hyrcanus, so subdued and,
compelling them to be circumcised, incorporated the Idumeans with
themselves that they formed part of the nation \[JOSEPHUS, Antiquities,
13.17; 12.11\]. This was but an earnest of the future union of Israel
and Judah in the possession of the enlarged land as one kingdom (, &c.).

stubble-- ().

[Obadiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">oba 1:19</span></span>

they of the south--The Jews who in the coming time are to occupy the
south of Judea shall possess, in addition to their own territory, the
adjoining mountainous region of Edom.

they of the plain--The Jews who shall occupy the low country along the
Mediterranean, south and southwest of Palestine, shall possess, in
addition to their own territory, the land of "the Philistines," which
runs as a long strip between the hills and the sea.

and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim--that is, the rightful
owners shall be restored, the Ephraimites to the fields of Ephraim.

Benjamin shall possess Gilead--that is, the region east of Jordan,
occupied formerly by Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh. Benjamin shall
possess besides its own territory the adjoining territory eastward,
while the two and a half tribes shall in the redistribution occupy the
adjoining territory of Moab and Ammon.

[Obadiah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">oba 1:20</span></span>

the captivity of this host--that is, the captives of this multitude of
Israelites.

shall possess that of the Canaanites--MAURER translates, "the captives .
. . whom the Canaanites (carried away captive into PhÅ“nicia) even unto
Zarephath, shall possess the south," namely, Idumea as well as the south
(). HENDERSON, similarly, "the captives that are among the Canaanites,"
&c. But the corresponding clauses of the parallelism are better balanced
in English Version, "the ten tribes of Israel shall possess the
territory of the Canaanites," namely, Western Palestine and PhÅ“nicia
(). "And the captives of Jerusalem (and Judah) shall possess the
southern cities," namely, Edom, &c. Each has the region respectively
adjoining assigned to it; Israel has the western Canaanite region;
Judah, the southern.

even unto Zarephath--near Zidon; called Sarepta in . The name implies it
was a place for smelting metals. From this quarter came the "woman of
Canaan" (). Captives of the Jews had been carried into the coasts of
Palestine or Canaan, about Tyre and Zidon (; ). The Jews when restored
shall possess the territory of their ancient oppressors.

in Sepharad--that is, the Bosphorus \[JEROME, from his Hebrew
Instructor\]. Sephar, according to others (). PalÃ&brvbr;ography
confirms JEROME. In the cuneiform inscription containing a list of the
tribes of Persia \[Niebuhr tab. 31.1\], before Ionia and Greece, and
after Cappadocia, comes the name CPaRaD. It was therefore a district of
Western Asia Minor, about Lydia, and near the Bosphorus. It is made an
appellative by MAURER. "The Jerusalem captives of the dispersion"
(compare ), wherever they be dispersed, shall return and possess the
southern cities. Sepharad, though literally the district near the
Bosphorus, represents the Jews' far and wide dispersion. JEROME says the
name in Assyrian means a boundary, that is, "the Jews scattered in all
boundaries and regions."

[Obadiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">oba 1:21</span></span>

saviours--There will be in the kingdom yet to come no king, but a
prince; the sabbatic period of the judges will return (comparethe phrase
so frequent in Judges, only once found in the times of the kings, , "the
land had rest"), when there was no visible king, but God reigned in the
theocracy. Israelites, not strangers, shall dispense justice to a
God-fearing people (; Eze. 45:1-25). The judges were not such a burden
to the people as the kings proved afterwards (). In their time the
people more readily repented than under the kings (compare ), \[ROOS\].
Judges were from time to time raised up as saviours or deliverers of
Israel from the enemy. These, and the similar deliverers in the long
subsequent age of Antiochus, the Maccabees, who conquered the Idumeans
(as here foretold, compare II Maccabees 10:15,23), were types of the
peaceful period yet to come to Israel.

to judge . . . Esau--to punish (so "judge," ) . . . Edom (compare , ).
Edom is the type of Israel's and God's last foes ().

kingdom shall be the Lord's--under Messiah (; , ; ; ; ; ).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Introduction](jon000)

</div>
