<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1002)  [Next](pe1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)

[1 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 3:1</span></span>

RELATIVE DUTIES OF HUSBANDS AND WIVES: EXHORTATIONS TO LOVE AND
FORBEARANCE: RIGHT CONDUCT UNDER PERSECUTIONS FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS' SAKE,
AFTER CHRIST'S EXAMPLE, WHOSE DEATH RESULTED IN QUICKENING TO US THROUGH
HIS BEING QUICKENED AGAIN, OF WHICH BAPTISM IS THE SACRAMENTAL SEAL.
(1Pe. 3:1-22)

Likewise--Greek, "In like manner," as "servants" in their sphere;
compare the reason of the woman's subjection, [Co1
11:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008); [Ti1
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011).

your own--enforcing the obligation: it is not strangers ye are required
to be subject to. Every time that obedience is enjoined upon women to
their husbands, the Greek, "idios," "one's own peculiarly," is used,
while the wives of men are designated only by heauton, "of themselves."
Feeling the need of leaning on one stronger than herself, the wife
(especially if joined to an unbeliever) might be tempted, though only
spiritually, to enter into that relation with another in which she ought
to stand to "her own spouse ([Co1
14:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034), "Let them ask their own
\[idious\] husbands at home"); an attachment to the person of the
teacher might thus spring up, which, without being in the common sense
spiritual adultery, would still weaken in its spiritual basis the
married relation \[STEIGER\].

that, if--Greek, "that even if." Even if you have a husband that obeys
not the word (that is, is an unbeliever).

without the word--independently of hearing the word preached, the usual
way of faith coming. But BENGEL, "without word," that is, without direct
Gospel discourse of the wives, "they may (literally, in oldest
manuscripts, 'shall,' which marks the almost objective certainty of the
result) be won" indirectly. "Unspoken acting is more powerful than
unperformed speaking" \[Å“CUMENIUS\]. "A soul converted is gained to
itself, to the pastor, wife, or husband, who sought it, and to Jesus
Christ; added to His treasury who thought not His own precious blood too
dear to lay out for this gain" \[LEIGHTON\]. "The discreet wife would
choose first of all to persuade her husband to share with her in the
things which lead to blessedness; but if this be impossible, let her
then alone diligently press after virtue, in all things obeying him so
as to do nothing at any time against his will, except in such things as
are essential to virtue and salvation" \[CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA\].

[1 Peter 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 3:2</span></span>

behold--on narrowly looking into it, literally, "having closely
observed."

chaste--pure, spotless, free from all impurity.

fear--reverential, towards your husbands. Scrupulously pure, as opposed
to the noisy, ambitious character of worldly women.

[1 Peter 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 3:3</span></span>

Literally, "To whom let there belong (namely, as their peculiar
ornament) not the outward adornment (usual in the sex which first, by
the fall, brought in the need of covering, Note, see on [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)) of," &c.

plaiting--artificial braiding, in order to attract admiration.

wearing--literally, "putting round," namely, the head, as a diadem--the
arm, as a bracelet--the finger, as rings.

apparel--showy and costly. "Have the blush of modesty on thy face
instead of paint, and moral worth and discretion instead of gold and
emeralds" \[MELISSA\].

[1 Peter 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 3:4</span></span>

But--"Rather." The "outward adornment" of jewelry, &c., is forbidden, in
so far as woman loves such things, not in so far as she uses them from a
sense of propriety, and does not abuse them. Singularity mostly comes
from pride and throws needless hindrances to religion in the way of
others. Under costly attire there may be a humble mind. "Great is he who
uses his earthenware as if it were plate; not less great is he who uses
his silver as if it were earthenware" \[SENECA in ALFORD\].

hidden--inner man, which the Christian instinctively hides from public
view.

of the heart--consisting in the heart regenerated and adorned by the
Spirit. This "inner man of the heart" is the subject of the verb "be,"
[Pe1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003), Greek: "Of whom let the
inner man be," namely, the distinction or adornment.

in that--consisting or standing in that as its element.

not corruptible--not transitory, nor tainted with corruption, as all
earthly adornments.

meek and quiet--meek, not creating disturbances: quiet, bearing with
tranquillity the disturbances caused by others. Meek in affections and
feelings; quiet in words, countenance, and actions \[BENGEL\].

in the sight of God--who looks to inward, not merely outward things.

of great price--The results of redemption should correspond to its
costly price ([Pe1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)).

[1 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 3:5</span></span>

after this manner--with the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit (compare
the portrait of the godly wife, Pro. 31:10-31).

trusted--Greek, "hoped." "Holy" is explained by "hoped in (so as to be
'united to,' Greek) God." Hope in God is the spring of true holiness
\[BENGEL\].

in subjection--Their ornament consisted in their subordination. Vanity
was forbidden ([Pe1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003)) as being
contrary to female subjection.

[1 Peter 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 3:6</span></span>

Sara--an example of faith.

calling him lord-- ([Gen 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)).

ye are--Greek, "ye have become": "children" of Abraham and Sara by
faith, whereas ye were Gentile aliens from the covenant.

afraid with any amazement--Greek, "fluttering alarm," "consternation."
Act well, and be not thrown into sudden panic, as weak females are apt
to be, by any opposition from without. BENGEL translates, "Not afraid OF
any fluttering terror coming from without" ([Pe1
3:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)). So the Septuagint, [Pro
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#025) uses the same Greek word, which
Peter probably refers to. Anger assails men; fear, women. You need fear
no man in doing what is right: not thrown into fluttering agitation by
any sudden outbreak of temper on the part of your unbelieving husbands,
while you do well.

[1 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 3:7</span></span>

dwell--Greek, "dwelling": connected with the verb, [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017), "Honor all."

knowledge--Christian knowledge: appreciating the due relation of the
sexes in the design of God, and acting with tenderness and forbearance
accordingly: wisely: with wise consideration.

them . . . giving honour to the wife--translate and punctuate the Greek
rather, "dwelling according to knowledge with the female (Greek
adjective, qualifying 'vessel'; not as English Version, a noun) as with
the weaker vessel (see on [Th1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004).
Both husband and wife are vessels in God's hand, and of God's making, to
fulfil His gracious purposes. Both weak, the woman the weaker. The sense
of his own weakness, and that she, like himself, is God's vessel and
fabric, ought to lead him to act with tender and wise consideration
towards her who is the weaker fabric), giving (literally, 'assigning,'
'apportioning') honor as being also (besides being man and wife) heirs
together," &c.; or, as the Vatican manuscript reads, as to those who are
also (besides being your wives) fellow heirs." (The reason why the man
should give honor to the woman is, because God gives honor to both as
fellow heirs; compare the same argument, [Pe1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)). He does not take into account
the case of an unbelieving wife, as she might yet believe.

grace of life--God's gracious gift of life ([Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004), [Pe1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)).

that your prayers be not hindered--by dissensions, which prevent united
prayer, on which depends the blessing.

[1 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 3:8</span></span>

General summary of relative duty, after having detailed particular
duties from [Pe1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018).

of one mind--as to the faith.

having compassion one of another--Greek, "sympathizing" in the joy and
sorrow of others.

love as brethren--Greek, "loving the brethren."

pitiful--towards the afflicted.

courteous--genuine Christian politeness; not the tinsel of the world's
politeness; stamped with unfeigned love on one side, and humility on the
other. But the oldest manuscripts read, "humble-minded." It is slightly
different from "humble," in that it marks a conscious effort to be truly
humble.

[1 Peter 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 3:9</span></span>

evil--in deed.

railing--in word.

blessing--your revilers; participle, not a noun after "rendering."

knowing that--The oldest manuscripts read merely, "because."

are--Greek, "were called."

inherit a blessing--not only passive, but also active; receiving
spiritual blessing from God by faith, and in your turn blessing others
from love \[GERHARD in ALFORD\]. "It is not in order to inherit a
blessing that we must bless, but because our portion is blessing." No
railing can injure you ([Pe1 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)).
Imitate God who "blesses" you. The first fruits of His blessing for
eternity are enjoyed by the righteous even now ([Pe1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)) \[BENGEL\].

[1 Peter 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 3:10</span></span>

will love--Greek, "wishes to love." He who loves life (present and
eternal), and desires to continue to do so, not involving himself in
troubles which will make this life a burden, and cause him to forfeit
eternal life. Peter confirms his exhortation, [Pe1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009), by [Psa
34:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012).

refrain--curb, literally, "cause to cease"; implying that our natural
inclination and custom is to speak evil. "Men commonly think that they
would be exposed to the wantonness of their enemies if they did not
strenuously vindicate their rights. But the Spirit promises a life of
blessedness to none but those who are gentle and patient of evils"
\[CALVIN\].

evil . . . guile--First he warns against sins of the tongue,
evil-speaking, and deceitful, double-tongued speaking; next, against
acts of injury to one's neighbor.

[1 Peter 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 3:11</span></span>

In oldest manuscripts, Greek, "Moreover (besides his words, in acts),
let him."

eschew--"turn from."

ensue--pursue as a thing hard to attain, and that flees from one in this
troublesome world.

[1 Peter 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 3:12</span></span>

Ground of the promised present and eternal life of blessedness to the
meek ([Pe1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)). The Lord's eyes are
ever over them for good.

ears . . . unto their prayers-- ([Jo1
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014)).

face . . . against--The eyes imply favorable regard; the face of the
Lord upon (not as English Version, "against") them that do evil, implies
that He narrowly observes them, so as not to let them really and
lastingly hurt His people (compare [Pe1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)).

[1 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 3:13</span></span>

who . . . will harm you--This fearless confidence in God's protection
from harm, Christ, the Head, in His sufferings realized; so His members.

if ye be--Greek, "if ye have become."

followers--The oldest manuscripts read "emulous," "zealous of" ([Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)).

good--The contrast in Greek is, "Who will do you evil, if ye be zealous
of good?"

[1 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 3:14</span></span>

But and if--"But if even." "The promises of this life extend only so far
as it is expedient for us that they should be fulfilled" \[CALVIN\]. So
he proceeds to state the exceptions to the promise ([Pe1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)), and how the truly wise will
behave in such exceptional cases. "If ye should suffer"; if it should so
happen; "suffer," a milder word than harm.

for righteousness--"not the suffering, but the cause for which one
suffers, makes the martyr" \[AUGUSTINE\].

happy--Not even can suffering take away your blessedness, but rather
promotes it.

and--Greek, "but." Do not impair your blessing ([Pe1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)) by fearing man's terror in your
times of adversity. Literally, "Be not terrified with their terror,"
that is, with that which they try to strike into you, and which strikes
themselves when in adversity. This verse and [Pe1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015) is quoted from [Isa
8:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012). God alone is to be feared; he
that fears God has none else to fear.

neither be troubled--the threat of the law, [Lev
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036); [Deu
28:65-66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065); in contrast to which the
Gospel gives the believer a heart assured of God's favor, and therefore
unruffled, amidst all adversities. Not only be not afraid, but be not
even agitated.

[1 Peter 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 3:15</span></span>

sanctify--hallow; honor as holy, enshrining Him in your hearts. So in
the Lord's Prayer, [Mat 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009). God's
holiness is thus glorified in our hearts as the dwelling-place of His
Spirit.

the Lord God--The oldest manuscripts read "Christ." Translate, "Sanctify
Christ as Lord."

and--Greek, "but," or "moreover." Besides this inward sanctification of
God in the heart, be also ready always to give, &c.

answer--an apologetic answer defending your faith.

to every man that asketh you--The last words limit the universality of
the "always"; not to a roller, but to everyone among the heathen who
inquires honestly.

a reason--a reasonable account. This refutes Rome's dogma, "I believe
it, because the Church believes it." Credulity is believing without
evidence; faith is believing on evidence. There is no repose for reason
itself but in faith. This verse does not impose an obligation to bring
forward a learned proof and logical defense of revelation. But as
believers deny themselves, crucify the world, and brave persecution,
they must be buoyed up by some strong "hope"; men of the world, having
no such hope themselves, are moved by curiosity to ask the secret of
this hope; the believer must be ready to give an experimental account
"how this hope arose in him, what it contains, and on what it rests"
\[STEIGER\].

with--The oldest manuscripts read, "but with." Be ready, but with
"meekness." Not pertly and arrogantly.

meekness-- ([Pe1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004)). The most
effective way; not self-sufficient impetuosity.

fear--due respect towards man, and reverence towards God, remembering
His cause does not need man's hot temper to uphold it.

[1 Peter 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe1 3:16</span></span>

Having a good conscience--the secret spring of readiness to give account
of our hope. So hope and good conscience go together in [Act
24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#015). Profession without practice
has no weight. But those who have a good conscience can afford to give
an account of their hope "with meekness."

whereas-- ([Pe1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012)).

they speak evil of you, as of evildoers--One oldest manuscript reads,
"ye are spoken against," omitting the rest.

falsely accuse--"calumniate"; the Greek expresses malice shown in deeds
as well as in words. It is translated, "despitefully use," [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044); [Luk
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#028).

conversation--life, conduct.

in Christ--who is the very element of your life as Christians. "In
Christ" defines "good." It is your good walk as Christians, not as
citizens, that calls forth malice ([Pe1
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#004), [Pe1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014)).

[1 Peter 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 3:17</span></span>

better--One may object, I would not bear it so ill if I had deserved it.
Peter replies, it is better that you did not deserve it, in order that
doing well and yet being spoken against, you may prove yourself a true
Christian \[GERHARD\].

if the will of God be so--rather as the optative is in the oldest
manuscripts, "if the will of God should will it so." Those who honor
God's will as their highest law ([Pe1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#015)) have the comfort to know that
suffering is God's appointment ([Pe1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019)). So Christ Himself; our
inclination does not wish it.

[1 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 3:18</span></span>

Confirmation of [Pe1 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017), by the
glorious results of Christ's suffering innocently.

For--"Because." That is "better," [Pe1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017), means of which we are rendered
more like to Christ in death and in life; for His death brought the best
issue to Himself and to us \[BENGEL\].

Christ--the Anointed Holy One of God; the Holy suffered for sins, the
Just for the unjust.

also--as well as yourselves ([Pe1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)). Compare [Pe1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021); there His suffering was brought
forward as an example to us; here, as a proof of the blessedness of
suffering for well-doing.

once--for all; never again to suffer. It is "better" for us also once to
suffer with Christ, than for ever without Christ We now are suffering
our "once"; it will soon be a thing of the past; a bright consolation to
the tried.

for sins--as though He had Himself committed them. He exposed Himself to
death by His "confession," even as we are called on to "give an answer
to him that asketh a reason of our hope." This was "well-doing" in its
highest manifestation. As He suffered, "The Just," so we ought willingly
to suffer, for righteousness' sake ([Pe1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014); compare [Pe1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012), [Pe1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)).

that he might bring us to God--together with Himself in His ascension to
the right hand of God ([Pe1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022)). He
brings us, "the unjust," justified together with Him into heaven. So the
result of Christ's death is His drawing men to Him; spiritually now, in
our having access into the Holiest, opened by Christ's ascension;
literally hereafter. "Bring us," moreover, by the same steps of
humiliation and exaltation through which He Himself passed. The several
steps of Christ's progress from lowliness to glory are trodden over
again by His people in virtue of their oneness with Him ([Pe1
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)). "To God," is Greek dative (not
the preposition and case), implying that God wishes it \[BENGEL\].

put to death--the means of His bringing us to God.

in the flesh--that is, in respect to the life of flesh and blood.

quickened by the Spirit--The oldest manuscripts omit the Greek article.
Translate with the preposition "in," as the antithesis to the previous
"in the flesh" requires, "IN spirit," that is, in respect to His Spirit.
"Put to death" in the former mode of life; "quickened" in the other. Not
that His Spirit ever died and was quickened, or made alive again, but
whereas He had lived after the manner of mortal men in the flesh, He
began to live a spiritual "resurrection" ([Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)) life, whereby He has the power
to bring us to God. Two ways of explaining [Pe1
3:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018), are open to us: (1)
"Quickened in Spirit," that is, immediately on His release from the
"flesh," the energy of His undying spirit-life was "quickened" by God
the Father, into new modes of action, namely, "in the Spirit He went
down (as subsequently He went up to heaven, [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022), the same Greek verb) and
heralded \[not salvation, as ALFORD, contrary to Scripture, which
everywhere represents man's state, whether saved or lost, after death
irreversible. Nor is any mention made of the conversion of the spirits
in prison. See on [Pe1 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020). Nor is
the phrase here 'preached the Gospel' (evangelizo), but 'heralded'
(ekeruxe) or 'preached'; but simply made the announcement of His
finished work; so the same Greek in [Mar
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#045), 'publish,' confirming Enoch and
Noah's testimony, and thereby declaring the virtual condemnation of
their unbelief, and the salvation of Noah and believers; a sample of the
similar opposite effects of the same work on all unbelievers, and
believers, respectively; also a consolation to those whom Peter
addresses, in their sufferings at the hands of unbelievers; specially
selected for the sake of 'baptism,' its 'antitype' ([Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)), which, as a seal, marks
believers as separated from the rest of the doomed world\] to the
spirits (His Spirit speaking to the spirits) in prison (in Hades or
Sheol, awaiting the judgment, [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)), which were of old disobedient
when," &c. (2) The strongest point in favor of (1) is the position of
"sometime," that is, of old, connected with "disobedient"; whereas if
the preaching or announcing were a thing long past, we should expect
"sometime," or of old, to be joined to "went and preached." But this
transposition may express that their disobedience preceded His
preaching. The Greek participle expresses the reason of His preaching,
"inasmuch as they were sometime disobedient" (compare [Pe1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)). Also "went" seems to mean a
personal going, as in [Pe1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022), not
merely in spirit. But see the answer below. The objections are
"quickened" must refer to Christ's body (compare [Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021), end), for as His Spirit never
ceased to live, it cannot be said to be "quickened." Compare [Joh
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021); [Rom
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011), and other passages, where
"quicken" is used of the bodily resurrection. Also, not His Spirit, but
His soul, went to Hades. His Spirit was commended by Him at death to His
Father, and was thereupon "in Paradise." The theory--(1) would thus
require that His descent to the spirits in prison should be after His
resurrection! Compare [Eph 4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009),
which makes the descent precede the ascent. Also Scripture elsewhere is
silent about such a heralding, though possibly Christ's death had
immediate effects on the state of both the godly and the ungodly in
Hades: the souls of the godly heretofore in comparative confinement,
perhaps then having been, as some Fathers thought, translated to God's
immediate and heavenly presence; but this cannot be proved from
Scripture. Compare however, [Joh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013);
[Col 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018). Prison is always used in a
bad sense in Scripture. "Paradise" and "Abraham's bosom," the abode of
good spirits in Old Testament times, are separated by a wide gulf from
Hell or Hades, and cannot be called "prison." Compare [Co2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002), [Co2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004), where "paradise" and the "third
heaven" correspond. Also, why should the antediluvian unbelievers in
particular be selected as the objects of His preaching in Hades?
Therefore explain: "Quickened in spirit, in which (as distinguished from
in person; the words "in which," that is, in spirit, expressly obviating
the objection that "went" implies a personal going) He went (in the
person of Noah, "a preacher of righteousness," [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005) : ALFORD'S own Note, [Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017), is the best reply to his
argument from "went" that a local going to Hades in person is meant. As
"He CAME and preached peace" by His Spirit in the apostles and ministers
after His death and ascension: so before His incarnation He preached in
Spirit through Noah to the antediluvians, [Joh
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018), [Joh
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028); [Act
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023). "Christ should show,"
literally, "announce light to the Gentiles") and preached unto the
spirits in prison, that is, the antediluvians, whose bodies indeed
seemed free, but their spirits were in prison, shut up in the earth as
one great condemned cell (exactly parallel to [Isa
24:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#022) "upon the earth . . . they
shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and
shall be shut up in the prison," &c. \[just as the fallen angels are
judicially regarded as "in chains of darkness," though for a time now at
large on the earth, [Pe1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004)\], where
[Pe1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018) has a plain allusion to the
flood, "the windows from on high are open," compare [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011)); from this prison the only way
of escape was that preached by Christ in Noah. Christ, who in our times
came in the flesh, in the days of Noah preached in Spirit by Noah to the
spirits then in prison ([Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001),
end, "the Spirit of the Lord God hath sent me to proclaim the opening of
the prison to them that are bound"). So in [Pe1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011), "the Spirit of Christ" is said
to have testified in the prophets. As Christ suffered even to death by
enemies, and was afterwards quickened in virtue of His "Spirit" (or
divine nature, [Rom 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003); [Co1
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)), which henceforth acted in its
full energy, the first result of which was the raising of His body ([Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021), end) from the prison of the
grave and His soul from Hades; so the same Spirit of Christ enabled
Noah, amidst reproach and trials, to preach to the disobedient spirits
fast bound in wrath. That Spirit in you can enable you also to suffer
patiently now, looking for the resurrection deliverance.

[1 Peter 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe1 3:20</span></span>

once--not in the oldest manuscripts.

when . . . the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah--Oldest
manuscripts. Greek, "was continuing to wait on" (if haply men in the
hundred twenty years of grace would repent) until the end of His waiting
came in their death by the flood. This refutes ALFORD'S idea of a second
day of grace having been given in Hades. Noah's days are selected, as
the ark and the destroying flood answer respectively to "baptism" and
the coming destruction of unbelievers by fire.

while the ark was a-preparing-- ([Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)). A long period of God's
"long-suffering and waiting," as Noah had few to help him, which
rendered the world's unbelief the more inexcusable.

wherein--literally, "(by having entered) into which."

eight--seven (the sacred number) with ungodly Ham.

few--so now.

souls--As this term is here used of living persons, why should not
"spirits" also? Noah preached to their ears, but Christ in spirit, to
their spirits, or spiritual natures.

saved by water--The same water which drowned the unbelieving, buoyed up
the ark in which the eight were saved. Not as some translate, "were
brought safe through the water." However, the sense of the preposition
may be as in [Co1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015), "they were
safely preserved through the water," though having to be in the water.

[1 Peter 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 3:21</span></span>

whereunto--The oldest manuscripts read, "which": literally, "which
(namely, water, in general; being) the antitype (of the water of the
flood) is now saving (the salvation being not yet fully realized by us,
compare [Co1 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001), [Co1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005); [Jde
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005); puts into a state of salvation)
us also (two oldest manuscripts read 'you' for 'us': You also, as well
as Noah and his party), to wit, baptism." Water saved Noah not of
itself, but by sustaining the ark built in faith, resting on God's word:
it was to him the sign and mean of a kind of regeneration, of the earth.
The flood was for Noah a baptism, as the passage through the Red Sea was
for the Israelites; by baptism in the flood he and his family were
transferred from the old world to the new: from immediate destruction to
lengthened probation; from the companionship of the wicked to communion
with God; from the severing of all bonds between the creature and the
Creator to the privileges of the covenant: so we by spiritual baptism.
As there was a Ham who forfeited the privileges of the covenant, so many
now. The antitypical water, namely, baptism, saves you also not of
itself, nor the mere material water, but the spiritual thing conjoined
with it, repentance and faith, of which it is the sign and seal, as
Peter proceeds to explain. Compare the union of the sign and thing
signified, [Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005); [Eph
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026); [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022); compare [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006).

not the, &c.--"flesh" bears the emphasis. "Not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh" (as is done by a mere water baptism, unaccompanied
with the Spirit's baptism, compare [Eph
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011)), but of the soul. It is the ark
(Christ and His Spirit-filled Church), not the water, which is the
instrument of salvation: the water only flowed round the ark; so not the
mere water baptism, but the water when accompanied with the Spirit.

answer--Greek, "interrogation"; referring to the questions asked of
candidates for baptism; eliciting a confession of faith "toward God" and
a renunciation of Satan (\[AUGUSTINE, The Creed, 4.1\]; \[CYPRIAN,
Epistles, 7, To Rogatianus\]), which, when flowing from "a good
conscience," assure one of being "saved." Literally, "a good
conscience's interrogation (including the satisfactory answer) toward
God." I prefer this to the translation of WAHL, ALFORD and others,
"inquiry of a good conscience after God": not one of the parallels
alleged, not even [Sa2 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#007), in the
Septuagint, is strictly in point. Recent Byzantine Greek idiom (whereby
the term meant: (1) the question; (2) the stipulation; (3) the
engagement), easily flowing from the usage of the word as Peter has it,
confirms the former translation.

by the resurrection of Jesus--joined with "saves you": In so far as
baptism applies to us the power of Christ's resurrection. As Christ's
death unto sin is the source of the believer's death unto, and so
deliverance from, sin's penalty and power; so His resurrection life is
the source of the believer's new spiritual life.

[1 Peter 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 3:22</span></span>

([Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001); [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034), [Rom
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038); [Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024); [Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021); [Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010); [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016); [Col
2:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010)). The fruit of His patience in
His voluntary endured and undeserved sufferings: a pattern to us, [Pe1
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017).

gone-- ([Luk 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051)). Proving against
rationalists an actual material ascension. Literally, "is on the right
hand of God, having gone into heaven." The oldest manuscripts of the
Vulgate and the Latin Fathers, add what expresses the benefit to us of
Christ's sitting on God's right hand, "Who is on the right hand of God,
having swallowed up death that we may become heirs of everlasting life";
involving for us A STATE OF LIFE, saved, glorious, and eternal. The
Greek manuscripts, however, reject the words. Compare with this verse
Peter's speeches, [Act 2:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032); [Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021), [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026); [Act
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040), [Act
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 4](pe1004)

</div>
