<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev002)  [Next](rev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

[Revelation 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 3:1</span></span>

THE EPISTLES TO SARDIS, PHILADELPHIA, AND LAODICEA. (Rev. 3:1-22)

Sardis--the ancient capital of Lydia, the kingdom of wealthy Croesus, on
the river Pactolus. The address to this Church is full of rebuke. It
does not seem to have been in vain; for MELITO, bishop of Sardis in the
second century, was eminent for piety and learning. He visited Palestine
to assure himself and his flock as to the Old Testament canon and wrote
an epistle on the subject \[EUSEBIUS Ecclesiastical History, 4.26\]; he
also wrote a commentary on the Apocalypse \[EUSEBIUS, Ecclesiastical
History, 4.26; JEROME, On Illustrious Men, 24\].

he that hath the seven Spirits of God--that is, He who hath all the
fulness of the Spirit ([Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004); [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005); [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), with which compare [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009); [Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010), proving His Godhead). This
attribute implies His infinite power by the Spirit to convict of sin and
of a hollow profession.

and the seven stars-- ([Rev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016), [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020)). His having the seven stars, or
presiding ministers, flows, as a consequence, from His having the seven
Spirits, or the fulness of the Holy Spirit. The human ministry is the
fruit of Christ's sending down the gifts of the Spirit. Stars imply
brilliancy and glory; the fulness of the Spirit, and the fulness of
brilliant light in Him, form a designed contrast to the formality which
He reproves.

name . . . livest . . . dead-- ([Ti1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006); [Ti2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005); [Tit
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016); compare [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001), [Eph
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005); [Eph
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)). "A name," that is, a
reputation. Sardis was famed among the churches for spiritual vitality;
yet the Heart-searcher, who seeth not as man seeth, pronounces her dead;
how great searchings of heart should her case create among even the best
of us! Laodicea deceived herself as to her true state ([Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)), but it is not written that she
had a high name among the other churches, as Sardis had.

[Revelation 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 3:2</span></span>

Be--Greek. "Become," what thou art not, "watchful," or "wakeful,"
literally, "waking."

the things which remain--Strengthen those thy remaining few graces,
which, in thy spiritual deadly slumber, are not yet quite extinct
\[ALFORD\]. "The things that remain" can hardly mean "the PERSONS that
are not yet dead, but are ready to die"; for [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004) implies that the "few" faithful
ones at Sardis were not "ready to die," but were full of life.

are--The two oldest manuscripts read, "were ready," literally, "were
about to die," namely, at the time when you "strengthen" them. This
implies that "thou art dead," [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001), is to be taken with limitation;
for those must have some life who are told to strengthen the things that
remain.

perfect--literally, "filled up in full complement"; Translate,
"complete." Weighed in the balance of Him who requires living faith as
the motive of works, and found wanting.

before God--Greek, "in the sight of God." The three oldest manuscripts,
Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic, read, "before (in the sight of) MY God";
Christ's judgment is God the Father's judgment. In the sight of men,
Sardis had "a name of living": "so many and so great are the obligations
of pastors, that he who would in reality fulfil even a third of them,
would be esteemed holy by men, whereas, if content with that alone, he
would be sure not to escape hell" \[JUAN D'AVILA\]. Note: in Sardis and
Laodicea alone of the seven we read of no conflict with foes within or
without the Church. Not that either had renounced the appearance of
opposition to the world; but neither had the faithfulness to witness for
God by word and example, so as to "torment them that dwelt on the earth"
([Rev 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010)).

[Revelation 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 3:3</span></span>

how thou hast received-- ([Col 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006);
[Th1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001); [Ti1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)). What Sardis is to "remember"
is, not how joyfully she had received originally the Gospel message, but
how the precious deposit was committed to her originally, so that she
could not say, she had not "received and heard" it. The Greek is not
aorist (as in [Rev 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004), as to Ephesus,
"Thou didst leave thy first love"), but "thou hast received" (perfect),
and still hast the permanent deposit of doctrine committed to thee. The
word "keep" (so the Greek is for English Version, "hold fast") which
follows, accords with this sense. "Keep" or observe the commandment
which thou hast received and didst hear.

heard--Greek aorist, "didst hear," namely, when the Gospel doctrine was
committed to thee. TRENCH explains "how," with what demonstration of the
Spirit and power from Christ's ambassadors the truth came to you, and
how heartily and zealously you at first received it. Similarly BENGEL,
"Regard to her former character (how it once stood) ought to guard
Sardis against the future hour, whatsoever it shall be, proving fatal to
her." But it is not likely that the Spirit repeats the same exhortation
virtually to Sardis as to Ephesus.

If therefore--seeing thou art so warned, if, nevertheless, &c.

come on thee as a thief--in special judgment on thee as a Church, with
the same stealthiness and as unexpectedly as shall be My visible second
coming. As the thief gives no notice of his approach. Christ applies the
language which in its fullest sense describes His second coming, to
describe His coming in special judgments on churches and states (as
Jerusalem, Mat. 24:4-28) these special judgments being anticipatory
earnests of that great last coming. "The last day is hidden from us,
that every day may be observed by us" \[AUGUSTINE\]. Twice Christ in the
days of His flesh spake the same words ([Mat
24:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042); [Luk
12:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039)); and so deeply had His words
been engraven on the minds of the apostles that they are often repeated
in their writings ([Rev 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015); [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002), [Th1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004), [Th1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006); [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)). The Greek proverb was that "the
feet of the avenging deities are shod with wool," expressing the
noiseless approach of the divine judgments, and their possible nearness
at the moment when they were supposed the farthest off \[TRENCH\].

[Revelation 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 3:4</span></span>

The three oldest manuscripts prefix "but," or "nevertheless"
(notwithstanding thy spiritual deadness), and omit "even."

names--persons named in the book of life ([Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)) known by name by the Lord as His
own. These had the reality corresponding to their name; not a mere name
among men as living, while really dead ([Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)). The gracious Lord does not
overlook any exceptional cases of real saints in the midst of unreal
professors.

not defiled their garments--namely, the garments of their Christian
profession, of which baptism is the initiatory seal, whence the
candidates for baptism used in the ancient Church to be arrayed in
white. Compare also [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027), as to
the spotlessness of the Church when she shall be presented to Christ;
and [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008), as to the "fine linen,
clean and white, the righteousness of the saints," in which it shall be
granted to her to be arrayed; and "the wedding garment." Meanwhile she
is not to sully her Christian profession with any defilement of flesh or
spirit, but to "keep her garments." For no defilement shall enter the
heavenly city. Not that any keep themselves here wholly free from
defilement; but, as compared with hollow professors, the godly keep
themselves unspotted from the world; and when they do contract it, they
wash it away, so as to have their "robes white in the blood of the Lamb"
([Rev 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)). The Greek is not "to
stain" (Greek, "miainein"), but to "defile," or besmear (Greek,
"molunein"), [Sol 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003).

they shall walk with me in white--The promised reward accords with the
character of those to be rewarded: keeping their garments undefiled and
white through the blood of the Lamb now, they shall walk with Him in
while hereafter. On "with me," compare the very same words, [Luk
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043); [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024). "Walk" implies spiritual life,
for only the living walk; also liberty, for it is only the free who walk
at large. The grace and dignity of flowing long garments is seen to best
advantage when the person "walks": so the graces of the saint's
manifested character shall appear fully when he shall serve the Lord
perfectly hereafter ([Rev 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003)).

they are worthy--with the worthiness (not their own, but that) which
Christ has put on them ([Rev 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)).
[Eze 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014), "perfect through MY
comeliness which I had put upon thee." Grace is glory in the bud. "The
worthiness here denotes a congruity between the saint's state of grace
on earth, and that of glory, which the Lord has appointed for them,
about to be estimated by the law itself of grace" \[VITRINGA\]. Contrast
[Act 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046).

[Revelation 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 3:5</span></span>

white--not a dull white, but glittering, dazzling white \[GROTIUS\].
Compare [Mat 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043). The body
transfigured into the likeness of Christ's body, and emitting beams of
light reflected from Him, is probably the "white raiment" promised here.

the same--Greek, "THIS man"; he and he alone. So one oldest manuscript
reads. But two oldest manuscripts, and most of the ancient versions,
"shall THUS be clothed," &c.

raiment--Greek, "garments." "He that overcometh" shall receive the same
reward as they who "have not defiled their garments" ([Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)); therefore the two are identical.

I will not--Greek, "I will not by any means."

blot out . . . name out of . . . book of life--of the heavenly city. A
register was kept in ancient cities of their citizens: the names of the
dead were of course erased. So those who have a name that they live and
are dead ([Rev 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)), are blotted out
of God's roll of the heavenly citizens and heirs of eternal life; not
that in God's electing decree they ever were in His book of life. But,
according to human conceptions, those who had a high name for piety
would be supposed to be in it, and were, in respect to privileges,
actually among those in the way of salvation; but these privileges, and
the fact that they once might have been saved, shall be of no avail to
them. As to the book of life, compare [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008); [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012), [Rev
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027); [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032); [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001). In the sense of the "call," many
are enrolled among the called to salvation, who shall not be found among
the chosen at last. The pale of salvation is wider than that of
election. Election is fixed. Salvation is open to all and is pending
(humanly speaking) in the case of those mentioned here. But [Rev
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027), exhibit the book of the elect
alone in the narrower sense, after the erasure of the others.

before . . . before--Greek, "in the presence of." Compare the same
promise of Christ's confessing before His Father those who confessed
Him, [Mat 10:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032); [Luk
12:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#008). He omits "in heaven" after "My
Father," because there is, now that He is in heaven, no contrast between
the Father in heaven and the Son on earth. He now sets His seal from
heaven upon many of His words uttered on earth \[TRENCH\]. An undesigned
coincidence, proving that these epistles are, as they profess, in their
words, as well as substance, Christ's own addresses; not even tinged
with the color of John's style, such as it appears in his Gospel and
Epistles. The coincidence is mainly with the three other Gospels, and
not with John's, which makes the coincidence more markedly undesigned.
So also the clause, "He that hath an ear, let him hear," is not repeated
from John's Gospel, but from the Lord's own words in the three synoptic
Gospels ([Mat 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015); [Mat
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#009); [Mar
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#009), [Mar
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#023); [Mar
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#016); [Luk
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#008); [Luk
14:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#035)).

[Revelation 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 3:6</span></span>

(See on [Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007).)

[Revelation 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 3:7</span></span>

Philadelphia--in Lydia, twenty-eight miles southeast of Sardis, built by
Attalus Philadelphus, king of Pergamos, who died A.D. 138. It was nearly
destroyed by an earthquake in the reign of Tiberius \[TACITUS, Annals,
2.47\]. The connection of this Church with Jews there causes the address
to it to have an Old Testament coloring in the images employed. It and
Smyrna alone of the seven receive unmixed praise.

he that is holy--as in the Old Testament, "the Holy One of Israel." Thus
Jesus and the God of the Old Testament are one. None but God is
absolutely holy (Greek, "hagios," separate from evil and perfectly
hating it). In contrast to "the synagogue of Satan" ([Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)).

true--Greek, "alethinos": "VERY God," as distinguished from the false
gods and from all those who say that they are what they are not ([Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)): real, genuine. Furthermore, He
perfectly realizes all that is involved in the names, GOD, Light ([Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009); [Jo1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#008)), Bread ([Joh
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)), the Vine ([Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)); as distinguished from all
typical, partial, and imperfect realizations of the idea. His nature
answers to His name ([Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003); [Th1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)). The Greek, "alethes," on the
other hand, is "truth-speaking," "truth-loving" ([Joh
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033); [Tit
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)).

he that hath the key of David--the antitype of Eliakim, to whom the
"key," the emblem of authority "over the house of David," was
transferred from Shebna, who was removed from the office of chamberlain
or treasurer, as unworthy of it. Christ, the Heir of the throne of
David, shall supplant all the less worthy stewards who have abused their
trust in God's spiritual house, and "shall reign over the house of
Jacob," literal and spiritual ([Luk
1:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)), "for ever," "as a Son over
His own house" ([Heb 3:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)). It rests
with Christ to open or shut the heavenly palace, deciding who is, and
who is not, to be admitted: as He also opens, or shuts, the prison,
having the keys of hell (the grave) and death ([Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018)). The power of the keys was given
to Peter and the other apostles, only when, and in so far as, Christ
made him and them infallible. Whatever degrees of this power may have
been committed to ministers, the supreme power belongs to Christ alone.
Thus Peter rightly opened the Gospel door to the Gentiles (Acts 10:1-48;
[Act 11:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017); especially [Act
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027), end). But he wrongly tried to
shut the door in part again ([Gal
2:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)). Eliakim had "the key of the
house of David laid upon his shoulder": Christ, as the antitypical
David, Himself has the key of the supreme "government upon His
shoulder." His attribute here, as in the former addresses, accords with
His promise. Though "the synagogue of Satan," false "Jews" ([Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)) try to "shut" the "door" which I
"set open before thee"; "no man can shut it" ([Rev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008)).

shutteth--So Vulgate and Syriac Versions read. But the four oldest
manuscripts read, "shall shut"; so Coptic Version and ORIGEN.

and no man openeth--Two oldest manuscripts, B, Aleph, Coptic Version,
and ORIGEN read, "shall open." Two oldest manuscripts, A, C, and Vulgate
Version support English Version reading.

[Revelation 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 3:8</span></span>

I have set--Greek, "given": it is My gracious gift to thee.

open door--for evangelization; a door of spiritual usefulness. The
opening of a door by Him to the Philadelphian Church accords with the
previous assignation to Him of "the key of David."

and--The three oldest manuscripts, A, B, C, and ORIGEN read, "which no
man can shut."

for--"because."

a little--This gives the idea that Christ says, He sets before
Philadelphia an open door because she has some little strength; whereas
the sense rather is, He does so because she has "but little strength":
being consciously weak herself, she is the fitter object for God's power
to rest on \[so AQUINAS\], that so the Lord Christ may have all the
glory.

and hast kept--and so, the littleness of thy strength becoming the
source of Almighty power to thee, as leading thee to rest wholly on My
great power, thou hast kept My word. GROTIUS makes "little strength" to
mean that she had a Church small in numbers and external resources: "a
little flock poor in worldly goods, and of small account in the eyes of
men" \[TRENCH\]. So ALFORD. I prefer the view given above. The Greek
verbs are in the aorist tense: "Thou didst keep . . . didst not deny My
name": alluding to some particular occasion when her faithfulness was
put to the test.

[Revelation 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 3:9</span></span>

I will make--Greek present, "I make," literally, "I give" (see on [Rev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008)). The promise to Philadelphia is
larger than that to Smyrna. To Smyrna the promise was that "the
synagogue of Satan" should not prevail against the faithful in her: to
Philadelphia, that she should even win over some of "the synagogue of
Satan" to fall on their faces and confess God is in her of a truth.
Translate, "(some) of the synagogue." For until Christ shall come, and
all Israel then be saved, there is but "a remnant" being gathered out of
the Jews "according to the election of grace." This is an instance of
how Christ set before her an "open door," some of her greatest
adversaries, the Jews, being brought to the obedience of the faith.
Their worshipping before her feet expresses the convert's willingness to
take the very lowest place in the Church, doing servile honor to those
whom once they persecuted, rather than dwell with the ungodly. So the
Philippian jailer before Paul.

[Revelation 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 3:10</span></span>

patience--"endurance." "The word of My endurance" is My Gospel word,
which teaches patient endurance in expectation of my coming ([Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)). My endurance is the endurance
which I require, and which I practice. Christ Himself now endures,
patiently waiting until the usurper be cast out, and all "His enemies be
made His footstool." So, too, His Church, for the joy before her of
sharing His coming kingdom, endures patiently. Hence, in [Rev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011), follows, "Behold, I come
quickly."

I also--The reward is in kind: "because thou didst keep," &c. "I also
(on My side) will keep thee," &c.

from--Greek, "(so as to deliver thee) out of," not to exempt from
temptation.

the hour of temptation--the appointed season of affliction and
temptation (so in [Deu 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034) the
plagues are called "the temptations of Egypt"), literally, "the
temptation": the sore temptation which is coming on: the time of great
tribulation before Christ's second coming.

to try them that dwell upon the earth--those who are of earth, earthy
([Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013)). "Dwell" implies that
their home is earth, not heaven. All mankind, except the elect ([Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)). The temptation brings out the
fidelity of those kept by Christ and hardens the unbelieving reprobates
([Rev 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020); [Rev
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#011), [Rev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021)). The particular persecutions
which befell Philadelphia shortly after, were the earnest of the great
last tribulation before Christ's coming, to which the Church's attention
in all ages is directed.

[Revelation 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 3:11</span></span>

Behold--omitted by the three oldest manuscripts and most ancient
versions.

I come quickly--the great incentive to persevering faithfulness, and the
consolation under present trials.

that . . . which thou hast--"The word of my patience," or "endurance"
([Rev 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010)), which He had just
commended them for keeping, and which involved with it the attaining of
the kingdom; this they would lose if they yielded to the temptation of
exchanging consistency and suffering for compromise and ease.

that no man take thy crown--which otherwise thou wouldst receive: that
no tempter cause thee to lose it: not that the tempter would thus secure
it for himself ([Col 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)).

[Revelation 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 3:12</span></span>

pillar in the temple--In one sense there shall be "no temple" in the
heavenly city because there shall be no distinction of things into
sacred and secular, for all things and persons shall be holy to the
Lord. The city shall be all one great temple, in which the saints shall
be not merely stones, as m the spiritual temple now on earth, but all
eminent as pillars: immovably firm (unlike Philadelphia, the city which
was so often shaken by earthquakes, STRABO \[12 and 13\]), like the
colossal pillars before Solomon's temple, Boaz (that is, "In it is
strength") and Jachin ("It shall be established"): only that those
pillars were outside, these shall be within the temple.

my God--(See on [Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)).

go no more out--The Greek is stronger, never more at all. As the elect
angels are beyond the possibility of falling, being now under (as the
Schoolmen say) "the blessed necessity of goodness," so shall the saints
be. The door shall be once for all shut, as well to shut safely in for
ever the elect, as to shut out the lost ([Mat
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010); [Joh
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035); compare [Isa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023), the type, Eliakim). They shall
be priests for ever unto God ([Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)). "Who would not yearn for that
city out of which no friend departs, and into which no enemy enters?"
\[AUGUSTINE in TRENCH\].

write upon him the name of my God--as belonging to God in a peculiar
sense ([Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004); [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); and especially [Rev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004)), therefore secure. As the name
of Jehovah ("Holiness to the Lord") was on the golden plate on the high
priest's forehead ([Exo 28:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)); so
the saints in their heavenly royal priesthood shall bear His name
openly, as consecrated to Him. Compare the caricature of this in the
brand on the forehead of the beast's followers ([Rev
13:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016)), and on the harlot ([Rev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005); compare [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)).

name of the city of my God--as one of its citizens ([Rev
21:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010), which is briefly alluded to by
anticipation here). The full description of the city forms the
appropriate close of the book. The saint's citizenship is now hidden,
but then it shall be manifested: he shall have the right to enter in
through the gates into the city ([Rev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)). This was the city which
Abraham looked for.

new--Greek, "kaine." Not the old Jerusalem, once called "the holy city,"
but having forfeited the name. Greek, "nea," would express that it had
recently come into existence; but Greek, "kaine," that which is new and
different, superseding the worn-out old Jerusalem and its polity. "John,
in the Gospel, applies to the old city the Greek name Hierosolyma. But
in the Apocalypse, always, to the heavenly city the Hebrew name,
Hierousalem. The Hebrew name is the original and holier one: the Greek,
the recent and more secular and political one" \[BENGEL\].

my new name--at present incommunicable and only known to God: to be
hereafter revealed and made the believer's own in union with God in
Christ. Christ's name written on him denotes he shall be wholly
Christ's. New also relates to Christ, who shall assume a new character
(answering to His "new name") entering with His saints on a kingdom--not
that which He had with the Father before the worlds, but that earned by
His humiliation as Son of man. GIBBON, the infidel \[Decline and Fall,
ch. 64\], gives an unwilling testimony to the fulfilment of the prophecy
as to Philadelphia from a temporal point of view, Among the Greek
colonies and churches of Asia, Philadelphia is still erect,--a column in
a scene of ruins--a pleasing example that the paths of honor and safety
may sometimes be the same."

[Revelation 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 3:13</span></span>

(See on [Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)).

[Revelation 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 3:14</span></span>

Laodiceans--The city was in the southwest of Phrygia, on the river
Lycus, not far from Colosse, and lying between it and Philadelphia. It
was destroyed by an earthquake, A.D. 62, and rebuilt by its wealthy
citizens without the help of the state \[TACITUS, Annals, 14.27\]. This
wealth (arising from the excellence of its wools) led to a
self-satisfied, lukewarm state in spiritual things, as [Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017) describes. See on [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016), on the Epistle which is thought
to have been written to the Laodicean Church by Paul. The Church in
latter times was apparently flourishing; for one of the councils at
which the canon of Scripture was determined was held in Laodicea in A.D.
361. Hardly a Christian is now to be found on or near its site.

the Amen-- ([Isa 65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016), Hebrew, "Bless
Himself in the God of Amen . . . swear by the God of Amen," [Co2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)). He who not only says, but is,
the Truth. The saints used Amen at the end of prayer, or in assenting to
the word of God; but none, save the Son of God, ever said, "Amen, I say
unto you," for it is the language peculiar to God, who avers by Himself.
The New Testament formula, "Amen. I say unto you," is equivalent to the
Old Testament formula, "as I live, saith Jehovah." In John's Gospel
alone He uses (in the Greek) the double "Amen," [Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051); [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003), &c.; in English Version," Verily,
verily." The title happily harmonizes with the address. His unchanging
faithfulness as "the Amen" contrasts with Laodicea's wavering of
purpose, "neither hot nor cold" ([Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)). The angel of Laodicea has with
some probability been conjectured to be Archippus, to whom, thirty years
previously, Paul had already given a monition, as needing to be stirred
up to diligence in his ministry. So the Apostolic Constitutions,
\[8.46\], name him as the first bishop of Laodicea: supposed to be the
son of Philemon ([Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002)).

faithful and true witness--As "the Amen" expresses the unchangeable
truth of His promises; so "the faithful the true witness," the truth of
His revelations as to the heavenly things which He has seen and
testifies. "Faithful," that is, trustworthy ([Ti2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011), [Ti2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)). "True" is here (Greek,
"alethinos") not truth-speaking (Greek, "alethes"), but "perfectly
realizing all that is comprehended in the name Witness" ([Ti1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)). Three things are necessary for
this: (1) to have seen with His own eyes what He attests; (2) to be
competent to relate it for others; (3) to be willing truthfully to do
so. In Christ all these conditions meet \[TRENCH\].

beginning of the creation of God--not he whom God created first, but as
in [Col 1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015) (see on [Col
1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)), the Beginner of all
creation, its originating instrument. All creation would not be
represented adoring Him, if He were but one of themselves. His being the
Creator is a strong guarantee for His faithfulness as "the Witness and
Amen."

[Revelation 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 3:15</span></span>

neither cold--The antithesis to "hot," literally, "boiling" ("fervent,"
[Act 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025); [Rom
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011); compare [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006); [Luk
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032)), requires that "cold" should
here mean more than negatively cold; it is rather, positively icy cold:
having never yet been warmed. The Laodiceans were in spiritual things
cold comparatively, but not cold as the world outside, and as those who
had never belonged to the Church. The lukewarm state, if it be the
transitional stage to a warmer, is a desirable state (for a little
religion, if real, is better than none); but most fatal when, as here,
an abiding condition, for it is mistaken for a safe state ([Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)). This accounts for Christ's
desiring that they were cold rather than lukewarm. For then there would
not be the same "danger of mixed motive and disregarded principle"
\[ALFORD\]. Also, there is more hope of the "cold," that is, those who
are of the world, and not yet warmed by the Gospel call; for, when
called, they may become hot and fervent Christians: such did the
once-cold publicans, Zaccheus and Matthew, become. But the lukewarm has
been brought within reach of the holy fire, without being heated by it
into fervor: having religion enough to lull the conscience in false
security, but not religion enough to save the soul: as Demas, [Ti2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010). Such were the halters between
two opinions in Israel ([Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021);
compare [Kg2 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041); [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)).

[Revelation 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 3:16</span></span>

neither cold nor hot--So one oldest manuscript, B, and Vulgate read. But
two oldest manuscripts, Syriac, and Coptic transpose thus, "hot nor
cold." It is remarkable that the Greek adjectives are in the masculine,
agreeing with the angel, not feminine, agreeing with the Church. The
Lord addresses the angel as the embodiment and representative of the
Church. The chief minister is answerable for his flock if he have not
faithfully warned the members of it.

I will--Greek, "I am about to," "I am ready to": I have it in my mind:
implying graciously the possibility of the threat not being executed, if
only they repent at once. His dealings towards them will depend on
theirs towards Him.

spue thee out of my month--reject with righteous loathing, as Canaan
spued out its inhabitants for their abominations. Physicians used
lukewarm water to cause vomiting. Cold and hot drinks were common at
feasts, but never lukewarm. There were hot and cold springs near
Laodicea.

[Revelation 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 3:17</span></span>

Self-sufficiency is the fatal danger of a lukewarm state (see on [Rev
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015)).

thou sayest--virtually and mentally, if not in so many words.

increased with goods--Greek, "have become enriched," implying
self-praise in self-acquired riches. The Lord alludes to [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008). The riches on which they prided
themselves were spiritual riches; though, doubtless, their spiritual
self-sufficiency ("I have need of nothing") was much fostered by their
worldly wealth; as, on the other hand, poverty of spirit is fostered by
poverty in respect to worldly riches.

knowest not that thou--in particular above all others. The "THOU" in the
Greek is emphatic.

art wretched--Greek, "art the wretched one."

miserable--So one oldest manuscripts reads. But two oldest manuscripts
prefix "the." Translate, "the pitiable"; "the one especially to be
pitied." How different Christ's estimate of men, from their own estimate
of themselves, "I have need of nothing!"

blind--whereas Laodicea boasted of a deeper than common insight into
divine things. They were not absolutely blind, else eye-salve would have
been of no avail to them; but short-sighted.

[Revelation 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 3:18</span></span>

Gentle and loving irony. Take My advice, thou who fanciest thyself in
need of nothing. Not only art thou not in need of nothing, but art in
need of the commonest necessaries of existence. He graciously stoops to
their modes of thought and speech: Thou art a people ready to listen to
any counsel as to how to buy to advantage; then, listen to My counsel
(for I am "Counsellor," [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)), buy
of ME" (in whom, according to Paul's Epistle written to the neighboring
Colosse and intended for the Laodicean Church also, [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001), [Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003); [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016), are hidden all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge). "Buy" does not imply that we can, by any work or
merit of ours, purchase God's free gift; nay the very purchase money
consists in the renunciation of all self-righteousness, such as Laodicea
had ([Rev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)). "Buy" at the cost of
thine own self-sufficiency (so Paul, [Phi
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#007)); and the giving up of all
things, however dear to us, that would prevent our receiving Christ's
salvation as a free gift, for example, self and worldly desires. Compare
[Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001), "Buy . . . without money
and price."

of me--the source of "unsearchable riches" ([Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)). Laodicea was a city of extensive
money transactions \[CICERO\].

gold tried in, &c.--literally, "fired (and fresh) from the fire," that
is, just fresh from the furnace which has proved its purity, and
retaining its bright gloss. Sterling spiritual wealth, as contrasted
with its counterfeit, in which Laodicea boasted itself. Having bought
this gold she will be no longer poor ([Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)).

mayest be rich--Greek, "mayest be enriched."

white raiment--"garments." Laodicea's wools were famous. Christ offers
infinitely whiter raiment. As "gold tried in the fire" expresses faith
tested by fiery trials: so "white raiment," Christ's righteousness
imputed to the believer in justification and imparted in sanctification.

appear--Greek, "be manifested," namely, at the last day, when everyone
without the wedding garment shall be discovered. To strip one, is in the
East the image of putting to open shame. So also to clothe one with fine
apparel is the image of doing him honor. Man can discover his shame, God
alone can cover it, so that his nakedness shall not be manifested at
last ([Col 3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)). Blessed is he
whose sin is so covered. The hypocrite's shame may be manifested now; it
must be so at last.

anoint . . . with eye-salve--The oldest manuscripts read, "(buy of Me)
eye-salve (collyrium, a roll of ointment), to anoint thine eyes." Christ
has for Laodicea an ointment far more precious than all the costly
unguents of the East. The eye is here the conscience or inner light of
the mind. According as it is sound and "single" (Greek, "haplous,"
"simple"), or otherwise, the man sees aright spiritually, or does not.
The Holy Spirit's unction, like the ancient eye-salve's, first smarts
with conviction of sin, then heals. He opens our eyes first to ourselves
in our wretchedness, then to the Saviour in His preciousness. TRENCH
notices that the most sunken churches of the seven, namely, Sardis and
Laodicea, are the ones in which alone are specified no opponents from
without, nor heresies from within. The Church owes much to God's
overruling Providence which has made so often internal and external
foes, in spite of themselves, to promote His cause by calling forth her
energies in contending for the faith once delivered to the saints. Peace
is dearly bought at the cost of spiritual stagnation, where there is not
interest enough felt in religion to contend about it at all.

[Revelation 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 3:19</span></span>

([Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017); [Pro
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011); [Heb
12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005).) So in the case of Manasseh
([Ch2 33:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011)).

As many--All. "He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. And shalt thou
be an exception? If excepted from suffering the scourge, thou art
excepted from the number of the sons" \[AUGUSTINE\]. This is an
encouragement to Laodicea not to despair, but to regard the rebuke as a
token for good, if she profit by it.

I love--Greek, "philo," the love of gratuitous affection, independent of
any grounds for esteem in the object loved. But in the case of
Philadelphia ([Rev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009)), "I have loved
thee" (Greek, "egapesa") with the love of esteem, founded on the
judgment. Compare the note in my English Gnomon of BENGEL, [Joh
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015).

I rebuke--The "I" in the Greek stands first in the sentence
emphatically. I in My dealings, so altogether unlike man's, in the case
of all whom I love, rebuke. The Greek, "elencho," is the same verb as in
[Joh 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008), "(the Holy Ghost) will
convince (rebuke unto conviction) the world of sin."

chasten--"chastise." The Greek, "paideu," which in classical Greek means
to instruct, in the New Testament means to instruct by chastisement
([Heb 12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005)). David was rebuked unto
conviction, when he cried, "I have sinned against the Lord"; the
chastening followed when his child was taken from him ([Sa2
12:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)). In the divine chastening,
the sinner at one and the same time winces under the rod and learns
righteousness.

be zealous--habitually. Present tense in the Greek, of a lifelong course
of zeal. The opposite of "lukewarm." The Greek by alliteration marks
this: Laodicea had not been "hot" (Greek, "zestos"), she is therefore
urged to "be zealous" (Greek, "zeleue"): both are derived from the same
verb, Greek, "zeo," "to boil."

repent--Greek aorist: of an act to be once for all done, and done at
once.

[Revelation 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 3:20</span></span>

stand--waiting in wonderful condescension and long-suffering.

knock-- ([Sol 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)). This is a further
manifestation of His loving desire for the sinner's salvation. He who is
Himself "the Door," and who bids us "knock" that it may be "opened unto"
us, is first Himself to knock at the door of our hearts. If He did not
knock first, we should never come to knock at His door. Compare [Sol
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004), which is plainly alluded to
here; the Spirit thus in Revelation sealing the canonicity of that
mystical book. The spiritual state of the bride there, between waking
and sleeping, slow to open the door to her divine lover, answers to that
of the lukewarm Laodicea here. "Love in regard to men emptied (humbled)
God; for He does not remain in His place and call to Himself the servant
whom He loved, but He comes down Himself to seek him, and He who is
all-rich arrives at the lodging of the pauper, and with His own voice
intimates His yearning love, and seeks a similar return, and withdraws
not when disowned, and is not impatient at insult, and when persecuted
still waits at the doors" \[NICOLAUS CABASILAS in TRENCH\].

my voice--He appeals to the sinner not only with His hand (His
providences) knocking, but with His voice (His word read or heard; or
rather, His Spirit inwardly applying to man's spirit the lessons to be
drawn from His providence and His word). If we refuse to answer to His
knocking at our door now, He will refuse to hear our knocking at His
door hereafter. In respect to His second coming also, He is even now at
the door, and we know not how soon He may knock: therefore we should
always be ready to open to Him immediately.

if any man hear--for man is not compelled by irresistible force: Christ
knocks, but does not break open the door, though the violent take heaven
by the force of prayer ([Mat 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)):
whosoever does hear, does so not of himself, but by the drawings of
God's grace ([Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)): repentance is
Christ's gift ([Act 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031)). He draws,
not drags. The Sun of righteousness, like the natural sun, the moment
that the door is opened, pours in His light, which could not previously
find an entrance. Compare HILARY on [Psa
118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019).

I will come in to him--as I did to Zaccheus.

sup with him, and he with me--Delightful reciprocity! Compare "dwelleth
in me, and I in Him," [Joh 6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056).
Whereas, ordinarily, the admitted guest sups with the admitter, here the
divine guest becomes Himself the host, for He is the bread of life, and
the Giver of the marriage feast. Here again He alludes to the imagery of
[Sol 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016), where the Bride invites Him
to eat pleasant fruits, even as He had first prepared a feast for her,
"His fruit was sweet to my taste." Compare the same interchange, [Joh
21:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#009), the feast being made up of
the viands that Jesus brought, and those which the disciples brought.
The consummation of this blessed intercommunion shall be at the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb, of which the Lord's Supper is the earnest and
foretaste.

[Revelation 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 3:21</span></span>

sit with me in my throne-- ([Rev
2:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026); [Rev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006); [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028); [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023); [Joh
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022), [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024); [Ti2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)). The same whom Christ had just
before threatened to spue out of His mouth, is now offered a seat with
Him on His throne! "The highest place is within reach of the lowest; the
faintest spark of grace may be fanned into the mightiest flame of love"
\[TRENCH\].

even as I also--Two thrones are here mentioned: (1) His Father's, upon
which He now sits, and has sat since His ascension, after His victory
over death, sin, the world; upon this none can sit save God, and the
God-man Christ Jesus, for it is the incommunicable prerogative of God
alone; (2) the throne which shall be peculiarly His as the once humbled
and then glorified Son of man, to be set up over the whole earth
(heretofore usurped by Satan) at His coming again; in this the
victorious saints shall share ([Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)). The transfigured elect Church
shall with Christ judge and reign over the nations in the flesh, and
Israel the foremost of them; ministering blessings to them as angels
were the Lord's mediators of blessing and administrators of His
government in setting up His throne in Israel at Sinai. This privilege
of our high calling belongs exclusively to the present time while Satan
reigns, when alone there is scope for conflict and for victory ([Ti2
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)). When Satan shall be bound
([Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)), there shall be no longer
scope for it, for all on earth shall know the Lord from the least to the
greatest. This, the grandest and crowning promise, is placed at the end
of all the seven addresses, to gather all in one. It also forms the link
to the next part of the book, where the Lamb is introduced seated on His
Father's throne ([Rev 4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002); [Rev
5:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)). The Eastern throne is broad,
admitting others besides him who, as chief, occupies the center. TRENCH
notices; The order of the promises in the seven epistles corresponds to
that of the unfolding of the kingdom of God its first beginnings on
earth to its consummation in heaven. To the faithful at Ephesus: (1) The
tree of life in the Paradise of God is promised ([Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)), answering to [Gen
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009). (2) Sin entered the world and
death by sin; but to the faithful at Smyrna it is promised, they shall
not be hurt by the second death ([Rev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011)). (3) The promise of the hidden
manna ([Rev 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017)) to Pergamos brings
us to the Mosaic period, the Church in the wilderness. (4) That to
Thyatira, namely, triumph over the nations ([Rev
2:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026)), forms the consummation of
the kingdom in prophetic type, the period of David and Solomon
characterized by this power of the nations. Here there is a division,
the seven falling into two groups, four and three, as often, for
example, the Lord's Prayer, three and four. The scenery of the last
three passes from earth to heaven, the Church contemplated as
triumphant, with its steps from glory to glory. (5) Christ promises to
the believer of Sardis not to blot his name out of the book of life but
to confess him before His Father and the angels at the judgment-day, and
clothe him with a glorified body of dazzling whiteness ([Rev
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)). (6) To the faithful at
Philadelphia Christ promises they shall be citizens of the new
Jerusalem, fixed as immovable pillars there, where city and temple are
one ([Rev 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)); here not only
individual salvation is promised to the believer, as in the case of
Sardis, but also privileges in the blessed communion of the Church
triumphant. (7) Lastly, to the faithful of Laodicea is given the
crowning promise, not only the two former blessings, but a seat with
Christ on His throne, even as He has sat with His Father on His Father's
throne ([Rev 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 4](rev004)

</div>
