<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

BABYLON'S FALL: GOD'S PEOPLE CALLED OUT OF HER: THE KINGS AND MERCHANTS
OF THE EARTH MOURN, WHILE THE SAINTS REJOICE AT HER FALL. (Rev. 18:1-24)

And--so Vulgate and ANDREAS. But A, B, Syriac, and Coptic omit "And."

power--Greek, "authority."

lightened--"illumined."

with--Greek, "owing to."

[Revelation 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 18:2</span></span>

mightily . . . strong--not supported by manuscripts. But A, B, Vulgate,
Syriac, and Coptic read, "with (literally, 'in') a mighty voice."

is fallen, is fallen--so A, Vulgate, Syriac, and ANDREAS. But B and
Coptic omit the second "is fallen" ([Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009); [Jer
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008)). This phrase is here prophetical
of her fall, still future, as [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004) proves.

devils--Greek, "demons."

the hold--a keep or prison.

[Revelation 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 18:3</span></span>

drunk-- [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008), from which perhaps
"the wine" may have been interpolated. They have drunk of her
fornication, the consequence of which will be wrath to themselves. But
A, B, and C read, "(owing to the wrath of her fornication all nations)
have fallen." Vulgate and most versions read as English Version, which
may be the right reading though not supported by the oldest manuscripts.
Babylon, the whore, is destroyed before the beast slays the two
witnesses ([Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007)), and then the
beast himself is destroyed.

the wine--so B, Syriac, and Coptic. But A, C, and Vulgate omit.

abundance--literally, "power."

delicacies--Greek, "luxury." See on [Ti1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011), where the Greek verb "wax
wanton" is akin to the noun here. Translate, "wanton luxury." The
reference is not to earthly merchandise, but to spiritual wares,
indulgences, idolatries, superstitions, worldly compromises, wherewith
the harlot, that is, the apostate Church, has made merchandise of men.
This applies especially to Rome; but the Greek, and even in a less
degree Protestant churches, are not guiltless. However, the principle of
evangelical Protestantism is pure, but the principle of Rome and the
Greek church is not so.

[Revelation 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 18:4</span></span>

Come out of her, my people--quoted from [Jer
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008); [Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006), [Jer
51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045). Even in the Romish Church God
has a people: but they are in great danger; their only safety is in
coming out of her at once. So also in every apostate or world-conforming
church there are some of God's invisible and true Church, who, if they
would be safe, must come out. Especially at the eve of God's judgment on
apostate Christendom: as Lot was warned to come out of Sodom just before
its destruction, and Israel to come from about the tents of Dathan and
Abiram. So the first Christians came out of Jerusalem when the apostate
Jewish Church was judged. "State and Church are precious gifts of God.
But the State being desecrated to a different end from what God designed
it, namely. to govern for, and as under, God, becomes beast-like; the
Church apostatizing becomes the harlot. The true woman is the kernel:
beast and harlot are the shell: whenever the kernel is mature, the shell
is thrown away" \[AUBERLEN\]. "The harlot is not Rome alone (though she
is pre-eminently so), but every Church that has not Christ's mind and
spirit. False Christendom, divided into very many sects, is truly
Babylon, that is, confusion. However, in all Christendom the true
Jesus-congregation, the woman clothed with the sun, lives and is hidden.
Corrupt, lifeless Christendom is the harlot, whose great aim is the
pleasure of the flesh, and which is governed by the spirit of nature and
the world" \[HAHN in AUBERLEN\]. The first justification of the woman is
in her being called out of Babylon the harlot, as the culminating stage
of the latter's sin, when judgment is about to fall: for apostate
Christendom, Babylon, is not to be converted, but to be destroyed.
Secondly, she has to pass through an ordeal of persecution from the
beast, which purifies and prepares her for the transfiguration glory at
Christ's coming ([Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004); [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)).

be not partakers--Greek, "have no fellowship with her sins."

that ye receive not of her plagues--as Lot's wife, by lingering too near
the polluted and doomed city.

[Revelation 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 18:5</span></span>

her sins--as a great heap.

reached--Greek, "reached so far as to come into close contact with, and
to cleave unto."

[Revelation 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 18:6</span></span>

Addressed to the executioners of God's wrath.

Reward--Greek, "repay."

she rewarded--English Version reading adds "you" with none of the oldest
manuscripts. But A, B, C, Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic omit it. She had
not rewarded or repaid the world power for some injury which the world
power had inflicted on her; but she had given the world power that which
was its due, namely, spiritual delusions, because it did not like to
retain God in its knowledge; the unfaithful Church's principle was,
"Populus vult decipi, et decipiatur." "The people like to be deceived,
and let them be deceived."

double--of sorrow. Contrast with this the double of joy which Jerusalem
shall receive for her past suffering ([Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007); [Zac
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)); even as she has received double
punishment for her sins ([Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)).

unto her--So Syriac, Coptic, and ANDREAS. A, B, and C omit it.

in the cup-- ([Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003); [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008); [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)).

filled--literally "mixed."

fill to her double--of the Lord's cup of wrath.

[Revelation 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 18:7</span></span>

How much--that is in proportion as.

lived deliciously--luxuriously: see on [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), where the Greek is akin.

sorrow--Greek, "mourning," as for a dead husband.

I sit--so Vulgate. But A, B, and C prefix "that."

I . . . am no widow--for the world power is my husband and my supporter.

shall see no sorrow--Greek, "mourning." "I am seated (this long time) .
. . I am no widow . . . I shall see no sorrow," marks her complete
unconcerned security as to the past, present, and future \[BENGEL\]. I
shall never have to mourn as one bereft of her husband. As Babylon was
queen of the East, so Rome has been queen of the West, and is called on
Imperial coins "the eternal city." So Papal Rome is called by AMMIAN
MARCELLIN \[15.7\]. "Babylon is a former Rome, and Rome a latter
Babylon. Rome is a daughter of Babylon, and by her, as by her mother,
God has been pleased to subdue the world under one sway" \[AUGUSTINE\].
As the Jew's restoration did not take place till Babylon's fall, so R.
KIMCHI on Obadiah, writes, "When Rome (Edom) shall be devastated, there
shall be redemption to Israel." Romish idolatries have been the great
stumbling-blocks to the Jews' acceptance of Christianity.

[Revelation 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 18:8</span></span>

death--on herself, though she thought herself secure even from the death
of her husband.

mourning--instead of her feasting.

famine--instead of her luxurious delicacies ([Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007)).

fire--(See on [Rev 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)). Literal
fire may burn the literal city of Rome, which is situated in the midst
of volcanic agencies. As the ground was cursed for Adam's sin, and the
earth under Noah was sunk beneath the flood, and Sodom was burnt with
fire, so may Rome be. But as the harlot is mystical (the whole faithless
Church), the burning may be mainly mystical, symbolizing utter
destruction and removal. BENGEL is probably right in thinking Rome will
once more rise to power. The carnal, faithless, and worldly elements in
all churches, Roman, Greek, and Protestant, tend towards one common
center, and prepare the way for the last form of the beast, namely,
Antichrist. The Pharisees were in the main sound in creed, yet judgment
fell on them as on the unsound Sadducees and half-heathenish Samaritans.
So faithless and adulterous, carnal, worldly Protestant churches, will
not escape for their soundness of creed.

the Lord--so B, C, Syriac, and ANDREAS. But A and Vulgate omit. "Strong"
is the meaning of God's Hebrew name, "EL."

judgeth--But A, B, and C read the past tense (Greek, "krinas"), "who
hath judged her": the prophetical past for the future: the charge in
[Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004) to God's people to come out
of her implies that the judgment was not yet actually executed.

[Revelation 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 18:9</span></span>

lived deliciously--Greek, "luxuriated." The faithless Church, instead of
reproving, connived at the self-indulgent luxury of the great men of
this world, and sanctioned it by her own practice. Contrast the world's
rejoicing over the dead bodies of the two witnesses ([Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010)) who had tormented it by their
faithfulness, with its lamentations over the harlot who had made the way
to heaven smooth, and had been found a useful tool in keeping subjects
in abject tyranny. Men's carnal mind relishes a religion like that of
the apostate Church, which gives an opiate to conscience, while leaving
the sinner license to indulge his lusts.

bewail her--A, B, C, Syriac, Coptic, and CYPRIAN omit "her."

[Revelation 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 18:10</span></span>

God's judgments inspire fear even in the worldly, but it is of short
duration, for the kings and great men soon attach themselves to the
beast in its last and worst shape, as open Antichrist, claiming all that
the harlot had claimed in blasphemous pretensions and more, and so
making up to them for the loss of the harlot.

mighty--Rome in Greek means strength; though that derivation is
doubtful.

[Revelation 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 18:11</span></span>

shall--So. B. But A and C read the present, "weep and mourn."

merchandise--Greek, "cargo": wares carried in ships: ship-lading
(compare [Rev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017)). Rome was not a
commercial city, and is not likely from her position to be so. The
merchandise must therefore be spiritual, even as the harlot is not
literal, but spiritual. She did not witness against carnal luxury and
pleasure-seeking, the source of the merchants' gains, but conformed to
them ([Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007)). She cared not for
the sheep, but for the wool. Professing Christian merchants in her lived
as if this world not heaven, were the reality, and were unscrupulous as
to the means of getting gain. Compare Notes, see on [Zac
5:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004), on the same subject, the
judgment on mystical Babylon's merchants for unjust gain. All the
merchandise here mentioned occurs repeatedly in the Roman Ceremonial.

[Revelation 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 18:12</span></span>

(See on [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)).

stones . . . pearls--Greek, "stone . . . pearl."

fine linen--A, B, and C read Greek, "bussinou" for "bussou," that is,
"fine linen manufacture" \[ALFORD\]. The manufacture for which Egypt
(the type of the apostate Church, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)) was famed. Contrast "the fine
linen" ([Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)) put on Israel, and
on the New Testament Church ([Rev
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)), the Bride, by God ([Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009)).

thyine wood--the citrus of the Romans: probably the cypressus thyoyides,
or the thuia articulata. "Citron wood" \[ALFORD\]. A sweet-smelling tree
of Cyrene in Lybia, used for incense.

all manner vessels--Greek, "every vessel," or "furniture."

[Revelation 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 18:13</span></span>

cinnamon--designed by God for better purposes: being an ingredient in
the holy anointing oil, and a plant in the garden of the Beloved ([Sol
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014)); but desecrated to vile uses by
the adulteress ([Pro 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#017)).

odours--of incense. A, C, Vulgate, and Syriac prefix "and amomium" (a
precious hair ointment made from an Asiatic shrub). English Version
reading is supported by Coptic and ANDREAS, but not oldest manuscripts.

ointments--Greek, "ointment."

frankincense--Contrast the true "incense" which God loves ([Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)).

fine flour--the similago of the Latins \[ALFORD\].

beasts--of burden: cattle.

slaves--Greek, "bodies."

souls of men-- ([Eze 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013)). Said of
slaves. Appropriate to the spiritual harlot, apostate Christendom,
especially Rome, which has so often enslaved both bodies and souls of
men. Though the New Testament does not directly forbid slavery, which
would, in the then state of the world, have incited a slave revolt, it
virtually condemns it, as here. Popery has derived its greatest gains
from the sale of masses for the souls of men after death, and of
indulgences purchased from the Papal chancery by rich merchants in
various countries, to be retailed at a profit \[MOSHEIM, III, 95, 96\].

[Revelation 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 18:14</span></span>

Direct address to Babylon.

the fruits that thy soul lusted after--Greek, "thy autumn-ripe fruits of
the lust (eager desire) of the soul."

dainty--Greek, "fat": "sumptuous" in food.

goodly--"splendid," "bright," in dress and equipage.

departed--supported by none of our manuscripts. But A, B, C, Vulgate,
Syriac, and Coptic read, "perished."

thou shalt--A, C, Vulgate, and Syriac read, "They (men) shall no more
find them at all."

[Revelation 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 18:15</span></span>

of these things--of the things mentioned, [Rev
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012).

which--"who."

made rich by--Greek, "derived riches from her."

stand afar off for the fear--(Compare [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010)).

wailing--Greek, "mourning."

[Revelation 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 18:16</span></span>

And--so Vulgate and ANDREAS. But A, B, and C omit.

decked--literally, "glided."

stones . . . pearls--Greek, "stone . . . pearl." B and ANDREAS read
"pearls." But A and C, "pearl."

[Revelation 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 18:17</span></span>

is come to naught--Greek, "is desolated."

shipmaster--Greek, "steersman," or "pilot."

all the company in ships--A, C, Vulgate, and Syriac read, "Every one who
saileth to a place" (B has ". . . to the place"), every voyager. Vessels
were freighted with pilgrims to various shrines, so that in one month
(A.D. 1300) two hundred thousand pilgrims were counted in Rome
\[D'AAUBIGNE, Histoire de la Reformation\]: a source of gain, not only
to the Papal see, but to shipmasters, merchants, pilots, &c. These
latter, however, are not restricted to those literally "shipmasters,"
&c., but mainly refer, in the mystical sense, to all who share in the
spiritual traffic of apostate Christendom.

[Revelation 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 18:18</span></span>

when they saw--Greek, "horontes." But A, B, C, and ANDREAS read, Greek,
"blepontes," "looking at." Greek, "blepo," is to use the eyes, to look:
the act of seeing without thought of the object seen. Greek, "horao,"
refers to the thing seen or presented to the eyes \[TITTMANN\].

smoke--so B, C. But A reads "place."

What city is like--Compare the similar beast as to the beast, [Rev
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004) : so closely do the harlot and
beast approximate one another. Contrast the attribution of this praise
to God, to whom alone it is due, by His servants ([Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)). MARTIAL says of Rome, "Nothing
is equal to her;" and ATHENÃ†US, "She is the epitome of the world."

[Revelation 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 18:19</span></span>

wailing--"mourning."

that had ships--A, B, and C read, "that had their ships": literally,
"the ships."

costliness--her costly treasures: abstract for concrete.

[Revelation 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 18:20</span></span>

holy apostles--So C reads. But A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, and
ANDREAS read, "Ye saints and ye apostles."

avenged you on her--Greek, "judged your judgment on (literally, exacting
it from) her." "There is more joy in heaven at the harlot's downfall
than at that of the two beasts. For the most heinous of all sin is the
sin of those who know God's word of grace, and keep it not. The
worldliness of the Church is the most worldly of all worldliness. Hence,
Babylon, in Revelation, has not only Israel's sins, but also the sins of
the heathen; and John dwells longer on the abominations and judgments of
the harlot than on those of the beast. The term 'harlot' describes the
false Church's essential character. She retains her human shape as the
woman, does not become a beast: she has the form of godliness, but
denies its power. Her rightful lord and husband, Jehovah-Christ, and the
joys and goods of His house, are no longer her all in all, but she runs
after the visible and vain things of the world, in its manifold forms.
The fullest form of her whoredom is, where the Church wishes to be
itself a worldly power, uses politics and diplomacy, makes flesh her
arm, uses unholy means for holy ends, spreads her dominion by sword or
money, fascinates men by sensual ritualism, becomes 'mistress of
ceremonies' to the dignitaries of the world, flatters prince or people,
and like Israel, seeks the help of one world power against the danger
threatening from another" \[AUBERLEN\]. Judgment, therefore, begins with
the harlot, as in privileges the house of God.

[Revelation 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 18:21</span></span>

a--Greek, "one."

millstone--Compare the judgment on the Egyptian hosts at the Red Sea,
[Exo 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005), [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010); [Neh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011), and the foretold doom of
Babylon, the world power, [Jer
51:63-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063).

with violence--Greek, "with impetus." This verse shows that this
prophecy is regarded as still to be fulfilled.

[Revelation 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 18:22</span></span>

pipers--flute players. "Musicians," painters and sculptors, have
desecrated their art to lend fascination to the sensuous worship of
corrupt Christendom.

craftsman--artisan.

[Revelation 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 18:23</span></span>

What a blessed contrast is [Rev 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005),
respecting the city of God: "They need no candle (just as Babylon shall
no more have the light of a candle, but for a widely different reason),
for the Lord God giveth them light."

candle--Translate as Greek, "lamp."

bridegroom . . . bride . . . no more . . . in thee--Contrast the
heavenly city, with its Bridegroom, Bride, and blessed marriage supper
([Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007), [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009); [Isa
62:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)).

thy merchants were--So most of the best authorities read. But A omits
the Greek article before "merchants," and then translates, "The great
men of . . . were thy merchants."

sorceries--Greek, "sorcery."

[Revelation 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 18:24</span></span>

Applied by Christ ([Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)) to
apostate Jerusalem, which proves that not merely the literal city Rome,
and the Church of Rome (though the chief representative of the
apostasy), but the WHOLE of the faithless Church of both the Old and New
Testament is meant by Babylon the harlot; just as the whole Church (Old
and New Testament) is meant by "the woman" ([Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)). As to literal city, ARINGHUS in
BENGEL says, Pagan Rome was the "general shambles" for slaying the sheep
of Jesus. FRED. SEYLER in BENGEL calculates that papal Rome, between
A.D. 1540 and 1580, slew more than nine hundred thousand Protestants.
Three reasons for the harlot's downfall are given: (1) The worldly
greatness of her merchants, which was due to unholy traffic in spiritual
things. (2) Her sorceries, or juggling tricks, in which the false
prophet that ministers to the beast in its last form shall exceed her;
compare "sorcerers" ([Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008); [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)), specially mentioned among
those doomed to the lake of fire. (3) Her persecution of (Old Testament)
"prophets" and (New Testament) "saints."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
