<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev019)  [Next](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001)

[Revelation 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 20:1</span></span>

SATAN BOUND, AND THE FIRST-RISEN SAINTS REIGN WITH CHRIST, A THOUSAND
YEARS; SATAN LOOSED, GATHERS THE NATIONS, GOG AND MAGOG, ROUND THE CAMP
OF THE SAINTS, AND IS FINALLY CONSIGNED TO THE LAKE OF FIRE; THE GENERAL
RESURRECTION AND LAST JUDGMENT. ([Rev
20:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001))

The destruction of his representatives, the beast and the false prophet,
to whom he had given his power, throne, and authority, is followed by
the binding of Satan himself for a thousand years.

the key of the bottomless pit--now transferred from Satan's hands, who
had heretofore been permitted by God to use it in letting loose plagues
on the earth; he is now to be made to feel himself the torment which he
had inflicted on men, but his full torment is not until he is cast into
"the lake of fire" ([Rev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010)).

[Revelation 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 20:2</span></span>

that old--ancient serpent ([Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)).

thousand years--As seven mystically implies universality, so a thousand
implies perfection, whether in good or evil \[AQUINAS on ch. 11\].
Thousand symbolizes that the world is perfectly leavened and pervaded by
the divine; since thousand is ten, the number of the world, raised to
the third power, three being the number of God \[AUBERLEN\]. It may
denote literally also a thousand years.

[Revelation 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 20:3</span></span>

shut him--A, B, Vulgate, Syriac, and ANDREAS omit "him."

set a seal upon him--Greek, "over him," that is, sealed up the door of
the abyss over his head. A surer seal to keep him from getting out than
his seal over Jesus in the tomb of Joseph, which was burst on the
resurrection morn. Satan's binding at' this juncture is not arbitrary,
but is the necessary consequence of the events ([Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)); just as Satan's being cast out
of heaven, where he had previously been the accuser of the brethren, was
the legitimate judgment which passed on him through the death,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ ([Rev
12:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)). Satan imagined that he had
overcome Christ on Golgotha, and that his power was secure for ever, but
the Lord in death overcame him, and by His ascension as our righteous
Advocate cast out Satan, the accuser from heaven. Time was given on
earth to make the beast and harlot powerful, and then to concentrate all
his power in Antichrist. The Antichristian kingdom, his last effort,
being utterly destroyed by Christ's mere appearing, his power on earth
is at an end. He had thought to destroy God's people on earth by
Antichristian persecutions (just as he had thought previously to destroy
Christ); but the Church is not destroyed from the earth but is raised to
rule over it, and Satan himself is shut up for a thousand years in the
"abyss" (Greek for "bottomless pit"), the preparatory prison to the
"lake of fire," his final doom. As before he ceased by Christ's
ascension to be an accuser in heaven, so during the millennium he ceases
to be the seducer and the persecutor on earth. As long as the devil
rules in the darkness of the world, we live in an atmosphere impregnated
with deadly elements. A mighty purification of the air will be effected
by Christ's coming. Though sin will not be absolutely abolished--for men
will still be in the flesh ([Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)) --sin will no longer be a
universal power, for the flesh is not any longer seduced by Satan. He
will not be, as now, "the god and prince of the world"--nor will the
world "lie in the wicked one"--the flesh will become ever more isolated
and be overcome. Christ will reign with His transfigured saints over men
in the flesh \[AUBERLEN\]. This will be the manifestation of "the world
to come," which has been already set up invisibly in the saints, amidst
"this world" ([Co2 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004); [Heb
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005); [Heb
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)). The Jewish Rabbis thought, as
the world was created in six days and on the seventh God rested, so
there would be six millenary periods, followed by a sabbatical
millennium. Out of seven years every seventh is the year of remission,
so out of the seven thousand years of the world the seventh millenary
shall be the millenary of remission. A tradition in the house of Elias,
A.D. 200, states that the world is to endure six thousand years; two
thousand before the law, two thousand under the law, and two thousand
under Messiah. Compare Note, see on [Heb
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009) and [Heb
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009), Margin; see on [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013). PAPIAS, JUSTIN MARTYR,
IRENÃ†US, and CYPRIAN, among the earliest Fathers, all held the doctrine
of a millennial kingdom on earth; not till millennial views degenerated
into gross carnalism was this doctrine abandoned.

that he should deceive--so A. But B reads, "that he deceive" (Greek,
"plana," for "planeesee").

and--so Coptic and ANDREAS. But A, B, and Vulgate omit "and."

[Revelation 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 20:4</span></span>

they sat--the twelve apostles, and the saints in general.

judgment was given unto there--(See on [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)). The office of judging was given
to them. Though in one sense having to stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ, yet in another sense they "do not come into judgment (Greek),
but have already passed from death unto life."

souls--This term is made a plea for denying the literality of the first
resurrection, as if the resurrection were the spiritual one of the souls
of believers in this life; the life and reign being that of the soul
raised in this life from the death of sin by vivifying faith. But
"souls" expresses their disembodied state (compare [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)) as John saw them at first; "and
they lived" implies their coming to life in the body again, so as to be
visible, as the phrase, [Rev 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005),
"this is the first resurrection," proves; for as surely as "the rest of
the dead lived not (again) until," &c., refers to the bodily general
resurrection, so must the first resurrection refer to the body. This
also accords with [Co1 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023), "They
that are Christ's at His coming." Compare [Psa
49:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011). From [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009), I infer that "souls" is here used
in the strict sense of spirits disembodied when first seen by John;
though doubtless "souls" is often used in general for persons, and even
for dead bodies.

beheaded--literally, "smitten with an axe"; a Roman punishment, though
crucifixion, casting to beasts, and burning, were the more common modes
of execution. The guillotine in revolutionary France was a revival of
the mode of capital punishment of pagan imperial Rome. Paul was
beheaded, and no doubt shall share the first resurrection, in accordance
with his prayer that he "might attain unto the resurrection from out of
the rest of the dead" (Greek, "exanastasis"). The above facts may
account for the specification of this particular kind of punishment.

for . . . for--Greek, "for the sake of"; on account of"; "because of."

and which--Greek, "and the which." And prominent among this class (the
beheaded), such as did not worship the beast. So [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007), Greek, "and the which," or "and
such as," particularizes prominently among the general class those that
follow in the description \[TREGELLES\]. The extent of the first
resurrection is not spoken of here. In [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023), [Co1
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051); [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014) we find that all "in Christ"
shall share in it. John himself was not "beheaded," yet who doubts but
that he shall share in the first resurrection? The martyrs are put
first, because most like Jesus in their sufferings and death, therefore
nearest Him in their life and reign; for Christ indirectly affirms there
are relative degrees and places of honor in His kingdom, the highest
being for those who drink his cup of suffering. Next shall be those who
have not bowed to the world power, but have looked to the things unseen
and eternal.

neither--"not yet."

foreheads . . . hands--Greek, "forehead . . . hand."

reigned with Christ--over the earth.

[Revelation 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 20:5</span></span>

But--B, Coptic, and ANDREAS read, "and." A and Vulgate omit it.

again--A, B, Vulgate, Coptic, and ANDREAS omit it. "Lived" is used for
lived again, as in [Rev 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008). John saw
them not only when restored to life, but when in the act of reviving
\[BENGEL\].

first resurrection--"the resurrection of the just." Earth is not yet
transfigured, and cannot therefore be the meet locality for the
transfigured Church; but from heaven the transfigured saints with Christ
rule the earth, there being a much freer communion of the heavenly and
earthly churches (a type of which state may be seen in the forty days of
the risen Saviour during which He appeared to His disciples), and they
know no higher joy than to lead their brethren on earth to the same
salvation and glory as they share themselves. The millennial reign on
earth does not rest on an isolated passage of the Apocalypse, but all
Old Testament prophecy goes on the same view (compare [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003); [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009); [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)). Jesus, while opposing the
carnal views of the kingdom of God prevalent among the Jews in His day,
does not contradict, but confirms, the Old Testament view of a coming,
earthly, Jewish kingdom of glory: beginning from within, and spreading
itself now spiritually, the kingdom of God shall manifest itself
outwardly at Christ's coming again. The papacy is a false anticipation
of the kingdom during the Church-historical period. "When Christianity
became a worldly power under Constantine, the hope of the future was
weakened by the joy over present success" \[BENGEL\]. Becoming a harlot,
the Church ceased to be a bride going to meet her Bridegroom; thus
millennial hopes disappeared. The rights which Rome as a harlot usurped,
shall be exercised in holiness by the Bride. They are "kings" because
they are "priests" ([Rev 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006); [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006); [Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)); their priesthood unto God and
Christ ([Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015)) is the ground of
their kingship in relation to man. Men will be willing subjects of the
transfigured priest-kings, in the day of the Lord's power. Their power
is that of attraction, winning the heart, and not counteracted by devil
or beast. Church and State shall then be co-extensive. Man created "to
have dominion over earth" is to rejoice over his world with unmixed,
holy joy. John tells us that, instead of the devil, the transfigured
Church of Christ; Daniel, that instead of the heathen beast, the holy
Israel, shall rule the world \[AUBERLEN\].

[Revelation 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 20:6</span></span>

Blessed--(Compare [Rev 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013); [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009)).

on such the second death hath no power--even as it has none on Christ
now that He is risen.

priests of God--Apostate Christendom being destroyed, and the believing
Church translated at Christ's coming, there will remain Israel and the
heathen world, constituting the majority of men then alive, which, from
not having come into close contact with the Gospel, have not incurred
the guilt of rejecting it. These will be the subjects of a general
conversion ([Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)). "The veil"
shall be taken off Israel first, then from off "all people." The
glorious events attending Christ's appearing, the destruction of
Antichrist, the transfiguration of the Church, and the binding of Satan,
will prepare the nations for embracing the Gospel. As individual
regeneration goes on now, so there shall be a "regeneration" of nations
then. Israel, as a nation, shall be "born at once--in one day." As the
Church began at Christ's ascension, so the kingdom shall begin at His
second advent. This is the humiliation of the modern civilized nations,
that nations which they despise most, Jews and uncivilized barbarians,
the negro descendants of Ham who from the curse of Noah have been so
backward, Cush and Sheba, shall supplant and surpass them as centers of
the world's history (compare [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021); [Rom
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019); [Rom
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020), &c.). The Jews are our teachers
even in New Testament times. Since their rejection revelation has been
silent. The whole Bible, even the New Testament, is written by Jews. If
revelation is to recommence in the millennial kingdom, converted Israel
must stand at the head of humanity. In a religious point of view, Jews
and Gentiles stand on an equal footing as both alike needing mercy; but
as regards God's instrumentalities for bringing about His kingdom on
earth, Israel is His chosen people for executing His plans. The
Israelite priest-kings on earth are what the transfigured priest-kings
are in heaven. There shall be a blessed chain of giving and
receiving--God, Christ, the transfigured Bride the Church, Israel, the
world of nations. A new time of revelation will begin by the outpouring
of the fulness of the Spirit. Ezekiel (the fortieth through forty-eighth
chapters), himself son of a priest, sets forth the priestly character of
Israel; Daniel the statesman, its kingly character; Jeremiah ([Jer
33:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#017)), both its priestly and
kingly character. In the Old Testament the whole Jewish national life
was religious only in an external legal manner. The New Testament Church
insists on inward renewal, but leaves its outward manifestations free.
But in the millennial kingdom, all spheres of life shall be truly
Christianized from within outwardly. The Mosaic ceremonial law
corresponds to Israel's priestly office; the civil law to its kingly
office: the Gentile Church adopts the moral law, and exercises the
prophetic office by the word working inwardly. But when the royal and
the priestly office shall be revived, then--the principles of the
Epistle to the Hebrews remaining the same--also the ceremonial and civil
law of Moses will develop its spiritual depths in the divine worship
(compare [Mat 5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)). At present is
the time of preaching; but then the time of the Liturgy of converted
souls forming "the great congregation" shall come. Then shall our
present defective governments give place to perfect governments in both
Church and State. Whereas under the Old Testament the Jews exclusively,
and in the New Testament the Gentiles exclusively, enjoy the revelation
of salvation (in both cases humanity being divided and separated), in
the millennium both Jews and Gentiles are united, and the whole organism
of mankind under the first-born brother, Israel, walks in the light of
God, and the full life of humanity is at last realized. Scripture does
not view the human race as an aggregate of individuals and
nationalities, but as an organic whole, laid down once for all in the
first pages of revelation. ([Gen
9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025); [Gen
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001), [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005), [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018), [Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025), [Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032); [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008) recognizes the fact that from the
first the division of the nations was made with a relation to Israel).
Hence arises the importance of the Old Testament to the Church now as
ever. Three grand groups of nations, Hamites, Japhetites, and Shemites,
correspond respectively to the three fundamental elements in man--body,
soul, and spirit. The flower of Shem, the representative of spiritual
life, is Israel, even as the flower of Israel is He in whom all mankind
is summed up, the second Adam ([Gen
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)). Thus Israel is the mediator
of divine revelations for all times. Even nature and the animal world
will share in the millennial blessedness. As sin loses its power, decay
and death will decrease \[AUBERLEN\]. Earthly and heavenly glories shall
be united in the twofold election. Elect Israel in the flesh shall stand
at the head of the earthly, the elect spiritual Church, the Bride, in
the heavenly. These twofold elections are not merely for the good of the
elect themselves, but for the good of those to whom they minister. The
heavenly Church is elected not merely to salvation, but to rule in love,
and minister blessings over the whole earth, as king-priests. The glory
of the transfigured saints shall be felt by men in the flesh with the
same consciousness of blessing as on the Mount of Transfiguration the
three disciples experienced in witnessing the glory of Jesus, and of
Moses and Elias, when Peter exclaimed, "It is good for us to be here";
in [Pe2 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016), the Transfiguration
is regarded as the earnest of Christ's coming in glory. The privilege of
"our high calling in Christ" is limited to the present time of Satan's
reign; when he is bound, there will be no scope for suffering for, and
so afterwards reigning with, Him ([Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021); compare Note, see on [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)). Moreover, none can be saved in
the present age and in the pale of the Christian Church who does not
also reign with Christ hereafter, the necessary preliminary to which is
suffering with Christ now. If we fail to lay hold of the crown, we lose
all, "the gift of grace as well as the reward of service" \[DE BURGH\].

[Revelation 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 20:7</span></span>

expired--Greek, "finished."

[Revelation 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 20:8</span></span>

Gog and Magog-- (Eze. 38:1-39:29; see on [Eze
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002)). Magog is a general name for
northern nations of Japheth's posterity, whose ideal head is Gog ([Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)). A has but one Greek article to
"Gog and Magog," whereby the two, namely, the prince and the people, are
marked as having the closest connection. B reads the second article
before Magog wrongly. HILLER \[Onomasticon\] explains both words as
signifying "lofty," "elevated." For "quarters" the Greek is "corners."

to battle--Greek, "to the war," in A and B. But ANDREAS omits "the."

[Revelation 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 20:9</span></span>

on the breadth of the earth--so as completely to overspread it. Perhaps
we ought to translate, ". . . of the \[holy\] land."

the camp of the saints and the beloved city--the camp of the saints
encircling the beloved city, Jerusalem (Ecclesiasticus 24:11). Contrast
"hateful" in Babylon ([Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002); [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), Septuagint). Ezekiel's prophecy
of Gog and Magog (Eze. 38:1-39:29) refers to the attack made by
Antichrist on Israel before the millennium: but this attack is made
after the millennium, so that "Gog and Magog" are mystical names
representing the final adversaries led by Satan in person. Ezekiel's Gog
and Magog come from the north, but those here come "from the four
corners of the earth." Gog is by some connected with a Hebrew root,
"covered."

from God--so B, Vulgate, Syriac, Coptic, and ANDREAS. But A omits the
words. Even during the millennium there is a separation between heaven
and earth, transfigured humanity and humanity in the flesh. Hence it is
possible that an apostasy should take place at its close. In the
judgment on this apostasy the world of nature is destroyed and renewed,
as the world of history was before the millennial kingdom; it is only
then that the new heaven and new earth are realized in final perfection.
The millennial new heaven and earth are but a foretaste of this
everlasting state when the upper and lower congregations shall be no
longer separate, though connected as in the millennium, and when new
Jerusalem shall descend from God out of heaven. The inherited sinfulness
of our nature shall be the only influence during the millennium to
prevent the power of the transfigured Church saving all souls. When this
time of grace shall end, no other shall succeed. For what can move him
in whom the visible glory of the Church, while the influence of evil is
restrained, evokes no longing for communion with the Church's King? As
the history of the world of nations ended with the manifestation of the
Church in visible glory, so that of mankind in general shall end with
the great separation of the just from the wicked ([Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)) \[AUBERLEN\].

[Revelation 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 20:10</span></span>

that deceived--Greek, "that deceiveth."

lake of fire--his final doom: as "the bottomless pit" ([Rev
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001)) was his temporary prison.

where--so Coptic. But A, B, Vulgate, and Syriac read, "where also."

the beast and the false prophet are-- ([Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)).

day and night--figurative for without intermission ([Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)), such as now is caused by night
interposing between day and day. The same phrase is used of the external
state of the blessed ([Rev 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008)). As
the bliss of these is eternal, so the woe of Satan and the lost must be.
As the beast and the false prophet led the former conspiracy against
Christ and His people, so Satan in person heads the last conspiracy.
Satan shall not be permitted to enter this Paradise regained, to show
the perfect security of believers, unlike the first Adam whom Satan
succeeded in robbing of Paradise; and shall, like Pharaoh at the Rod
Sea, receive in this last attempt his final doom.

for ever and ever--Greek, "to the ages of the ages."

[Revelation 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 20:11</span></span>

great--in contrast to the "thrones," [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004).

white--the emblem of purity and justice.

him that sat on it--the Father \[ALFORD\]. Rather, the Son, to whom "the
Father hath committed all judgment." God in Christ, that is, the Father
represented by the Son, is He before whose judgment-seat we must all
stand. The Son's mediatorial reign is with a view to prepare the kingdom
for the Father's acceptance. When He has done that, He shall give it up
to the Father, "that God may be all in all," coming into direct
communion with His creatures, without intervention of a Mediator, for
the first time since the fall. Heretofore Christ's Prophetical mediation
had been prominent in His earthly ministry, His Priestly mediation is
prominent now in heaven between His first and second advents, and His
Kingly shall be so during the millennium and at the general judgment.

earth and heaven fled away--The final conflagration, therefore, precedes
the general judgment. This is followed by the new heaven and earth (Rev.
21:1-27).

[Revelation 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 20:12</span></span>

the dead--"the rest of the dead" who did not share the first
resurrection, and those who died during the millennium.

small and great--B has "the small and the great." A, Vulgate, Syriac,
and ANDREAS have "the great and the small." The wicked who had died from
the time of Adam to Christ's second advent, and all the righteous and
wicked who had died during and after the millennium, shall then have
their eternal portion assigned to them. The godly who were transfigured
and reigned with Christ during it, shall also be present, not indeed to
have their portion assigned as if for the first time (for that shall
have been fixed long before, [Joh
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)), but to have it confirmed for
ever, and that God's righteousness may be vindicated in the case of both
the saved and the lost, in the presence of an assembled universe.
Compare "We must ALL appear," &c. [Rom
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010); [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010). The saints having been first
pronounced just themselves by Christ out of "the book of life," shall
sit as assessors of the Judge. Compare [Mat
25:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031), [Mat
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040), "these My brethren." God's
omniscience will not allow the most insignificant to escape unobserved,
and His omnipotence will cause the mightiest to obey the summons. The
living are not specially mentioned: as these all shall probably first
(before the destruction of the ungodly, [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)) be transfigured, and caught up
with the saints long previously transfigured; and though present for the
confirmation of their justification by the Judge, shall not then first
have their eternal state assigned to them, but shall sit as assessors
with the Judge.

the books . . . opened-- ([Dan 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)).
The books of God's remembrance, alike of the evil and the good ([Psa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008); [Psa
139:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#004); [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016)): conscience ([Rom
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)), the word of Christ ([Joh
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)), the law ([Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)), God's eternal counsel ([Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016)).

book of life-- ([Rev 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005); [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027); [Exo
32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032); [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)). Besides the general book
recording the works of all, there is a special book for believers in
which their names are written, not for their works, but for the work of
Christ for, and in, them. Therefore it is called, "the Lamb's book of
life." Electing grace has singled them out from the general mass.

according to their works--We are justified by faith, but judged
according to (not by) our works. For the general judgment is primarily
designed for the final vindication of God's righteousness before the
whole world, which in this checkered dispensation of good and evil,
though really ruling the world, has been for the time less manifest.
Faith is appreciable by God and the believer alone ([Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017)). But works are appreciable by
all. These, then, are made the evidential test to decide men's eternal
state, thus showing that God's administration of judgment is altogether
righteous.

[Revelation 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 20:13</span></span>

death and hell--Greek, "Hades." The essential identity of the dying and
risen body is hereby shown; for the sea and grave give up their dead.
The body that sinned or served God shall, in righteous retribution, be
the body also that shall suffer or be rewarded. The "sea" may have a
symbolical \[CLUVER from AUGUSTINE\], besides the literal meaning, as,
in [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008); [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Rev
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017), [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019); so "death" and "hell" are
personifications (compare [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)).
But the literal sense need hardly be departed from: all the different
regions wherein the bodies and souls of men had been, gave them up.

[Revelation 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 20:14</span></span>

Death and Hades, as personified representatives of the enemies of
Christ' and His Church, are said to be cast into the lake of fire to
express the truth that Christ and His people shall never more die, or be
in the state of disembodied spirits.

This is the second death--"the lake of fire" is added in A, B, and
ANDREAS. English Version, which omits the clause, rests on inferior
manuscripts. In hell the ancient form of death, which was one of the
enemies destroyed by Christ, shall not continue, but a death of a far
different kind reigns there, "everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord": an abiding testimony of the victory of Christ.

[Revelation 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 20:15</span></span>

The blissful lot of the righteous is not here specially mentioned as
their bliss had commenced before the final judgment. Compare, however,
[Mat 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034), [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 21](rev021)

</div>
