<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

[Romans 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 12:1</span></span>

DUTIES OF BELIEVERS, GENERAL AND PARTICULAR. (Rom. 12:1-21)

I beseech you therefore--in view of all that has been advanced in the
foregoing part of this Epistle.

by the mercies of God--those mercies, whose free and unmerited nature,
glorious Channel, and saving fruits have been opened up at such length.

that ye present--See on [Rom 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013),
where we have the same exhortation and the same word there rendered
"yield" (as also in [Rom 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016), [Rom
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)).

your bodies--that is, "yourselves in the body," considered as the organ
of the inner life. As it is through the body that all the evil that is
in the unrenewed heart comes forth into palpable manifestation and
action, so it is through the body that all the gracious principles and
affections of believers reveal themselves in the outward life.
Sanctification extends to the whole man ([Th1
5:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)).

a living sacrifice--in glorious contrast to the legal sacrifices, which,
save as they were slain, were no sacrifices at all. The death of the one
"Lamb of God, taking away the sin of the world," has swept all dead
victims from off the altar of God, to make room for the redeemed
themselves as "living sacrifices" to Him who made "Him to be sin for
us"; while every outgoing of their grateful hearts in praise, and every
act prompted by the love of Christ, is itself a sacrifice to God of a
sweet-smelling savor ([Heb 13:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)).

holy--As the Levitical victims, when offered without blemish to God,
were regarded as holy, so believers, "yielding themselves to God as
those that are alive from the dead, and their members as instruments of
righteousness unto God," are, in His estimation, not ritually but really
"holy," and so

acceptable--"well-pleasing"

unto God--not as the Levitical offerings, merely as appointed symbols of
spiritual ideas, but objects, intrinsically, of divine complacency, in
their renewed character, and endeared relationship to Him through His
Son Jesus Christ.

which is your reasonable--rather, "rational"

service--in contrast, not to the senselessness of idol-worship, but to
the offering of irrational victims under the law. In this view the
presentation of ourselves, as living monuments of redeeming mercy, is
here called "our rational service"; and surely it is the most rational
and exalted occupation of God's reasonable creatures. So [Pe2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005), "to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ."

[Romans 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 12:2</span></span>

And be ye not conformed to this world--Compare [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002); [Gal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004), Greek.

but be ye transformed--or, "transfigured" (as in [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002); and [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018), Greek).

by the renewing of your mind--not by a mere outward disconformity to the
ungodly world, many of whose actions in themselves may be virtuous and
praiseworthy; but by such an inward spiritual transformation as makes
the whole life new--new in its motives and ends, even where the actions
differ in nothing from those of the world--new, considered as a whole,
and in such a sense as to be wholly unattainable save through the
constraining power of the love of Christ.

that ye may prove--that is, experimentally. (On the word "experience"
see on [Rom 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004), and compare [Th1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010), where the sentiment is the
same).

what is that--"the"

good and acceptable--"well-pleasing"

and perfect, will of God--We prefer this rendering (with CALVIN) to that
which many able critics \[THOLUCK, MEYER, DE WETTE, FRITZSCHE, PHILIPPI,
ALFORD, HODGE\] adopt--"that ye may prove," or "discern the will of God,
\[even\] what is good, and acceptable, and perfect." God's will is
"good," as it demands only what is essentially and unchangeably good
([Rom 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#010)); it is "well pleasing," in
contrast with all that is arbitrary, as demanding only what God has
eternal complacency in (compare [Mic
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008), with [Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)); and it is "perfect," as it
required nothing else than the perfection of God's reasonable creature,
who, in proportion as he attains to it, reflects God's own perfection.
Such then is the great general duty of the redeemed--SELF-CONSECRATION,
in our whole spirit and soul and body to Him who hath called us into the
fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ. Next follow specific duties, chiefly
social; beginning with Humility, the chiefest of all the graces--but
here with special reference to spiritual gifts.

[Romans 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 12:3</span></span>

For I say--authoritatively

through the grace given unto me--as an apostle of Jesus Christ; thus
exemplifying his own precept by modestly falling back on that office
which both warranted and required such plainness towards all classes.

to every man that is among you, not to think, &c.--It is impossible to
convey in good English the emphatic play, so to speak, which each word
here has upon another: "not to be high-minded above what he ought to be
minded, but so to be minded as to be sober-minded" \[CALVIN, ALFORD\].
This is merely a strong way of characterizing all undue self-elevation.

according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith--Faith is
here viewed as the inlet to all the other graces, and so, as the
receptive faculty of the renewed soul--that is, "as God hath given to
each his particular capacity to take in the gifts and graces which He
designs for the general good."

[Romans 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 12:4</span></span>

For as we have many members, &c.--The same diversity and yet unity
obtains in the body of Christ, whereof all believers are the several
members, as in the natural body.

[Romans 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 12:6</span></span>

Having then gifts differing according to the grace given to us--Here,
let it be observed, all the gifts of believers alike are viewed as
communications of mere grace.

whether--we have the gift of

prophecy--that is, of inspired teaching (as in [Act
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032)). Anyone speaking with divine
authority--whether with reference to the past, the present, or the
future--was termed a prophet ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)).

let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith--rather, "of our
faith." Many Romish expositors and some Protestant (as CALVIN and
BENGEL, and, though, hesitatingly, BEZA and HODGE), render this "the
analogy of faith," understanding by it "the general tenor" or "rule of
faith," divinely delivered to men for their guidance. But this is
against the context, whose object is to show that, as all the gifts of
believers are according to their respective capacity for them, they are
not to be puffed up on account of them, but to use them purely for their
proper ends.

[Romans 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 12:7</span></span>

Or ministry, let us wait on--"be occupied with."

our ministering--The word here used imports any kind of service, from
the dispensing of the word of life ([Act
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)) to the administering of the
temporal affairs of the Church ([Act
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)). The latter seems intended
here, being distinguished from "prophesying," "teaching," and
"exhorting."

or he that teacheth--Teachers are expressly distinguished from prophets,
and put after them, as exercising a lower function ([Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001); [Co1
12:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)). Probably it consisted
mainly in opening up the evangelical bearings of Old Testament
Scripture; and it was in this department apparently that Apollos showed
his power and eloquence ([Act 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)).

[Romans 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 12:8</span></span>

Or he that exhorteth--Since all preaching, whether by apostles,
prophets, or teachers, was followed up by exhortation ([Act
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023); [Act
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022); [Act
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032), &c.), many think that no
specific class is here in view. But if liberty was given to others to
exercise themselves occasionally in exhorting the brethren, generally,
or small parties of the less instructed, the reference may be to them.

he that giveth--in the exercise of private benevolence probably, rather
than in the discharge of diaconal duty.

with simplicity--so the word probably means. But as simplicity seems
enjoined in the next clause but one of this same verse, perhaps the
meaning here is, "with liberality," as the same word is rendered in [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002); [Co2
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011).

he that ruleth--whether in the Church or his own household. See [Ti1
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004), where the same word is applied
to both.

with diligence--with earnest purpose.

he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness--not only without grudging
either trouble or pecuniary relief, but feeling it to be "more blessed
to give than to receive," and to help than be helped.

[Romans 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 12:9</span></span>

Let love be without dissimulation--"Let your love be unfeigned" (as in
[Co2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006); [Pe1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022); and see [Jo1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018)).

Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good--What a lofty
tone of moral principle and feeling is here inculcated! It is not,
Abstain from the one, and do the other; nor, Turn away from the one, and
draw to the other; but, Abhor the one, and cling, with deepest sympathy,
to the other.

[Romans 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 12:10</span></span>

Be, &c.--better, "In brotherly love be affectionate one to another; in
\[giving, or showing\] honor, outdoing each other." The word rendered
"prefer" means rather "to go before," "take the lead," that is, "show an
example." How opposite is this to the reigning morality of the heathen
world! and though Christianity has so changed the spirit of society,
that a certain beautiful disinterestedness and self-sacrifice shines in
the character of not a few who are but partially, if at all under the
transforming power of the Gospel, it is only those whom "the love of
Christ constrains to live not unto themselves," who are capable of
thoroughly acting in the spirit of this precept.

[Romans 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 12:11</span></span>

not slothful in business--The word rendered "business" means "zeal,"
"diligence," "purpose"; denoting the energy of action.

serving the Lord--that is, the Lord Jesus (see [Eph
6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)). Another reading--"serving the
time," or "the occasion"--which differs in form but very slightly from
the received reading, has been adopted by good critics \[LUTHER,
OLSHAUSEN, FRITZSCHE, MEYER\]. But as manuscript authority is decidedly
against it, so is internal evidence; and comparatively few favor it. Nor
is the sense which it yields a very Christian one.

[Romans 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 12:12</span></span>

Rejoicing, &c.--Here it is more lively to retain the order and the verbs
of the original: "In hope, rejoicing; in tribulation, enduring; in
prayer, persevering." Each of these exercises helps the other. If our
"hope" of glory is so assured that it is a rejoicing hope, we shall find
the spirit of "endurance in tribulation" natural and easy; but since it
is "prayer" which strengthens the faith that begets hope and lifts it up
into an assured and joyful expectancy, and since our patience in
tribulation is fed by this, it will be seen that all depends on our
"perseverance in prayer."

[Romans 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 12:13</span></span>

given to hospitality--that is, the entertainment of strangers. In times
of persecution, and before the general institution of houses of
entertainment, the importance of this precept would be at once felt. In
the East, where such houses are still rare, this duty is regarded as of
the most sacred character \[HODGE\].

[Romans 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 12:14</span></span>

Bless--that is, Call down by prayer a blessing on.

them which persecute you, &c.--This is taken from the Sermon on the
Mount ([Mat 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)), which, from the
allusions made to it, seems to have been the storehouse of Christian
morality among the churches.

[Romans 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 12:15</span></span>

Rejoice with them that rejoice; and weep--the "and" should probably be
omitted.

with them that weep--What a beautiful spirit of sympathy with the joys
and sorrows of others is here inculcated! But it is only one charming
phase of the unselfish character which belongs to all living
Christianity. What a world will ours be when this shall become its
reigning spirit! Of the two, however, it is more easy to sympathize with
another's sorrows than his joys, because in the one case he needs us; in
the other not. But just for this reason the latter is the more
disinterested, and so the nobler.

[Romans 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 12:16</span></span>

Be--"Being"

of the same mind one toward another--The feeling of the common bond
which binds all Christians to each other, whatever diversity of station,
cultivation, temperament, or gifts may obtain among them, is the thing
here enjoined. This is next taken up in detail.

Mind not--"not minding"

high things--that is, Cherish not ambitious or aspiring purposes and
desires. As this springs from selfish severance of our own interests and
objects from those of our brethren, so it is quite incompatible with the
spirit inculcated in the preceding clause.

but condescend--"condescending"

to men of low estate--or (as some render the words), "inclining unto the
things that be lowly." But we prefer the former.

Be not wise in your own conceits--This is just the application of the
caution against high-mindedness to the estimate we form of our own
mental character.

[Romans 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 12:17</span></span>

Recompense--"Recompensing," &c.--(See on [Rom
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)).

Provide--"Providing"

things honest--"honorable"

in the sight of all men--The idea (which is from [Pro
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#004)) is the care which Christians
should take so to demean themselves as to command the respect of all
men.

[Romans 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 12:18</span></span>

If it be possible--that is, If others will let you.

as much as lieth in you--or, "dependeth on you."

live peaceably--or, "be at peace."

with all men--The impossibility of this in some cases is hinted at, to
keep up the hearts of those who, having done their best unsuccessfully
to live in peace, might be tempted to think the failure was necessarily
owing to themselves. But how emphatically expressed is the injunction to
let nothing on our part prevent it! Would that Christians were guiltless
in this respect!

[Romans 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 12:19</span></span>

avenge not, &c.--(See on [Rom 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)).

but rather give place unto wrath--This is usually taken to mean, "but
give room or space for wrath to spend itself." But as the context shows
that the injunction is to leave vengeance to God, "wrath" here seems to
mean, not the offense, which we are tempted to avenge, but the avenging
wrath of God (see [Ch2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#018)), which
we are enjoined to await, or give room for. (So the best interpreters).

[Romans 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 12:20</span></span>

if thine enemy hunger, &c.--This is taken from [Pro
25:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021), which without doubt supplied
the basis of those lofty precepts on that subject which form the
culminating point of the Sermon on the Mount.

in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head--As the heaping of
"coals of fire" is in the Old Testament the figurative expression of
divine vengeance ([Psa 140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010); [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006), &c.), the true sense of these
words seems to be, "That will be the most effectual vengeance--a
vengeance under which he will be fain to bend" (So ALFORD, HODGE, &c.).
[Rom 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021) confirms this.

[Romans 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 12:21</span></span>

Be not overcome of evil--for then you are the conquered party.

but overcome evil with good--and then the victory is yours; you have
subdued your enemy in the noblest sense.

Note, (1) The redeeming mercy of God in Christ is, in the souls of
believers, the living spring of all holy obedience ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)). (2) As redemption under the
Gospel is not by irrational victims, as under the law, but "by the
precious blood of Christ" ([Pe1
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018)), and, consequently, is not
ritual but real, so the sacrifices which believers are now called to
offer are all "living sacrifices"; and these--summed up in
self-consecration to the service of God--are "holy and acceptable to
God," making up together "our rational service" ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)). (3) In this light, what are we
to think of the so-called "unbloody sacrifice of the mass, continually
offered to God as a propitiation for the sins both of the living and the
dead," which the adherents of Rome's corrupt faith have been taught for
ages to believe is the highest and holiest act of Christian worship--in
direct opposition to the sublimely simple teaching which the Christians
of Rome first received ([Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001))
--(4) Christians should not feel themselves at liberty to be conformed
to the world, if only they avoid what is manifestly sinful; but rather,
yielding themselves to the transforming power of the truth as it is in
Jesus, they should strive to exhibit before the world an entire
renovation of heart and life ([Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)). (5) What God would have men to
be, in all its beauty and grandeur, is for the first time really
apprehended, when "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not on tables of stone, but on the fleshy tables of the
heart," [Co2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003) ([Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)). (6) Self-sufficiency and lust
of power are peculiarly unlovely in the vessels of mercy, whose
respective graces and gifts are all a divine trust for the benefit of
the common body and of mankind at large ([Rom
12:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)). (7) As forgetfulness of this
has been the source of innumerable and unspeakable evils in the Church
of Christ, so the faithful exercise by every Christian of his own
peculiar office and gifts, and the loving recognition of those of his
brethren, as all of equal importance in their own place, would put a new
face upon the visible Church, to the vast benefit and comfort of
Christians themselves and to the admiration of the world around them
([Rom 12:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)). (8) What would the
world be, if it were filled with Christians having but one object in
life, high above every other--to "serve the Lord"--and throwing into
this service "alacrity" in the discharge of all duties, and abiding
"warmth of spirit" ([Rom 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011))! (9)
Oh, how far is even the living Church from exhibiting the whole
character and spirit, so beautifully portrayed in the latter verses of
this chapter ([Rom 12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012))! What
need of a fresh baptism of the Spirit in order to this! And how "fair as
the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners," will
the Church become, when at length instinct with this Spirit! The Lord
hasten it in its time!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
