<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom004)  [Next](rom006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)

[Romans 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 5:1</span></span>

THE BLESSED EFFECTS OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. ([Rom
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001))

Therefore being--"having been."

justified by faith, we have peace with God, &c.--If we are to be guided
by manuscript authority, the true reading here, beyond doubt, is, "Let
us have peace"; a reading, however, which most reject, because they
think it unnatural to exhort men to have what it belongs to God to give,
because the apostle is not here giving exhortations, but stating matters
of fact. But as it seems hazardous to set aside the decisive testimony
of manuscripts, as to what the apostle did write, in favor of what we
merely think he ought to have written, let us pause and ask--If it be
the privilege of the justified to "have peace with God," why might not
the apostle begin his enumeration of the fruits of justification by
calling on believers to "realize" this peace as belonged to them, or
cherish the joyful consciousness of it as their own? And if this is what
he has done, it would not be necessary to continue in the same style,
and the other fruits of justification might be set down, simply as
matters of fact. This "peace" is first a change in God's relation to us;
and next, as the consequence of this, a change on our part towards Him.
God, on the one hand, has "reconciled us to Himself by Jesus Christ"
([Co2 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)); and we, on the other
hand, setting our seal to this, "are reconciled to God" ([Co2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)). The "propitiation" is the
meeting-place; there the controversy on both sides terminates in an
honorable and eternal "peace."

[Romans 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 5:2</span></span>

By whom also we have--"have had"

access by faith into this grace--favor with God.

wherein we stand--that is "To that same faith which first gave us 'peace
with God' we owe our introduction into that permanent standing in the
favor of God which the justified enjoy." As it is difficult to
distinguish this from the peace first mentioned, we regard it as merely
an additional phase of the same \[MEYER, PHILIPPI, MEHRING\], rather
than something new \[BEZA, THOLUCK, HODGE\].

and rejoice--"glory," "boast," "triumph"--"rejoice" is not strong
enough.

in hope of the glory of God--On "hope," see on [Rom
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004).

[Romans 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 5:3</span></span>

we glory in tribulation also; knowing that tribulation worketh
patience--Patience is the quiet endurance of what we cannot but wish
removed, whether it be the withholding of promised good ([Rom
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)), or the continued experience of
positive ill (as here). There is indeed a patience of unrenewed nature,
which has something noble in it, though in many cases the offspring of
pride, if not of something lower. Men have been known to endure every
form of privation, torture, and death, without a murmur and without even
visible emotion, merely because they deemed it unworthy of them to sink
under unavoidable ill. But this proud, stoical hardihood has nothing in
common with the grace of patience--which is either the meek endurance of
ill because it is of God ([Job
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021); [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)), or the calm waiting for
promised good till His time to dispense it come ([Heb
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)); in the full persuasion that
such trials are divinely appointed, are the needed discipline of God's
children, are but for a definite period, and are not sent without
abundant promises of "songs in the night." If such be the "patience"
which "tribulation worketh," no wonder that

[Romans 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 5:4</span></span>

patience worketh experience--rather, "proof," as the same word is
rendered in [Co2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#009); [Co2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003); [Phi
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022); that is, experimental evidence
that we have "believed through grace."

and experience--"proof."

hope--"of the glory of God," as prepared for us. Thus have we hope in
two distinct ways, and at two successive stages of the Christian life:
first, immediately on believing, along with the sense of peace and
abiding access to God ([Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001));
next, after the reality of this faith has been "proved," particularly by
the patient endurance of trials sent to test it. We first get it by
looking away from ourselves to the Lamb of God; next by looking into or
upon ourselves as transformed by that "looking unto Jesus." In the one
case, the mind acts (as they say) objectively; in the other,
subjectively. The one is (as divines say) the assurance of faith; the
other, the assurance of sense.

[Romans 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 5:5</span></span>

And hope maketh not ashamed--putteth not to shame, as empty hopes do.

because the love of God--that is, not "our love to God," as the Romish
and some Protestant expositors (following some of the Fathers) represent
it; but clearly "God's love to us"--as most expositors agree.

is shed abroad--literally, "poured forth," that is, copiously diffused
(compare [Joh 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038); [Tit
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006)).

by the Holy Ghost which is--rather, "was."

given unto us--that is, at the great Pentecostal effusion, which is
viewed as the formal donation of the Spirit to the Church of God, for
all time and for each believer. (The Holy Ghost is here first introduced
in this Epistle.) It is as if the apostle had said, "And how can this
hope of glory, which as believers we cherish, put us to shame, when we
feel God Himself, by His Spirit given to us, drenching our hearts in
sweet, all-subduing sensations of His wondrous love to us in Christ
Jesus?" This leads the apostle to expatiate on the amazing character of
that love.

[Romans 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 5:6</span></span>

For when we were yet without strength--that is, powerless to deliver
ourselves, and so ready to perish.

in due time--at the appointed season.

Christ died for the ungodly--Three signal properties of God's love are
here given: First, "Christ died for the ungodly," whose character, so
far from meriting any interposition in their behalf, was altogether
repulsive to the eye of God; second, He did this "when they were without
strength"--with nothing between them and perdition but that
self-originating divine compassion; third, He did this "at the due
time," when it was most fitting that it should take place (compare [Gal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)), The two former of these
properties the apostle now proceeds to illustrate.

[Romans 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 5:7</span></span>

For scarcely for a righteous man--a man of simply unexceptionable
character.

will one--"any one"

die: yet peradventure for a good man--a man who, besides being
unexceptionable, is distinguished for goodness, a benefactor to society.

some--"some one."

would--rather, "doth."

even dare to die--"Scarce an instance occurs of self-sacrifice for one
merely upright; though for one who makes himself a blessing to society
there may be found an example of such noble surrender of life" (So
BENGEL, OLSHAUSEN, THOLUCK, ALFORD, PHILIPPI). (To make the "righteous"
and the "good" man here to mean the same person, and the whole sense to
be that "though rare, the case may occur, of one making a sacrifice of
life for a worthy character" \[as CALVIN, BEZA, FRITZSCHE, JOWETT\], is
extremely flat.)

[Romans 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 5:8</span></span>

But God commendeth--"setteth off," "displayeth"--in glorious contrast
with all that men will do for each other.

his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners--that is, in a
state not of positive "goodness," nor even of negative "righteousness,"
but on the contrary, "sinners," a state which His soul hateth.

Christ died for us--Now comes the overpowering inference, emphatically
redoubled.

[Romans 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 5:9</span></span>

Much more then, being--"having been"

now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

[Romans 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 5:10</span></span>

For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son, much more, being now--"having now been"

reconciled, we shall be saved by his life--that is "If that part of the
Saviour's work which cost Him His blood, and which had to be wrought for
persons incapable of the least sympathy either with His love or His
labors in their behalf--even our 'justification,' our
'reconciliation'--is already completed; how much more will He do all
that remains to be done, since He has it to do, not by death agonies any
more, but in untroubled 'life,' and no longer for enemies, but for
friends--from whom, at every stage of it, He receives the grateful
response of redeemed and adoring souls?" To be "saved from wrath through
Him," denotes here the whole work of Christ towards believers, from the
moment of justification, when the wrath of God is turned away from them,
till the Judge on the great white throne shall discharge that wrath upon
them that "obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ"; and that work
may all be summed up in "keeping them from falling, and presenting them
faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy" ([Jde
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024)): thus are they "saved from wrath
through Him."

[Romans 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 5:11</span></span>

And not only so, but we also joy--rather, "glory."

in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by--"through"

whom we have now received the atonement--rather, "the reconciliation"
(Margin), as the same word is rendered in [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010) and in [Co2
5:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018). (In fact, the earlier meaning
of the English word "atonement" was "the reconciliation of two estranged
parties") \[TRENCH\]. The foregoing effects of justification were all
benefits to ourselves, calling for gratitude; this last may be termed a
purely disinterested one. Our first feeling towards God, after we have
found peace with Him, is that of clinging gratitude for so costly a
salvation; but no sooner have we learned to cry, Abba, Father, under the
sweet sense of reconciliation, than "gloriation" in Him takes the place
of dread of Him, and now He appears to us "altogether lovely!"

On this section, Note, (1) How gloriously does the Gospel evince its
divine origin by basing all acceptable obedience on "peace with God,"
laying the foundations of this peace in a righteous "justification" of
the sinner "through our Lord Jesus Christ," and making this the entrance
to a permanent standing in the divine favor, and a triumphant
expectation of future glory! ([Rom
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)). Other peace, worthy of the
name, there is none; and as those who are strangers to it rise not to
the enjoyment of such high fellowship with God, so they have neither any
taste for it nor desire after it. (2) As only believers possess the true
secret of patience under trials, so, although "not joyous but grievous"
in themselves ([Heb 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017)), when
trials divinely sent afford them the opportunity of evidencing their
faith by the grace of patience under them, they should "count it all
joy" ([Rom 5:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003); and see [Jam
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002)). (3) "Hope," in the New
Testament sense of the term, is not a lower degree of faith or assurance
(as many now say, I hope for heaven, but am not sure of it); but
invariably means "the confident expectation of future good." It
presupposes faith; and what faith assures us will be ours, hope
accordingly expects. In the nourishment of this hope, the soul's look
outward to Christ for the ground of it, and inward upon ourselves for
evidence of its reality, must act and react upon each other ([Rom
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002) and [Rom
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004) compared). (4) It is the proper
office of the Holy Ghost to beget in the soul the full conviction and
joyful consciousness of the love of God in Christ Jesus to sinners of
mankind, and to ourselves in particular; and where this exists, it
carries with it such an assurance of final salvation as cannot deceive
([Rom 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)). (5) The justification of
sinful men is not in virtue of their amendment, but of "the blood of
God's Son"; and while this is expressly affirmed in [Rom
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009), our reconciliation to God by the
"death of His Son," affirmed in [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010), is but a variety of the same
statement. In both, the blessing meant is the restoration of the sinner
to a righteous standing in the sight of God; and in both, the
meritorious ground of this, which is intended to be conveyed, is the
expiatory sacrifice of God's Son. (6) Gratitude to God for redeeming
love, if it could exist without delight in God Himself, would be a
selfish and worthless feeling; but when the one rises into the
other--the transporting sense of eternal "reconciliation" passing into
"gloriation in God" Himself--then the lower is sanctified and sustained
by the higher, and each feeling is perfective of the other ([Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)).

[Romans 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 5:12</span></span>

COMPARISON AND CONTRAST BETWEEN ADAM AND CHRIST IN THEIR RELATION TO THE
HUMAN FAMILY. ([Rom 5:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012))

Wherefore--that is, Things being so; referring back to the whole
preceding argument.

as by one man--Adam.

sin--considered here in its guilt, criminality, penal desert.

entered into the world, and death by sin--as the penalty of sin.

and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned--rather, "all
sinned," that is, in that one man's first sin. Thus death reaches every
individual of the human family, as the penalty due to himself. (So, in
substance, BENGEL, HODGE, PHILIPPI). Here we should have expected the
apostle to finish his sentence, in some such way as this: "Even so, by
one man righteousness has entered into the world, and life by
righteousness." But, instead of this, we have a digression, extending to
five verses, to illustrate the important statement of [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012); and it is only at [Rom
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018) that the comparison is resumed
and finished.

[Romans 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 5:13</span></span>

For until the law sin was in the world--that is during all the period
from Adam "until the law" of Moses was given, God continued to treat men
as sinners.

but sin is not imputed where there is no law--"There must therefore have
been a law during that period, because sin was then imputed"; as is now
to be shown.

[Romans 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 5:14</span></span>

Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression--But who are
they?--a much contested question. Infants (say some), who being
guiltless of actual sin, may be said not to have sinned in the way that
Adam did \[AUGUSTINE, BEZA, HODGE\]. But why should infants be specially
connected with the period "from Adam to Moses," since they die alike in
every period? And if the apostle meant to express here the death of
infants, why has he done it so enigmatically? Besides, the death of
infants is comprehended in the universal mortality on account of the
first sin, so emphatically expressed in [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012); what need then to specify it
here? and why, if not necessary, should we presume it to be meant here,
unless the language unmistakably point to it--which it certainly does
not? The meaning then must be, that "death reigned from Adam to Moses,
even over those that had not, like Adam, transgressed against a positive
commandment, threatening death to the disobedient." (So most
interpreters). In this case, the particle "even," instead of specifying
one particular class of those who lived "from Adam to Moses" (as the
other interpretation supposes), merely explains what it was that made
the case of those who died from Adam to Moses worthy of special
notice--namely, that "though unlike Adam and all since Moses, those who
lived between the two had no positive threatening of death for
transgression, nevertheless, death reigned even over them."

who is the figure--or, "a type."

of him that was to come--Christ. "This clause is inserted on the first
mention of the name "Adam," the one man of whom he is speaking, to
recall the purpose for which he is treating of him, as the figure of
Christ" \[ALFORD\]. The point of analogy intended here is plainly the
public character which both sustained, neither of the two being regarded
in the divine procedure towards men as mere individual men, but both
alike as representative men. (Some take the proper supplement here to be
"Him \[that is\] to come"; understanding the apostle to speak from his
own time, and to refer to Christ's second coming \[FRITZSCHE, DE WETTE,
ALFORD\]. But this is unnatural, since the analogy of the second Adam to
the first has been in full development ever since "God exalted Him to be
a Prince and a Saviour," and it will only remain to be consummated at
His second coming. The simple meaning is, as nearly all interpreters
agree, that Adam is a type of Him who was to come after him in the same
public character, and so to be "the second Adam").

[Romans 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 5:15</span></span>

But--"Yet," "Howbeit."

not as the offence--"trespass."

so also is the free gift--or "the gracious gift," "the gift of grace."
The two cases present points of contrast as well as resemblance.

For if, &c.--rather, "For if through the offense of the one the many
died (that is, in that one man's first sin), much more did the grace of
God, and the free gift by grace, even that of the one man, Jesus Christ,
abound unto the many." By "the many" is meant the mass of mankind
represented respectively by Adam and Christ, as opposed, not to few, but
to "the one" who represented them. By "the free gift" is meant (as in
[Rom 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)) the glorious gift of
justifying righteousness; this is expressly distinguished from "the
grace of God," as the effect from the cause; and both are said to
"abound" towards us in Christ--in what sense will appear in [Rom
5:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016). And the "much more," of the
one case than the other, does not mean that we get much more of good by
Christ than of evil by Adam (for it is not a case of quantity at all);
but that we have much more reason to expect, or it is much more
agreeable to our ideas of God, that the many should be benefited by the
merit of one, than that they should suffer for the sin of one; and if
the latter has happened, much more may we assure ourselves of the former
\[PHILIPPI, HODGE\].

[Romans 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 5:16</span></span>

And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift--"Another point of
contrast may be mentioned."

for the judgment--"sentence."

was by one--rather, "was of one," meaning not "one man," but, as appears
from the next clause, "one offense."

to condemnation, but the free gift--"gift of grace."

is of many offences unto justification--a glorious point of contrast.
"The condemnation by Adam was for one sin; but the justification by
Christ is an absolution not only from the guilt of that first offense,
mysteriously attaching to every individual of the race, but from the
countless offenses it, to which, as a germ lodged in the bosom of every
child of Adam, it unfolds itself in his life." This is the meaning of
"grace abounding towards us in the abundance of the gift of
righteousness." It is a grace not only rich in its character, but rich
in detail; it is a "righteousness" not only rich in a complete
justification of the guilty, condemned sinner; but rich in the amplitude
of the ground which it covers, leaving no one sin of any of the
justified uncancelled, but making him, though loaded with the guilt of
myriads of offenses, "the righteousness of God in Christ."

[Romans 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 5:17</span></span>

For if by--"the"

one man's offence death reigned by one--"through the one."

much more shall they which receive--"the"

abundance of grace and of the gift of--justifying

righteousness . . . reign in life by one Jesus Christ--"through the
one." We have here the two ideas of [Rom
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015) and [Rom
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016) sublimely combined into one, as
if the subject had grown upon the apostle as he advanced in his
comparison of the two cases. Here, for the first time in this section,
he speaks of that LIFE which springs out of justification, in contrast
with the death which springs from sin and follows condemnation. The
proper idea of it therefore is, "Right to live"--"Righteous life"--life
possessed and enjoyed with the good will, and in conformity with the
eternal law, of "Him that sitteth on the Throne"; life therefore in its
widest sense--life in the whole man and throughout the whole duration of
human existence, the life of blissful and loving relationship to God in
soul and body, for ever and ever. It is worthy of note, too, that while
he says death "reigned over" us through Adam, he does not say Life
"reigns over us" through Christ; lest he should seem to invest this new
life with the very attribute of death--that of fell and malignant
tyranny, of which we were the hapless victims. Nor does he say Life
reigns in us, which would have been a scriptural enough idea; but, which
is much more pregnant, "We shall reign in life." While freedom and might
are implied in the figure of "reigning," "life" is represented as the
glorious territory or atmosphere of that reign. And by recurring to the
idea of [Rom 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016), as to the "many
offenses" whose complete pardon shows "the abundance of grace and of the
gift of righteousness," the whole statement is to this effect: "If one
man's one offense let loose against us the tyrant power of Death, to
hold us as its victims in helpless bondage, 'much more,' when we stand
forth enriched with God's 'abounding grace' and in the beauty of a
complete absolution from countless offenses, shall we expatiate in a
life divinely owned and legally secured, 'reigning' in exultant freedom
and unchallenged might, through that other matchless 'One,' Jesus
Christ!" (On the import of the future tense in this last clause, see on
[Rom 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019), and [Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)).

[Romans 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 5:18</span></span>

Therefore--now at length resuming the unfinished comparison of [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), in order to give formally the
concluding member of it, which had been done once and again
substantially, in the intermediate verses.

as by the offence of one judgment came--or, more simply, "it came."

upon all men to condenmation; even so by the righteousness of one the
free gift came--rather, "it came."

upon all men to justification of life--(So CALVIN, BENGEL, OLSHAUSEN,
THOLUCK, HODGE, PHILIPPI). But better, as we judge: "As through one
offense it \[came\] upon all men to condemnation; even so through one
righteousness \[it came\] upon all men to justification of life"--(So
BEZA, GROTIUS, FERME, MEYER, DE WETTE, ALFORD, Revised Version). In this
case, the apostle, resuming the statement of [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), expresses it in a more
concentrated and vivid form--suggested no doubt by the expression in
[Rom 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016), "through one offense,"
representing Christ's whole work, considered as the ground of our
justification, as "ONE RIGHTEOUSNESS." (Some would render the peculiar
word here employed, "one righteous act" \[ALFORD, &c.\]; understanding
by it Christ's death as the one redeeming act which reversed the one
undoing act of Adam. But this is to limit the apostle's idea too much;
for as the same word is properly rendered "righteousness" in [Rom
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004), where it means "the righteousness
of the law as fulfilled by us who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit," so here it denotes Christ's whole "obedience unto death,"
considered as the one meritorious ground of the reversal of the
condemnation which came by Adam. But on this, and on the expression,
"all men," see on [Rom 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019). The
expression "justification of life," is a vivid combination of two ideas
already expatiated upon, meaning "justification entitling to and issuing
in the rightful possession and enjoyment of life").

[Romans 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 5:19</span></span>

For, &c.--better, "For as by the one man's disobedience the many were
made sinners, even so by the obedience of the One shall the many be made
righteous." On this great verse observe: First, By the "obedience" of
Christ here is plainly not meant more than what divines call His active
obedience, as distinguished from His sufferings and death; it is the
entire work of Christ in its obediential character. Our Lord Himself
represents even His death as His great act of obedience to the Father:
"This commandment (that is, to lay down and resume His life) have I
received of My Father" ([Joh 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008)).
Second, The significant word twice rendered made, does not signify to
work a change upon a person or thing, but to constitute or ordain, as
will be seen from all the places where it is used. Here, accordingly, it
is intended to express that judicial act which holds men, in virtue of
their connection with Adam, as sinners; and, in connection with Christ,
as righteous. Third, The change of tense from the past to the
future--"as through Adam we were made sinners, so through Christ we
shall be made righteous"--delightfully expresses the enduring character
of the act, and of the economy to which such acts belong, in contrast
with the for-ever-past ruin of believers in Adam. (See on [Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)). Fourth, The "all men" of [Rom
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018) and the "many" of [Rom
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019) are the same party, though under
a slightly different aspect. In the latter case, the contrast is between
the one representative (Adam--Christ) and the many whom he represented;
in the former case, it is between the one head (Adam--Christ) and the
human race, affected for death and life respectively by the actings of
that one. Only in this latter case it is the redeemed family of man that
is alone in view; it is humanity as actually lost, but also as actually
saved, as ruined and recovered. Such as refuse to fall in with the high
purpose of God to constitute His Son a "second Adam," the Head of a new
race, and as impenitent and unbelieving finally perish, have no place in
this section of the Epistle, whose sole object is to show how God
repairs in the second Adam the evil done by the first. (Thus the
doctrine of universal restoration has no place here. Thus too the forced
interpretation by which the "justification of all" is made to mean a
justification merely in possibility and offer to all, and the
"justification of the many" to mean the actual justification of as many
as believe \[ALFORD, &c.\], is completely avoided. And thus the
harshness of comparing a whole fallen family with a recovered part is
got rid of. However true it be in fact that part of mankind is not
saved, this is not the aspect in which the subject is here presented. It
is totals that are compared and contrasted; and it is the same total in
two successive conditions--namely, the human race as ruined in Adam and
recovered in Christ).

[Romans 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 5:20</span></span>

Moreover the law--"The law, however." The Jew might say, If the whole
purposes of God towards men center in Adam and Christ, where does "the
law" come in, and what was the use of it? Answer: It

entered--But the word expresses an important idea besides "entering." It
signifies, "entered incidentally," or "parenthetically." (In [Gal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004) the same word is rendered, "came
in privily.") The meaning is, that the promulgation of the law at Sinai
was no primary or essential feature of the divine plan, but it was
"added" ([Gal 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)) for a subordinate
purpose--the more fully to reveal the evil occasioned by Adam, and the
need and glory of the remedy by Christ.

that the offence might abound--or, "be multiplied." But what offense?
Throughout all this section "the offense" (four times repeated besides
here) has one definite meaning, namely, "the one first offense of Adam";
and this, in our judgment, is its meaning here also: "All our
multitudinous breaches of the law are nothing but that one first
offense, lodged mysteriously in the bosom of every child of Adam as an
offending principal, and multiplying itself into myriads of particular
offenses in the life of each." What was one act of disobedience in the
head has been converted into a vital and virulent principle of
disobedience in all the members of the human family, whose every act of
wilful rebellion proclaims itself the child of the original
transgression.

But where sin abounded--or, "was multiplied."

grace did much more abound--rather, "did exceedingly abound," or
"superabound." The comparison here is between the multiplication of one
offense into countless transgressions, and such an overflow of grace as
more than meets that appalling case.

[Romans 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 5:21</span></span>

That as sin--Observe, the word "offense" is no more used, as that had
been sufficiently illustrated; but--what better befitted this
comprehensive summation of the whole matter--the great general term sin.

hath reigned unto death--rather, "in death," triumphing and (as it were)
revelling in that complete destruction of its victims.

even so might grace reign--In [Rom
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014), [Rom
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017) we had the reign of death over
the guilty and condemned in Adam; here it is the reign of the mighty
causes of these--of SIN which clothes Death a Sovereign with venomous
power ([Co1 15:56](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#056)) and with awful
authority ([Rom 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)), and of GRACE,
the grace which originated the scheme of salvation, the grace which
"sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world," the grace which "made Him
to be sin for us who knew no sin," the grace which "makes us to be the
righteousness of God in Him," so that "we who receive the abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness do reign in life by One, Jesus
Christ!"

through righteousness--not ours certainly ("the obedience of
Christians," to use the wretched language of GROTIUS) nor yet exactly
"justification" \[STUART, HODGE\]; but rather, "the (justifying)
righteousness of Christ" \[BEZA, ALFORD, and in substance, OLSHAUSEN,
MEYER\]; the same which in [Rom 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)
is called His "obedience," meaning His whole mediatorial work in the
flesh. This is here represented as the righteous medium through which
grace reaches its objects and attains all its ends, the stable throne
from which Grace as a Sovereign dispenses its saving benefits to as many
as are brought under its benign sway.

unto eternal life--which is salvation in its highest form and fullest
development for ever.

by Jesus Christ our Lord--Thus, on that "Name which is above every
name," the echoes of this hymn to the glory of "Grace" die away, and
"Jesus is left alone."

On reviewing this golden section of our Epistle, the following
additional remarks occur: (1) If this section does not teach that the
whole race of Adam, standing in him as their federal head, "sinned in
him and fell with him in his first transgression," we may despair of any
intelligible exposition of it. The apostle, after saying that Adam's sin
introduced death into the world, does not say "and so death passed upon
all men for that Adam "sinned," but "for that all sinned." Thus,
according to the teaching of the apostle, "the death of all is for the
sin of all"; and as this cannot mean the personal sins of each
individual, but some sin of which unconscious infants are guilty equally
with adults, it can mean nothing but the one "first transgression" of
their common head, regarded as the sin of each of his race, and
punished, as such, with death. It is vain to start back from this
imputation to all of the guilt of Adam's first sin, as wearing the
appearance of injustice. For not only are all other theories liable to
the same objection, in some other form--besides being inconsistent with
the text--but the actual facts of human nature, which none dispute, and
which cannot be explained away, involve essentially the same
difficulties as the great principle on which the apostle here explains
them. If we admit this principle, on the authority of our apostle, a
flood of light is at once thrown upon certain features of the divine
procedure, and certain portions of the divine oracles, which otherwise
are involved in much darkness; and if the principle itself seem hard to
digest, it is not harder than the existence of evil, which, as a fact,
admits of no dispute, but, as a feature in the divine administration,
admits of no explanation in the present state. (2) What is called
original sin--or that depraved tendency to evil with which every child
of Adam comes into the world--is not formally treated of in this section
(and even in the seventh chapter, it is rather its nature and operation
than its connection with the first sin which is handled). But
indirectly, this section bears testimony to it; representing the one
original offense, unlike every other, as having an enduring vitality in
the bosom of every child of Adam, as a principle of disobedience, whose
virulence has gotten it the familiar name of "original sin." (3) In what
sense is the word "death" used throughout this section? Not certainly as
mere temporal death, as Arminian commentators affirm. For as Christ came
to undo what Adam did, which is all comprehended in the word "death," it
would hence follow that Christ has merely dissolved the sentence by
which soul and body are parted in death; in other words, merely procured
the resurrection of the body. But the New Testament throughout teaches
that the salvation of Christ is from a vastly more comprehensive "death"
than that. But neither is death here used merely in the sense of penal
evil, that is, "any evil inflicted in punishment of sin and for the
support of law" \[HODGE\]. This is too indefinite, making death a mere
figure of speech to denote "penal evil" in general--an idea foreign to
the simplicity of Scripture--or at least making death, strictly so
called, only one part of the thing meant by it, which ought not to be
resorted to if a more simple and natural explanation can be found. By
"death" then, in this section, we understand the sinner's destruction,
in the only sense in which he is capable of it. Even temporal death is
called "destruction" ([Deu 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#023); [Sa1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#011), &c.), as extinguishing all that
men regard as life. But a destruction extending to the soul as well as
the body, and into the future world, is clearly expressed in [Mat
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013); [Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009); [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016), &c. This is the penal "death" of
our section, and in this view of it we retain its proper sense. Life--as
a state of enjoyment of the favor of God, of pure fellowship with Him,
and voluntary subjection to Him--is a blighted thing from the moment
that sin is found in the creature's skirts; in that sense, the
threatening, "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die," was carried into immediate effect in the case of Adam when he
fell; who was thenceforward "dead while he lived." Such are all his
posterity from their birth. The separation of soul and body in temporal
death carries the sinner's destruction" a stage farther; dissolving his
connection with that world out of which he extracted a pleasurable,
though unblest, existence, and ushering him into the presence of his
Judge--first as a disembodied spirit, but ultimately in the body too, in
an enduring condition--"to be punished (and this is the final state)
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of His power." This final extinction in soul and body of all that
constitutes life, but yet eternal consciousness of a blighted
existence--this, in its amplest and most awful sense, is "DEATH"! Not
that Adam understood all that. It is enough that he understood "the day"
of his disobedience to be the terminating period of his blissful "life."
In that simple idea was wrapt up all the rest. But that he should
comprehend its details was not necessary. Nor is it necessary to suppose
all that to be intended in every passage of Scripture where the word
occurs. Enough that all we have described is in the bosom of the thing,
and will be realized in as many as are not the happy subjects of the
Reign of Grace. Beyond doubt, the whole of this is intended in such
sublime and comprehensive passages as this: "God . . . gave His . . .
Son that whosoever believeth in Him might not PERISH, but have
everlasting LIFE" ([Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)). And
should not the untold horrors of that "DEATH"--already "reigning over"
all that are not in Christ, and hastening to its consummation--quicken
our flight into "the second Adam," that having "received the abundance
of grace and of the gift of righteousness, we may reign in LIFE by the
One, Jesus Christ?"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 6](rom006)

</div>
