<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1005)  [Next](sa1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 6:1</span></span>

THE PHILISTINES COUNSEL HOW TO SEND BACK THE ARK. ([Sa1
6:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001))

the ark . . . was in the country of the Philistines seven
months--Notwithstanding the calamities which its presence had brought on
the country and the people, the Philistine lords were unwilling to
relinquish such a prize, and tried every means to retain it with peace
and safety, but in vain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 6:2</span></span>

the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners--The designed
restoration of the ark was not, it seems, universally approved of, and
many doubts were expressed whether the prevailing pestilence was really
a judgment of Heaven. The priests and diviners united all parties by
recommending a course which would enable them easily to discriminate the
true character of the calamities, and at the same time to propitiate the
incensed Deity for any acts of disrespect which might have been shown to
His ark.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 6:4</span></span>

Five golden emerods--Votive or thank offerings were commonly made by the
heathen in prayer for, or gratitude after, deliverance from lingering or
dangerous disorders, in the form of metallic (generally silver) models
or images of the diseased parts of the body. This is common still in
Roman Catholic countries, as well as in the temples of the Hindus and
other modern heathen.

five golden mice--This animal is supposed by some to be the jerboa or
jumping mouse of Syria and Egypt \[BOCHART\]; by others, to be the
short-tailed field mouse, which often swarms in prodigious numbers and
commits great ravages in the cultivated fields of Palestine.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 6:5</span></span>

give glory unto the God of Israel--By these propitiatory presents, the
Philistines would acknowledge His power and make reparation for the
injury done to His ark.

lighten his hand . . . from off your gods--Elohim for god.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 6:6</span></span>

Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
hardened their hearts?--The memory of the appalling judgments that had
been inflicted on Egypt was not yet obliterated. Whether preserved in
written records, or in floating tradition, they were still fresh in the
minds of men, and being extensively spread, were doubtless the means of
diffusing the knowledge and fear of the true God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 6:7</span></span>

make a new cart--Their object in making a new one for the purpose seems
to have been not only for cleanliness and neatness, but from an
impression that there would have been an impropriety in using one that
had been applied to meaner or more common services. It appears to have
been a covered wagon (see on [Sa2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003)).

two milch kine--Such untrained heifers, wanton and vagrant, would pursue
no certain and regular path, like those accustomed to the yoke, and
therefore were most unlikely of their own spontaneous motion to
prosecute the direct road to the land of Israel.

bring their calves home from them--The strong natural affection of the
dams might be supposed to stimulate their return homewards, rather than
direct their steps in a foreign country.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 6:8</span></span>

take the ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart--This mode of
carrying the sacred symbol was forbidden; but the ignorance of the
Philistines made the indignity excusable (see on [Sa2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)).

put the jewels . . . in a coffer by the side thereof--The way of
securing treasure in the East is still in a chest, chained to the house
wall or some solid part of the furniture.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 6:9</span></span>

Beth-shemesh--that is, "house of the sun," now Ain Shems \[ROBINSON\], a
city of priests in Judah, in the southeast border of Dan, lying in a
beautiful and extensive valley. JOSEPHUS says they were set a-going near
a place where the road divided into two--the one leading back to Ekron,
where were their calves, and the other to Beth-shemesh. Their frequent
lowings attested their ardent longing for their young, and at the same
time the supernatural influence that controlled their movements in a
contrary direction.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 6:12</span></span>

the lords of the Philistines went after them--to give their tribute of
homage, to prevent imposture, and to obtain the most reliable evidence
of the truth. The result of this journey tended to their own deeper
humiliation, and the greater illustration of God's glory.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 6:14</span></span>

and they clave--that is, the Beth-shemites, in an irrepressible outburst
of joy.

offered the kine--Though contrary to the requirements of the law ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003); [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)), these animals might properly
be offered, as consecrated by God Himself; and though not beside the
tabernacle, there were many instances of sacrifices offered by prophets
and holy men on extraordinary occasions in other places.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 6:17</span></span>

And these are the golden emerods . . . and the mice--There were five
representative images of the emerods, corresponding to the five
principal cities of the Philistines. But the number of the golden mice
must have been greater, for they were sent from the walled towns as well
as the country villages.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 6:18</span></span>

unto the great stone of Abel--Abel, or Aben, means "stone," so that
without resorting to italics, the reading should be, "the great stone."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 6:19</span></span>

he smote the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had looked into the
ark--In the ecstasy of delight at seeing the return of the ark, the
Beth-shemesh reapers pried into it beneath the wagon cover; and instead
of covering it up again, as a sacred utensil, they let it remain exposed
to common inspection, wishing it to be seen, in order that all might
enjoy the triumph of seeing the votive offerings presented to it, and
gratify curiosity with the sight of the sacred shrine. This was the
offense of those Israelites (Levites, as well as common people), who had
treated the ark with less reverence than the Philistines themselves.

he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten
men--Beth-shemesh being only a village, this translation must be
erroneous, and should be, "he smote fifty out of a thousand," being only
fourteen hundred in all who indulged this curiosity. God, instead of
decimating, according to an ancient usage, slew only a twentieth part;
that is, according to JOSEPHUS, seventy out of fourteen hundred (see
[Num 4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#018)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 6:21</span></span>

Kirjath-jearim--"the city of woods," also called Kirjath-baal ([Jos
15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060); [Jos
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#014); [Ch1
13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#006)). This was the nearest town to
Beth-shemesh; and being a place of strength, it was a more fitting place
for the residence of the ark. Beth-shemesh being in a low plain, and
Kirjath-jearim on a hill, explains the message, "Come ye down, and fetch
it up to you."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 7](sa1007)

</div>
