<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1024)  [Next](sa1026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 25:1</span></span>

SAMUEL DIES. ([Sa1 25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001))

Samuel died--After a long life of piety and public usefulness, he left
behind him a reputation which ranks him among the greatest of Scripture
worthies.

buried him in his house at Ramah--that is, his own mausoleum. The
Hebrews took as great care to provide sepulchers anciently as people do
in the East still, where every respectable family has its own house of
the dead. Often this is in a little detached garden, containing a small
stone building (where there is no rock), resembling a house, which is
called the sepulcher of the family--it has neither door nor window.

David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran--This removal had
probably no connection with the prophet's death; but was probably
occasioned by the necessity of seeking provision for his numerous
followers.

the wilderness of Paran--stretching from Sinai to the borders of
Palestine in the southern territories of Judea. Like other wildernesses,
it presented large tracts of natural pasture, to which the people sent
their cattle at the grazing season, but where they were liable to
constant and heavy depredations by prowling Arabs. David and his men
earned their subsistence by making reprisals on the cattle of these
freebooting Ishmaelites; and, frequently for their useful services, they
obtained voluntary tokens of acknowledgment from the peaceful
inhabitants.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 25:2</span></span>

in Carmel--now Kurmul. The district takes its name from this town, now a
mass of ruins; and about a mile from it is Tell Main, the hillock on
which stood ancient Maon.

the man was very great--His property consisted in cattle, and he was
considered wealthy, according to the ideas of that age.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 25:3</span></span>

he was of the house of Caleb--of course, of the same tribe with David
himself; but many versions consider Caleb ("dog") not as a proper, but a
common noun, and render it, "he was snappish as a dog."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 25:4</span></span>

Nabal did shear his sheep, and David sent out ten young men, &c.--David
and his men lurked in these deserts, associating with the herdsmen and
shepherds of Nabal and others and doing them good offices, probably in
return for information and supplies obtained through them. Hence when
Nabal held his annual sheep-shearing in Carmel, David felt himself
entitled to share in the festival and sent a message, recounting his own
services and asking for a present. "In all these particulars we were
deeply struck with the truth and strength of the biblical description of
manners and customs almost identically the same as they exist at the
present day. On such a festive occasion, near a town or village, even in
our own time, an Arab sheik of the neighboring desert would hardly fail
to put in a word either in person or by message; and his message, both
in form and substance, would be only a transcript of that of David"
\[ROBINSON\].

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 25:10</span></span>

THE CHURLISH ANSWER PROVOKES HIM. ([Sa1
25:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010))

Nabal answered David's servants, . . . Who is David? &c.--Nabal's answer
seems to indicate that the country was at the time in a loose and
disorderly state. David's own good conduct, however, as well as the
important services rendered by him and his men, were readily attested by
Nabal's servants. The preparations of David to chastise his insolent
language and ungrateful requital are exactly what would be done in the
present day by Arab chiefs, who protect the cattle of the large and
wealthy sheep masters from the attacks of the marauding border tribes or
wild beasts. Their protection creates a claim for some kind of tribute,
in the shape of supplies of food and necessaries, which is usually given
with great good will and gratitude; but when withheld, is enforced as a
right. Nabal's refusal, therefore, was a violation of the established
usages of the place.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 25:13</span></span>

two hundred abode by the stuff--This addition to his followers was made
after his return into Judah (see [Sa1
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 25:14</span></span>

ABIGAIL PACIFIES HIM. (1Sa. 25:14-35)

Then Abigail made haste--The prudence and address of Nabal's wife were
the means of saving him and family from utter destruction. She
acknowledged the demand of her formidable neighbors; but justly
considering, that to atone for the insolence of her husband, a greater
degree of liberality had become necessary, she collected a large amount
of food, accompanying it with the most valued products of the country.

bottles--goatskins, capable of holding a great quantity.

parched corn--It was customary to eat parched corn when it was fully
grown, but not ripe.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 25:19</span></span>

she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after
you--People in the East always try to produce an effect by their
presents, loading on several beasts what might be easily carried by one,
and bringing them forward, article by article, in succession. Abigail
not only sent her servants in this way, but resolved to go in person,
following her present, as is commonly done, to watch the impression
which her munificence would produce.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 25:23</span></span>

she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her
face--Dismounting in presence of a superior is the highest token of
respect that can be given; and it is still an essential act of homage to
the great. Accompanying this act of courtesy with the lowest form of
prostration, she not only by her attitude, but her language, made the
fullest amends for the disrespect shown by her husband, as well as paid
the fullest tribute of respect to the character and claims of David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 25:25</span></span>

Nabal--signifying fool, gave pertinence to his wife's remark.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 25:26</span></span>

let thine enemies . . . be as Nabal--be as foolish and contemptible as
he.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 25:29</span></span>

the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord
thy God--An Orientalism, expressing the perfect security of David's life
from all the assaults of his enemies, under the protecting shield of
Providence, who had destined him for high things.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 25:32</span></span>

David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord--Transported by passion and
blinded by revenge, he was on the eve of perpetrating a great injury.
Doubtless, the timely appearance and prudent address of Abigail were
greatly instrumental in changing his purpose. At all events, it was the
means of opening his eyes to the moral character of the course on which
he had been impetuously rushing; and in accepting her present, he speaks
with lively satisfaction as well as gratitude to Abigail, for having
relieved him from bloodshed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 25:36</span></span>

NABAL'S DEATH. ([Sa1 25:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036))

he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king--The
sheep-shearing season was always a very joyous occasion. Masters usually
entertained their shepherds; and even Nabal, though of a most niggardly
disposition, prepared festivities on a scale of sumptuous liberality.
The modern Arabs celebrate the season with similar hilarity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 25:37</span></span>

in the morning . . . his wife had told him these things, that his heart
died within him--He probably fainted from horror at the perilous
situation in which he had unconsciously placed himself; and such a shock
had been given him by the fright to his whole system, that he rapidly
pined and died.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 25:39</span></span>

the Lord hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head--If
this was an expression of pleasure, and David's vindictive feelings were
gratified by the intelligence of Nabal's death, it was an instance of
human infirmity which we may lament; but perhaps he referred to the
unmerited reproach ([Sa1 25:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010)),
and the contempt of God implied in it.

David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to wife--This
unceremonious proceeding was quite in the style of Eastern monarchs, who
no sooner take a fancy for a lady than they despatch a messenger to
intimate their royal wishes that she should henceforth reside in the
palace; and her duty is implicitly to obey. David's conduct shows that
the manners of the Eastern nations were already imitated by the great
men in Israel; and that the morality of the times which God permitted,
gave its sanction to the practice of polygamy. His marriage with Abigail
brought him a rich estate.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">sa1 25:44</span></span>

Michal--By the unchallengeable will of her father, she who was David's
wife was given to another. But she returned and sustained the character
of his wife when he ascended the throne.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](sa1026)

</div>
