<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1017)  [Next](sa1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 18:1</span></span>

JONATHAN LOVES DAVID. ([Sa1 18:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001))

the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David--They were nearly
of an age. The prince had taken little interest in David as a minstrel;
but his heroism and modest, manly bearing, his piety and high
endowments, kindled the flame not of admiration only, but of affection,
in the congenial mind of Jonathan.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 18:2</span></span>

Saul would let him go no more home--He was established as a permanent
resident at court.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 18:3</span></span>

Then Jonathan and David made a covenant--Such covenants of brotherhood
are frequent in the East. They are ratified by certain ceremonies, and
in presence of witnesses, that the persons covenanting will be sworn
brothers for life.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 18:4</span></span>

Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to
David--To receive any part of the dress which had been worn by a
sovereign, or his eldest son and heir, is deemed, in the East, the
highest honor which can be conferred on a subject (see on [Est
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#008)). The girdle, being connected with
the sword and the bow, may be considered as being part of the military
dress, and great value is attached to it in the East.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 18:6</span></span>

SAUL ENVIES HIS PRAISE. ([Sa1 18:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#005))

the women came out of all cities of Israel--in the homeward march from
the pursuit of the Philistines. This is a characteristic trait of
Oriental manners. On the return of friends long absent, and particularly
on the return of a victorious army, bands of women and children issue
from the towns and villages, to form a triumphal procession, to
celebrate the victory, and, as they go along, to gratify the soldiers
with dancing, instrumental music, and extempore songs, in honor of the
generals who have earned the highest distinction by feats of gallantry.
The Hebrew women, therefore, were merely paying the customary
gratulations to David as the deliverer of their country, but they
committed a great indiscretion by praising a subject at the expense of
their sovereign.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 18:9</span></span>

Saul eyed David--that is, invidiously, with secret and malignant hatred.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 18:10</span></span>

SEEKS TO KILL HIM. ([Sa1 18:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010))

on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul--This
rankling thought brought on a sudden paroxysm of his mental malady.

he prophesied--The term denotes one under the influence either of a good
or a bad spirit. In the present it is used to express that Saul was in a
frenzy. David, perceiving the symptoms, hastened, by the soothing
strains of his harp, to allay the stormy agitation of the royal mind.
But before its mollifying influence could be felt, Saul hurled a javelin
at the head of the young musician.

there was a javelin in Saul's hand--Had it been followed by a fatal
result, the deed would have been considered the act of an irresponsible
maniac. It was repeated more than once ineffectually, and Saul became
impressed with a dread of David as under the special protection of
Providence.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 18:13</span></span>

FEARS HIM FOR HIS GOOD SUCCESS. ([Sa1
18:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#013))

Therefore Saul removed him from him--sent him away from the court, where
the principal persons, including his own son, were spellbound with
admiration of the young and pious warrior.

made him captain over a thousand--gave him a military commission, which
was intended to be an honorable exile. But this post of duty served only
to draw out before the public the extraordinary and varied qualities of
his character, and to give him a stronger hold of the people's
affections.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 18:17</span></span>

HE OFFERS HIM HIS DAUGHTER FOR A SNARE. ([Sa1
18:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017))

Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee
to wife--Though bound to this already \[[Sa1
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025)\], he had found it convenient to
forget his former promise. He now holds it out as a new offer, which
would tempt David to give additional proofs of his valor. But the fickle
and perfidious monarch broke his pledge at the time when the marriage
was on the eve of being celebrated, and bestowed Merab on another man
(see on [Sa2 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#008)); an indignity as
well as a wrong, which was calculated deeply to wound the feelings and
provoke the resentment of David. Perhaps it was intended to do so, that
advantage might be taken of his indiscretion. But David was preserved
from this snare.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 18:20</span></span>

Michal Saul's daughter loved David--This must have happened some time
after.

they told Saul, and the thing pleased him--Not from any favor to David,
but he saw that it would be turned to the advancement of his malicious
purposes, and the more so when, by the artful intrigues and flattery of
his spies, the loyal sentiments of David were discovered.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 18:25</span></span>

The king desireth not any dowry--In Eastern countries the husband
purchases his wife either by gifts or services. As neither David nor his
family were in circumstances to give a suitable dowry for a princess,
the king intimated that he would be graciously pleased to accept some
gallant deed in the public service.

a hundred foreskins of the Philistines--Such mutilations on the bodies
of their slain enemies were commonly practised in ancient war, and the
number told indicated the glory of the victory. Saul's willingness to
accept a public service had an air of liberality, while his choice of so
difficult and hazardous a service seemed only putting a proper value on
gaining the hand of a king's daughter. But he covered unprincipled
malice against David under this proposal, which exhibited a zeal for God
and the covenant of circumcision.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 18:26</span></span>

the days were not expired--The period within which this exploit was to
be achieved was not exhausted.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 18:27</span></span>

David . . . slew of the Philistines two hundred men--The number was
doubled, partly to show his respect and attachment to the princess, and
partly to oblige Saul to the fulfilment of his pledge.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 18:29</span></span>

Saul was yet the more afraid of David--because Providence had visibly
favored him, by not only defeating the conspiracy against his life, but
through his royal alliance paving his way to the throne.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 19](sa1019)

</div>
