<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1019)  [Next](sa1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 20:1</span></span>

DAVID CONSULTS WITH JONATHAN FOR HIS SAFETY. ([Sa1
20:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001))

David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan--He
could not remain in Naioth, for he had strong reason to fear that when
the religious fit, if we may so call it, was over, Saul would relapse
into his usual fell and sanguinary temper. It may be thought that David
acted imprudently in directing his flight to Gibeah. But he was
evidently prompted to go thither by the most generous feelings--to
inform his friend of what had recently occurred, and to obtain that
friend's sanction to the course he was compelled to adopt. Jonathan
could not be persuaded there was any real danger after the oath his
father had taken; at all events, he felt assured his father would do
nothing without telling him. Filial attachment naturally blinded the
prince to defects in the parental character and made him reluctant to
believe his father capable of such atrocity. David repeated his unshaken
convictions of Saul's murderous purpose, but in terms delicately chosen
([Sa1 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#003)), not to wound the filial
feelings of his friend; while Jonathan, clinging, it would seem, to a
hope that the extraordinary scene enacted at Naioth might have wrought a
sanctified improvement on Saul's temper and feelings, undertook to
inform David of the result of his observations at home.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 20:5</span></span>

David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to-morrow the new moon, and I should
not fail to sit with the king at meat--The beginning of a new month or
moon was always celebrated by special sacrifices, followed by feasting,
at which the head of a family expected all its members to be present.
David, both as the king's son-in-law and a distinguished courtier, dined
on such occasions at the royal table, and from its being generally known
that David had returned to Gibeah, his presence in the palace would be
naturally expected. This occasion was chosen by the two friends for
testing the king's state of feeling. As a suitable pretext for David's
absence, it was arranged that he should visit his family at Beth-lehem,
and thus create an opportunity of ascertaining how his non-appearance
would be viewed. The time and place were fixed for Jonathan reporting to
David; but as circumstances might render another interview unsafe, it
was deemed expedient to communicate by a concerted signal.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 20:11</span></span>

THEIR COVENANT RENEWED BY OATH. ([Sa1
20:11-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011))

Jonathan said to David, Come, let us go into the field--The private
dialogue, which is here detailed at full length, presents a most
beautiful exhibition of these two amiable and noble-minded friends.
Jonathan was led, in the circumstances, to be the chief speaker. The
strength of his attachment, his pure disinterestedness, his warm piety,
his invocation to God (consisting of a prayer and a solemn oath
combined), the calm and full expression he gave of his conviction that
his own family were, by the divine will, to be disinherited, and David
elevated to the possession of the throne, the covenant entered into with
David on behalf of his descendants, and the imprecation ([Sa1
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)) denounced on any of them who
should violate his part of the conditions, the reiteration of this
covenant on both sides ([Sa1 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#017)) to
make it indissoluble--all this indicates such a power of mutual
affection, such magnetic attractiveness in the character of David, such
susceptibility and elevation of feeling in the heart of Jonathan, that
this interview for dramatic interest and moral beauty stands unrivalled
in the records of human friendship.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 20:19</span></span>

when thou hast stayed three days--either with your family at Beth-lehem,
or wherever you find it convenient.

come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in
hand--Hebrew, "in the day," or "time of the business," when the same
matter was under inquiry formerly ([Sa1
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#022)).

remain by the stone Ezel--Hebrew, "the stone of the way"; a sort of
milestone which directed travellers. He was to conceal himself in some
cave or hiding-place near that spot.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 20:23</span></span>

as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of--The plan being
concerted, the friends separated for a time, and the amiable character
of Jonathan again peers out in his parting allusion to their covenant of
friendship.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 20:25</span></span>

SAUL, MISSING DAVID, SEEKS TO KILL JONAHAN. (1Sa. 20:24-40)

the king sat upon his seat, as at other times . . . by the wall--The
left-hand corner at the upper end of a room was and still is in the
East, the most honorable place. The person seated there has his left arm
confined by the wall, but his right hand is at full liberty. From
Abner's position next the king, and David's seat being left empty, it
would seem that a state etiquette was observed at the royal table, each
of the courtiers and ministers having places assigned them according to
their respective gradations of rank.

Jonathan arose--either as a mark of respect on the entrance of the king,
or in conformity with the usual Oriental custom for a son to stand in
presence of his father.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 20:26</span></span>

he is not clean--No notice was taken of David's absence, as he might be
laboring under some ceremonial defilement.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 20:27</span></span>

on the morrow, which was the second day of the month--The time of the
moon's appearance being uncertain--whether at midday, in the evening, or
at midnight, the festival was extended over two days. Custom, not the
law, had introduced this.

Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of
Jesse--The question was asked, as it were, casually, and with as great
an air of indifference as he could assume. And Jonathan having replied
that David had asked and obtained his permission to attend a family
anniversary at Beth-lehem \[[Act
20:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)\], the pent-up passions of
the king burst out in a most violent storm of rage and invective against
his son.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 20:30</span></span>

Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman--This is a striking Oriental
form of abuse. Saul was not angry with his wife; it was the son alone,
upon whom he meant, by this style of address, to discharge his
resentment. The principle on which it is founded seems to be, that to a
genuine filial instinct it is a more inexpiable offense to hear the name
or character of a parent traduced, than any personal reproach. This was,
undoubtedly, one cause of "the fierce anger" in which the high-minded
prince left the table without tasting a morsel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 20:33</span></span>

Saul cast a javelin at him--This is a sad proof of the maniacal frenzy
into which the unhappy monarch was transported.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 20:35</span></span>

Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed--or, "at the
place appointed."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 20:36</span></span>

he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot--The
direction given aloud to the attendant was the signal preconcerted with
David. It implied danger.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa1 20:40</span></span>

Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad--that is, his missive weapons.
The French word artillerie, signifies "archery." The term is still used
in England, in the designation of the "artillery company of London," the
association of archers, though they have long disused bows and arrows.
Jonathan's boy being despatched out of the way, the friends enjoyed the
satisfaction of a final meeting.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa1 20:41</span></span>

JONATHAN AND DAVID LOVINGLY PART. ([Sa1
20:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041))

David . . . fell on his face to the ground, and bowed three times--a
token of homage to the prince's rank; but on a close approach, every
other consideration was sunk in the full flow of the purest brotherly
affection.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa1 20:42</span></span>

Jonathan said to David, Go in peace--The interview being a stolen one,
and every moment precious, it was kindness in Jonathan to hasten his
friend's departure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa1021)

</div>
