<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2014)  [Next](sa2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 15:1</span></span>

ABSALOM STEALS THE HEARTS OF ISRAEL. ([Sa2
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001))

Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before
him--This was assuming the state and equipage of a prince. The royal
guards, called runners, avant couriers, amounted to fifty ([Kg1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005)). The chariot, as the Hebrew
indicates, was of a magnificent style; and the horses, a novelty among
the Hebrew people, only introduced in that age as an appendage of
royalty ([Psa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009); [Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)), formed a splendid retinue,
which would make him "the observed of all observers."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 15:2</span></span>

Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate--Public
business in the East is always transacted early in the morning--the
kings sitting an hour or more to hear causes or receive petitions, in a
court held anciently, and in many places still, in the open air at the
city gateway; so that, as those whose circumstances led them to wait on
King David required to be in attendance on his morning levees, Absalom
had to rise up early and stand beside the way of the gate. Through the
growing infirmities of age, or the occupation of his government with
foreign wars, many private causes had long lain undecided, and a deep
feeling of discontent prevailed among the people. This dissatisfaction
was artfully fomented by Absalom, who addressed himself to the various
suitors; and after briefly hearing their tale, he gratified everyone
with a favorable opinion of his case. Studiously concealing his
ambitious designs, he expressed a wish to be invested with official
power, only that he might accelerate the course of justice and advance
the public interests. His professions had an air of extraordinary
generosity and disinterestedness, which, together with his fawning arts
in lavishing civilities on all, made him a popular favorite. Thus, by
forcing a contrast between his own display of public spirit and the
dilatory proceedings of the court, he created a growing disgust with his
father's government, as weak, careless, or corrupt, and seduced the
affections of the multitude, who neither penetrated the motive nor
foresaw the tendency of his conduct.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 15:7</span></span>

after forty years--It is generally admitted that an error has here crept
into the text, and that instead of "forty," we should read with the
Syriac and Arabic versions, and JOSEPHUS, "four years"--that is, after
Absalom's return to Jerusalem, and his beginning to practice the base
arts of gaining popularity.

my vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord--during his exile in Geshur.
The purport of it was, that whenever God's providence should pave the
way for his re-establishment in Jerusalem, he would offer a sacrifice of
thanksgiving. Hebron was the spot selected for the performance of this
vow, ostensibly as being his native place ([Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)), and a famous high place, where
sacrifices were frequently offered before the temple was built; but
really as being in many respects the most suitable for the commencement
of his rebellious enterprise. David, who always encouraged piety and
desired to see religious engagements punctually performed, gave his
consent and his blessing.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 15:10</span></span>

HE FORMS A CONSPIRACY. ([Sa2 15:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#010))

Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel--These emissaries
were to sound the inclination of the people, to further the interests of
Absalom, and exhort all the adherents of his party to be in readiness to
join his standard as soon as they should hear that he had been
proclaimed king. As the summons was to be made by the sound of trumpets,
it is probable that care had been taken to have trumpeters stationed on
the heights, and at convenient stations--a mode of announcement that
would soon spread the news over all the country of his inauguration to
the throne.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 15:11</span></span>

with Absalom went two hundred men . . . that were called--From their
quality, reputation, and high standing, such as would create the
impression that the king patronized the movement and, being aged and
infirm, was willing to adopt his oldest and noblest son to divide with
him the cares and honors of government.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 15:12</span></span>

Absalom sent for Ahithophel--who he knew was ready to join the revolt,
through disgust and revenge, as Jewish writers assert, at David's
conduct towards Bath-sheba, who was his granddaughter.

Giloh--near Hebron.

the conspiracy was strong--The rapid accession of one place after
another in all parts of the kingdom to the party of the insurgents,
shows that deep and general dissatisfaction existed at this time against
the person and government of David. The remnant of Saul's partisans, the
unhappy affair of Bath-sheba, the overbearing insolence and crimes of
Joab, negligence and obstruction in the administration of justice--these
were some of the principal causes that contributed to the success of
this widespread insurrection.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 15:14</span></span>

DAVID FLEES FROM JERUSALEM. (2Sa. 15:13-37)

David said . . . Arise, and let us flee--David, anxious for the
preservation of the city which he had beautified, and hopeful of a
greater support throughout the country, wisely resolved on leaving
Jerusalem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 15:18</span></span>

all the Gittites, six hundred men--These were a body of foreign guards,
natives of Gath, whom David, when in the country of the Philistines, had
enlisted in his service, and kept around his person. Addressing their
commander, Ittai, he made a searching trial of their fidelity in bidding
them ([Sa2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#019)) abide with the new
king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 15:23</span></span>

the brook Kidron--a winter torrent that flows through the valley between
the city and the eastern side of the Mount of Olives.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 15:24</span></span>

Zadok also, and all the Levites . . ., bearing the ark--Knowing the
strong religious feelings of the aged king, they brought it to accompany
him in his distress. But as he could not doubt that both the ark and
their sacred office would exempt them from the attacks of the rebels, he
sent them back with it--not only that they might not be exposed to the
perils of uncertain wandering, for he seems to place more confidence in
the symbol of the divine presence than in God Himself--but that, by
remaining in Jerusalem, they might render him greater service by
watching the enemy's movements.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 15:30</span></span>

David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet--The same pathway over that
mount has been followed ever since that memorable day.

had his head covered--with a mourning wrapper. The humility and
resignation of David marked strongly his sanctified spirit, induced by
contrition for his transgressions. He had fallen, but it was the fall of
the upright; and he rose again, submitting himself meekly in the
meantime to the will of God \[CHALMERS\].

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 15:31</span></span>

David said, Turn, O Lord, . . . the counsel of Ahithophel--this senator
being the mainstay of the conspiracy.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 15:32</span></span>

when David was come to the top of the mount, where he
worshipped--looking towards Jerusalem, where were the ark and
tabernacle.

Hushai the Archite--A native of Archi, on the frontiers of Benjamin and
Ephraim ([Jos 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#002)). Comparing the
prayer against Ahithophel with the counsel to Hushai, we see how
strongly a spirit of fervent piety was combined in his character with
the devices of an active and far-seeing policy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](sa2016)

</div>
