<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2023)  [Next](kg1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 24:1</span></span>

DAVID NUMBERS THE PEOPLE. ([Sa2
24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001))

again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah--"Again" carries
us back to the former tokens of His wrath in the three years' famine
\[[Sa2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)\]. God, though He cannot
tempt any man ([Jam 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013)), is
frequently described in Scripture as doing what He merely permits to be
done; and so, in this case, He permitted Satan to tempt David. Satan was
the active mover, while God only withdrew His supporting grace, and the
great tempter prevailed against the king. (See [Exo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013); [Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019); [Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010); [Psa
105:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#025); [Isa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017), &c.). The order was given to
Joab, who, though not generally restrained by religious scruples, did
not fail to present, in strong terms (see on [Ch1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#003)), the sin and danger of this
measure. He used every argument to dissuade the king from his purpose.
The sacred history has not mentioned the objections which he and other
distinguished officers urged against it in the council of David. But it
expressly states that they were all overruled by the inflexible
resolution of the king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 24:5</span></span>

they passed over Jordan--This census was taken first in the eastern
parts of the Hebrew kingdom; and it would seem that Joab was accompanied
by a military force, either to aid in this troublesome work, or to
overawe the people who might display reluctance or opposition.

the river of Gad--"Wady" would be a better term. It extends over a
course estimated at about sixty miles, which, though in summer almost
constantly dry, exhibits very evident traces of being swept over by an
impetuous torrent in winter (see [Deu
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 24:6</span></span>

the land of Tahtim-hodshi--that is, the land lately acquired; namely,
that of the Hagarites conquered by Saul ([Ch1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#010)). The progress was northward.
Thence they crossed the country, and, proceeding along the western coast
to the southern extremities of the country, they at length arrived in
Jerusalem, having completed the enumeration of the whole kingdom in the
space of nine months and twenty days.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 24:9</span></span>

Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king--The
amount here stated, compared with [Ch1
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005), gives a difference of three
hundred thousand. The discrepancy is only apparent, and admits of an
easy reconciliation; thus (see [Ch1
27:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001)), there were twelve divisions
of generals, who commanded monthly, and whose duty was to keep guard on
the royal person, each having a body of troops consisting of twenty-four
thousand men, which, together, formed an army of two hundred
eighty-eight thousand; and as a separate detachment of twelve thousand
was attendant on the twelve princes of the twelve tribes mentioned in
the same chapter, so both are equal to three hundred thousand. These
were not reckoned in this book, because they were in the actual service
of the king as a regular militia. But [Ch1
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005) joins them to the rest, saying,
"all those of Israel were one million, one hundred thousand"; whereas
the author of Samuel, who reckons only the eight hundred thousand, does
not say, "all those of Israel," but barely "and Israel were," &c. It
must also be observed that, exclusive of the troops before mentioned,
there was an army of observation on the frontiers of the Philistines'
country, composed of thirty thousand men, as appears from [Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001); which, it seems, were included in
the number of five hundred thousand of the people of Judah by the author
of Samuel. But the author of Chronicles, who mentions only four hundred
seventy thousand, gives the number of that tribe exclusive of those
thirty thousand men, because they were not all of the tribe of Judah,
and therefore he does not say, "all those of Judah," as he had said,
"all those of Israel," but only, "and those of Judah." Thus both
accounts may be reconciled \[DAVIDSON\].

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 24:10</span></span>

HE, HAVING THREE PLAGUES PROPOUNDED BY GAD, REPENTS, AND CHOOSES THREE
DAYS' PESTILENCE. ([Sa2 24:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010))

David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David
said unto the Lord, I have sinned--The act of numbering the people was
not in itself sinful; for Moses did it by the express authority of God.
But David acted not only independently of such order or sanction, but
from motives unworthy of the delegated king of Israel; from pride and
vainglory; from self-confidence and distrust of God; and, above all,
from ambitious designs of conquest, in furtherance of which he was
determined to force the people into military service, and to ascertain
whether he could muster an army sufficient for the magnitude of the
enterprises he contemplated. It was a breach of the constitution, an
infringement of the liberties of the people, and opposed to that divine
policy which required that Israel should continue a separate people. His
eyes were not opened to the heinousness of his sin till God had spoken
unto him by His commissioned prophet.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 24:13</span></span>

Shall seven years of famine come unto thee--that is, in addition to the
three that had been already, with the current year included (see on [Ch1
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#011)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 24:14</span></span>

David said, . . . Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord--His
overwhelming sense of his sin led him to acquiesce in the punishment
denounced, notwithstanding its apparent excess of severity. He proceeded
on a good principle in choosing the pestilence. In pestilence he was
equally exposed, as it was just and right he should be, to danger as his
people, whereas, in war and famine, he possessed means of protection
superior to them. Besides, he thereby showed his trust, founded on long
experience, in the divine goodness.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 24:15</span></span>

HIS INTERCESSION TO GOD; THE PLAGUE CEASES. ([Sa2
24:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015))

from the morning--rather that morning when Gad came \[[Sa2
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)\], till the end of the three
days.

there died of the people . . . seventy thousand men--Thus was the pride
of the vainglorious monarch, confiding in the number of his population,
deeply humbled.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 24:16</span></span>

the Lord repented him of the evil--God is often described in Scripture
as repenting when He ceased to pursue a course He had begun.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 24:17</span></span>

David . . . said--or, "had said,"

I have sinned . . . but these sheep, what have they done?--The guilt of
numbering the people lay exclusively with David. But in the body politic
as well as natural, when the head suffers, all the members suffer along
with it; and, besides, although David's sin was the immediate cause, the
great increase of national offenses at this time had ([Sa2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)) kindled the anger of the Lord.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 24:18</span></span>

Araunah--or Ornan ([Ch1 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#018)), the
Jebusite, one of the ancient inhabitants, who, having become a convert
to the true religion, retained his house and possessions. He resided on
Mount Moriah, the spot on which the temple was afterwards built ([Ch2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)); but that mount was not then
enclosed in the town.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 24:21</span></span>

to build an altar unto the Lord, that the plague may be stayed--It is
evident that the plague was not stayed till after the altar was built,
and the sacrifice offered, so that what is related ([Sa2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)) was by anticipation. Previous
to the offering of this sacrifice, he had seen the destroying angel as
well as offered the intercessory prayer ([Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017)). This was a sacrifice of
expiation; and the reason why he was allowed to offer it on Mount Moriah
was partly in gracious consideration to his fear of repairing to Gibeon
([Ch1 21:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#029)), and partly in
anticipation of the removal of the tabernacle and the erection of the
temple there ([Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 24:23</span></span>

All these things did Araunah, as a king, give--Indicating, as the sense
is, that this man had been anciently a heathen king or chief, but was
now a proselyte who still retained great property and influence in
Jerusalem, and whose piety was evinced by the liberality of his offers.
The words, "as a king," are taken by some to signify simply, "he gave
with royal munificence."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 24:24</span></span>

Nay; . . . I will . . . buy it of thee at a price--The sum mentioned
here, namely, fifty shekels of silver, equal Â£6 sterling, was paid for
the floor, oxen and wood instruments only, whereas the large sum ([Ch1
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#025)) was paid afterwards for the
whole hill, on which David made preparations for building the temple.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 24:25</span></span>

David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings--There seem to have
been two sacrifices; the first expiatory, the second a thanksgiving for
the cessation of the pestilence (see on [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Introduction](kg1000)

</div>
