<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2020)  [Next](sa2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 21:1</span></span>

THE THREE YEARS' FAMINE FOR THE GIBEONITES CEASE BY HANGING SEVEN OF
SAUL'S SONS. ([Sa2 21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001))

the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he
slew the Gibeonites--The sacred history has not recorded either the time
or the reason of this massacre. Some think that they were sufferers in
the atrocity perpetrated by Saul at Nob ([Sa1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019)), where many of them may have
resided as attendants of the priests; while others suppose it more
probable that the attempt was made afterwards, with a view to regain the
popularity he had lost throughout the nation by that execrable outrage.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 21:2</span></span>

in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah--Under pretense of a
rigorous and faithful execution of the divine law regarding the
extermination of the Canaanites, he set himself to expel or destroy
those whom Joshua had been deceived into sparing. His real object seems
to have been, that the possessions of the Gibeonites, being forfeited to
the crown, might be divided among his own people (compare [Sa1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007)). At all events, his proceeding
against this people was in violation of a solemn oath, and involving
national guilt. The famine was, in the wise and just retribution of
Providence, made a national punishment, since the Hebrews either
assisted in the massacre, or did not interpose to prevent it; since they
neither endeavored to repair the wrong, nor expressed any horror of it;
and since a general protracted chastisement might have been
indispensable to inspire a proper respect and protection to the
Gibeonite remnant that survived.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 21:6</span></span>

Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up
unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul--The practice of the Hebrews, as of most
Oriental nations, was to slay first, and afterwards to suspend on a
gibbet, the body not being left hanging after sunset. The king could not
refuse this demand of the Gibeonites, who, in making it, were only
exercising their right as blood-avengers; and, although through fear and
a sense of weakness they had not hitherto claimed satisfaction, yet now
that David had been apprised by the oracle of the cause of the
long-prevailing calamity, he felt it his duty to give the Gibeonites
full satisfaction--hence their specifying the number seven, which was
reckoned full and complete. And if it should seem unjust to make the
descendants suffer for a crime which, in all probability, originated
with Saul himself, yet his sons and grandsons might be the instruments
of his cruelty, the willing and zealous executors of this bloody raid.

the king said, I will give them--David cannot be charged with doing this
as an indirect way or ridding himself of rival competitors for the
throne, for those delivered up were only collateral branches of Saul's
family, and never set up any claim to the sovereignty. Moreover, David
was only granting the request of the Gibeonites as God had bidden him
do.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 21:8</span></span>

the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for
Adriel--Merab, Michal's sister, was the wife of Adriel; but Michal
adopted and brought up the boys under her care.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 21:9</span></span>

they hanged them in the hill before the Lord--Deeming themselves not
bound by the criminal law of Israel ([Deu
21:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)), their intention was to let
the bodies hang until God, propitiated by this offering, should send
rain upon the land, for the want of it had occasioned the famine. It was
a heathen practice to gibbet men with a view of appeasing the anger of
the gods in seasons of famine, and the Gibeonites, who were a remnant of
the Amorites ([Sa2 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#002)), though
brought to the knowledge of the true God, were not, it seems, free from
this superstition. God, in His providence, suffered the Gibeonites to
ask and inflict so barbarous a retaliation, in order that the oppressed
Gibeonites might obtain justice and some reparation of their wrongs,
especially that the scandal brought on the name of the true religion by
the violation of a solemn national compact might be wiped away from
Israel, and that a memorable lesson should be given to respect treaties
and oaths.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 21:10</span></span>

RIZPAH'S KINDNESS UNTO THE DEAD. ([Sa2
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010))

Rizpah . . . took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock--She
erected a tent near the spot, in which she and her servants kept watch,
as the relatives of executed persons were wont to do, day and night, to
scare the birds and beasts of prey away from the remains exposed on the
low-standing gibbets.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 21:12</span></span>

DAVID BURIES THE BONES OF SAUL AND JONATHAN IN THEIR FATHER'S SEPULCHER.
([Sa2 21:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#012))

David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son,
&c.--Before long, the descent of copious showers, or perhaps an order of
the king, gave Rizpah the satisfaction of releasing the corpses from
their ignominious exposure; and, incited by her pious example, David
ordered the remains of Saul and his sons to be transferred from their
obscure grave in Jabesh-gilead to an honorable interment in the family
vault at Zelah or Zelzah ([Sa1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)),
now Beit-jala.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 21:15</span></span>

Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel--Although the
Philistines had completely succumbed to the army of David, yet the
appearance of any gigantic champions among them revived their courage
and stirred them up to renewed inroads on the Hebrew territory. Four
successive contests they provoked during the latter period of David's
reign, in the first of which the king ran so imminent a risk of his life
that he was no longer allowed to encounter the perils of the
battlefield.

The song contained in this chapter is the same as the eighteenth Psalm,
where the full commentary will be given \[see on [Psa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001), &c.\]. It may be sufficient
simply to remark that Jewish writers have noticed a great number of very
minute variations in the language of the song as recorded here, from
that embodied in the Book of Psalms--which may be accounted for by the
fact that this, the first copy of the poem, was carefully revised and
altered by David afterwards, when it was set to the music of the
tabernacle. This inspired ode was manifestly the effusion of a mind
glowing with the highest fervor of piety and gratitude, and it is full
of the noblest imagery that is to be found within the range even of
sacred poetry. It is David's grand tribute of thanksgiving for
deliverance from his numerous and powerful enemies, and establishing him
in the power and glory of the kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](sa2023)

</div>
