<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 3:1</span></span>

SIX SONS BORN TO DAVID. ([Sa2 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001))

there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David--The
rival parties had varying success, but David's interest steadily
increased; less, however, by the fortunes of war, than a growing
adherence to him as the divinely designated king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 3:2</span></span>

unto David were sons born in Hebron--The six sons mentioned had all
different mothers.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 3:3</span></span>

Chileab--("his father's picture")--called also Daniel ([Ch1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001)).

Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur--a region in Syria, north
of Israel. This marriage seems to have been a political match, made by
David, with a view to strengthen himself against Ish-bosheth's party, by
the aid of a powerful friend and ally in the north. Piety was made to
yield to policy, and the bitter fruits of this alliance with a heathen
prince he reaped in the life of the turbulent Absalom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 3:5</span></span>

Eglah David's wife--This addition has led many to think that Eglah was
another name for Michal, the first and proper wife, who, though she had
no family after her insolent ridicule of David ([Sa2
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#023)), might have had a child before.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 3:6</span></span>

ABNER REVOLTS TO DAVID. ([Sa2 3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006))

Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul--In the East, the wives
and concubines of a king are the property of his successor to this
extent, that for a private person to aspire to marry one of them would
be considered a virtual advance of pretensions to the crown (see [Kg1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#017)). It is not clear whether the
accusation against Abner was well or ill founded. But he resented the
charge as an indignity, and, impelled by revenge, determined to transfer
all the weight of his influence to the opposite party. He evidently set
a full value on his services, and seems to have lorded it over his weak
nephew in a haughty, overbearing manner.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 3:12</span></span>

Abner sent messengers to David--Though his language implied a secret
conviction, that in supporting Ish-bosheth he had been laboring to
frustrate the divine purpose of conferring the sovereignty of the
kingdom on David, this acknowledgment was no justification either of the
measure he was now adopting, or of the motives that prompted it. Nor
does it seem possible to uphold the full integrity and honor of David's
conduct in entertaining his secret overtures for undermining
Ish-bosheth, except we take into account the divine promise of the
kingdom, and his belief that the secession of Abner was a means designed
by Providence for accomplishing it. The demand for the restoration of
his wife Michal was perfectly fair; but David's insisting on it at that
particular moment, as an indispensable condition of his entering into
any treaty with Abner, seems to have proceeded not so much from a
lingering attachment as from an expectation that his possession of her
would incline some adherents of the house of Saul to be favorable to his
cause.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 3:17</span></span>

Abner had communication with the elders of Israel--He spoke the truth in
impressing their minds with the well-known fact of David's divine
designation to the kingdom. But he acted a base and hypocritical part in
pretending that his present movement was prompted by religious motives,
when it sprang entirely from malice and revenge against Ish-bosheth. The
particular appeal of the Benjamites was a necessary policy; their tribe
enjoyed the honor of giving birth to the royal dynasty of Saul; they
would naturally be disinclined to lose that prestige. They were,
besides, a determined people, whose contiguity to Judah might render
them troublesome and dangerous. The enlistment of their interest,
therefore, in the scheme, would smooth the way for the adhesion of the
other tribes; and Abner enjoyed the most convenient opportunity of using
his great influence in gaining over that tribe while escorting Michal to
David with a suitable equipage. The mission enabled him to cover his
treacherous designs against his master--to draw the attention of the
elders and people to David as uniting in himself the double
recommendation of being the nominee of Jehovah, no less than a
connection of the royal house of Saul, and, without suspicion of any
dishonorable motives, to advocate policy of terminating the civil
discord, by bestowing the sovereignty on the husband of Michal. In the
same character of public ambassador, he was received and feted by David;
and while, ostensibly, the restoration of Michal was the sole object of
his visit, he busily employed himself in making private overtures to
David for bringing over to his cause those tribes which he had artfully
seduced. Abner pursued a course unworthy of an honorable man and though
his offer was accepted by David, the guilt and infamy of the transaction
were exclusively his.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 3:24</span></span>

JOAB KILLS ABNER. ([Sa2 3:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022))

Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done?--Joab's knowledge
of Abner's wily character might have led him to doubt the sincerity of
that person's proposals and to disapprove the policy of relying on his
fidelity. But undoubtedly there were other reasons of a private and
personal nature which made Joab displeased and alarmed by the reception
given to Abner. The military talents of that general, his popularity
with the army, his influence throughout the nation, rendered him a
formidable rival. In the event of his overtures being carried out, the
important service of bringing over all the other tribes to the king of
Judah would establish so strong a claim on the gratitude of David, that
his accession would inevitably raise a serious obstacle to the ambition
of Joab. To these considerations was added the remembrance of the blood
feud that existed between them since the death of his brother Asahel
([Sa2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)). Determined, therefore, to
get Abner out of the way, Joab feigned some reason, probably in the
king's name, for recalling him, and, going out to meet him, stabbed him
unawares; not within Hebron, for it was a city of refuge, but at a noted
well in the neighborhood.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 3:31</span></span>

David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him, Rend your
clothes, and gird you with sackcloth--David's sorrow was sincere and
profound, and he took occasion to give it public expression by the
funeral honors he appointed for Abner.

King David himself followed the bier--a sort of wooden frame, partly
resembling a coffin, and partly a hand-barrow.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 3:33</span></span>

the king lamented over Abner--This brief elegy is an effusion of
indignation as much as of sorrow. As Abner had stabbed Asahel in open
war \[[Sa2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)\], Joab had not the
right of the Goel. Besides, he had adopted a lawless and execrable
method of obtaining satisfaction (see on [Kg1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005)). The deed was an insult to the
authority, as well as most damaging to the prospects of the king. But
David's feelings and conduct on hearing of the death, together with the
whole character and accompaniments of the funeral solemnity, tended not
only to remove all suspicion of guilt from him, but even to turn the
tide of popular opinion in his favor, and to pave the way for his
reigning over all the tribes more honorably than by the treacherous
negotiations of Abner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa2004)

</div>
