<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2015)  [Next](sa2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 16:1</span></span>

ZIBA, BY FALSE SUGGESTIONS, CLAIMS HIS MASTER'S INHERITANCE. ([Sa2
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001))

Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him--This crafty man, anticipating
the certain failure of Absalom's conspiracy, took steps to prepare for
his future advancement on the restoration of the king.

a bottle of wine--a large goatskin vessel. Its size made the supply of
wine proportioned to the rest of his present.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 16:2</span></span>

The asses be for the king's household to ride on--The royal fugitives
were moving on foot, not from inability to procure conveyances, but as
being suitable to their present state of humiliation and penitence.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 16:3</span></span>

To-day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my
father--Such a hope might not unnaturally arise at this period of civil
distraction, that the family of David would destroy themselves by their
mutual broils, and the people reinstate the old dynasty. There was an
air of plausibility in Ziba's story. Many, on whom the king had
conferred favors, were now deserting him. No wonder, therefore, that in
the excitement of momentary feeling, believing, on the report of a
slanderer, Mephibosheth to be among the number, he pronounced a rash and
unrighteous judgment by which a great injury was inflicted on the
character and interests of a devoted friend.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 16:5</span></span>

SHIMEI CURSES DAVID. ([Sa2 16:5-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005))

when king David came to Bahurim--a city of Benjamin ([Sa2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016); [Sa2
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016)). It is, however, only the
confines of the district that are here meant.

Shimei, . . . a man of the family of Saul--The misfortune of his family,
and the occupation by David of what they considered their rightful
possessions, afforded a natural, if not a justifiable cause for this
ebullition of rude insults and violence. He upbraided David as an
ambitious usurper, and charged him, as one whose misdeeds had recoiled
upon his own head, to surrender a throne to which he was not entitled.
His language was that of a man incensed by the wrongs that he conceived
had been done to his house. David was guiltless of the crime of which
Shimei accused him; but his conscience reminded him of other flagrant
iniquities; and he, therefore, regarded the cursing of this man as a
chastisement from heaven. His answer to Abishai's proposal evinced the
spirit of deep and humble resignation--the spirit of a man who watched
the course of Providence, and acknowledged Shimei as the instrument of
God's chastening hand. One thing is remarkable, that he acted more
independently of the sons of Zeruiah in this season of great distress
than he could often muster courage to do in the days of his prosperity
and power.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 16:13</span></span>

went along on the hill's side over against him--as he descended the
rough road on the eastern side of the Mount of Olives, "went along on
the hill's side"--literally, "the rib of the hill."

threw stones at him--as a mark of contempt and insult.

cast dust--As if to add insult to injury, clouds of dust were thrown by
this disloyal subject in the path of his unfortunate sovereign.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 16:14</span></span>

refreshed themselves there--that is, in the city of Bahurim.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 16:15</span></span>

Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king--Hushai's devotion to David
was so well-known, that his presence in the camp of the conspirators
excited great surprise. Professing, however, with great address, to
consider it his duty to support the cause which the course of Providence
and the national will had seemingly decreed should triumph, and urging
his friendship for the father as a ground of confidence in his fidelity
to the son, he persuaded Absalom of his sincerity, and was admitted
among the councillors of the new king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 16:20</span></span>

AHITHOPHEL'S COUNSEL. ([Sa2 16:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020))

Give counsel among you what we shall do--This is the first cabinet
council on record, although the deference paid to Ahithophel gave him
the entire direction of the proceedings.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 16:21</span></span>

Ahithophel said unto Absalom--This councillor saw that now the die was
cast; half measures would be inexpedient. To cut off all possibility of
reconciliation between the king and his rebellious son, he gave this
atrocious advice regarding the treatment of the royal women who had been
left in charge of the palace. Women, being held sacred, are generally
left inviolate in the casualties of war. The history of the East affords
only one parallel to this infamous outrage of Absalom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa2017)

</div>
