<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 0:0</span></span>

The Song of Solomon, called in the Vulgate and Septuagint, "The Song of
Songs," from the opening words. This title denotes its superior
excellence, according to the Hebrew idiom; so holy of holies, equivalent
to "most holy" ([Exo 29:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#037)); the
heaven of heavens, equivalent to the highest heavens ([Deu
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014)). It is one of the five volumes
(megilloth) placed immediately after the Pentateuch in manuscripts of
the Jewish Scriptures. It is also fourth of the Hagiographa (Cetubim,
writings) or the third division of the Old Testament, the other two
being the Law and the Prophets. The Jewish enumeration of the Cetubim is
Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes,
Esther, Daniel, Ezra (including Nehemiah), and Chronicles. Its
canonicity is certain; it is found in all Hebrew manuscripts of
Scripture; also in the Greek Septuagint; in the catalogues of MELITO,
bishop of Sardis, A.D. 170 (EUSEBIUS, Ecclesiastical History, 4.26), and
of others of the ancient Church.

ORIGEN and JEROME tell us that the Jews forbade it to be read by any
until he was thirty years old. It certainly needs a degree of spiritual
maturity to enter aright into the holy mystery of love which it
allegorically sets forth. To such as have attained this maturity, of
whatever age they be, the Song of Songs is one of the most edifying of
the sacred writings. ROSENMULLER justly says, The sudden transitions of
the bride from the court to the grove are inexplicable, on the
supposition that it describes merely human love. Had it been the latter,
it would have been positively objectionable, and never would have been
inserted in the holy canon. The allusion to "Pharaoh's chariots" ([Sol
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009)) has been made a ground for
conjecturing that the love of Solomon and Pharaoh's daughter is the
subject of the Song. But this passage alludes to a remarkable event in
the history of the Old Testament Church, the deliverance from the hosts
and chariots of Pharaoh at the Red Sea. (However, see on [Sol
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009)). The other allusions are quite
opposed to the notion; the bride is represented at times as a
shepherdess ([Sol 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)), "an
abomination to the Egyptians" ([Gen
46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034)); so also [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006); [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004); [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008); [Sol
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007) are at variance with it. The
Christian fathers, ORIGEN and THEODORET, compared the teachings of
Solomon to a ladder with three steps; Ecclesiastes, natural (the nature
of sensible things, vain); Proverbs, moral; Canticles, mystical
(figuring the union of Christ and the Church). The Jews compared
Proverbs to the outer court of Solomon's temple, Ecclesiastes to the
holy place, and Canticles to the holy of holies. Understood
allegorically, the Song is cleared of all difficulty. "Shulamith" ([Sol
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013)), the bride, is thus an
appropriate name, Daughter of Peace being the feminine of Solomon,
equivalent to the Prince of Peace. She by turns is a vinedresser,
shepherdess, midnight inquirer, and prince's consort and daughter, and
He a suppliant drenched with night dews, and a king in His palace, in
harmony with the various relations of the Church and Christ. As
Ecclesiastes sets forth the vanity of love of the creature, Canticles
sets forth the fullness of the love which joins believers and the
Saviour. The entire economy of salvation, says HARRIS, aims at restoring
to the world the lost spirit of love. God is love, and Christ is the
embodiment of the love of God. As the other books of Scripture present
severally their own aspects of divine truth, so Canticles furnishes the
believer with language of holy love, wherewith his heart can commune
with his Lord; and it portrays the intensity of Christ's love to him;
the affection of love was created in man to be a transcript of the
divine love, and the Song clothes the latter in words; were it not for
this, we should be at a loss for language, having the divine warrant,
wherewith to express, without presumption, the fervor of the love
between Christ and us. The image of a bride, a bridegroom, and a
marriage, to represent this spiritual union, has the sanction of
Scripture throughout; nay, the spiritual union was the original fact in
the mind of God, of which marriage is the transcript ([Isa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005); [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005); [Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001), &c.; Eze. 16:1-63; Eze. 23:1-49;
[Mat 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015); [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002); [Mat
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001), &c.; [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029); [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002); [Eph
5:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023), where Paul does not go from
the marriage relation to the union of Christ and the Church as if the
former were the first; but comes down from the latter as the first and
best recognized fact on which the relation of marriage is based; [Rev
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002); [Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)). Above all, the Song seems to
correspond to, and form a trilogy with, Psalms 45 and 72, which contain
the same imagery; just as Psalm 37 answers to Proverbs, and the Psalms
39 and 73 to Job. Love to Christ is the strongest, as it is the purest,
of human passions, and therefore needs the strongest language to express
it: to the pure in heart the phraseology, drawn from the rich imagery of
Oriental poetry, will not only appear not indelicate or exaggerated, but
even below the reality. A single emblem is a type; the actual rites,
incidents, and persons of the Old Testament were appointed types of
truths afterwards to be revealed. But the allegory is a continued
metaphor, in which the circumstances are palpably often purely imagery,
while the thing signified is altogether real. The clue to the meaning of
the Song is not to be looked for in the allegory itself, but in other
parts of Scripture. "It lies in the casket of revelation an exquisite
gem, engraved with emblematical characters, with nothing literal thereon
to break the consistency of their beauty" \[BURROWES\]. This accounts
for the name of God not occurring in it. Whereas in the parable the
writer narrates, in the allegory he never does so. The Song throughout
consists of immediate addresses either of Christ to the soul, or of the
soul to Christ. "The experimental knowledge of Christ's loveliness and
the believer's love is the best commentary on the whole of this
allegorical Song" \[LEIGHTON\]. Like the curiously wrought Oriental
lamps, which do not reveal the beauty of their transparent emblems until
lighted up within, so the types and allegories of Scripture, "the
lantern to our path" \[[Psa 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)\],
need the inner light of the Holy Spirit of Jesus to reveal their
significance. The details of the allegory are not to be too minutely
pressed. In the Song, with an Oriental profusion of imagery, numbers of
lovely, sensible objects are aggregated not strictly congruous, but
portraying jointly by their very diversity the thousand various and
seemingly opposite beauties which meet together in Christ.

The unity of subject throughout, and the recurrence of the same
expressions ([Sol 2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006); [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005); [Sol
8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#003); [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016); [Sol
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003); [Sol
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010); [Sol
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006); [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010); [Sol
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005)), prove the unity of the poem, in
opposition to those who make it consist of a number of separate erotic
songs. The sudden transitions (for example, from the midnight knocking
at a humble cottage to a glorious description of the King) accord with
the alternations in the believer's experience. However various the
divisions assigned be, most commentators have observed four breaks
(whatever more they have imagined), followed by four abrupt beginnings
([Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007); [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005); [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001); [Sol
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004)). Thus there result five parts,
all alike ending in full repose and refreshment. We read ([Kg1
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#032)) that Solomon's songs were "a
thousand and five." The odd number five added over the complete thousand
makes it not unlikely that the "five" refers to the Song of songs,
consisting of five parts.

It answers to the idyllic poetry of other nations. The Jews explain it
of the union of Jehovah and ancient Israel; the allusions to the temple
and the wilderness accord with this; some Christians of Christ and the
Church; others of Christ and the individual believer. All these are
true; for the Church is one in all ages, the ancient typifying the
modern Church, and its history answering to that of each individual soul
in it. Jesus "sees all, as if that all were one, loves one, as if that
one were all." "The time suited the manner of this revelation; because
types and allegories belonged to the old dispensation, which reached its
ripeness under Solomon, when the temple was built" \[MOODY STUART\].
"The daughter of Zion at that time was openly married to Jehovah"; for
it is thenceforth that the prophets, in reproving Israel's subsequent
sin, speak of it as a breach of her marriage covenant. The songs
heretofore sung by her were the preparatory hymns of her childhood; "the
last and crowning 'Song of Songs' was prepared for the now mature maiden
against the day of her marriage to the King of kings" \[ORIGEN\].
Solomon was peculiarly fitted to clothe this holy mystery with the
lovely natural imagery with which the Song abounds; for "he spake of
trees, from the cedar in Lebanon, even unto the hyssop that springeth
out of the wall" ([Kg1 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033)). A higher
qualification was his knowledge of the eternal Wisdom or Word of God
(Pro. 8:1-36), the heavenly bridegroom. David, his father, had prepared
the way, in Psalms 45 and 72; the son perfected the allegory. It seems
to have been written in early life, long before his declension; for
after it a song of holy gladness would hardly be appropriate. It was the
song of his first love, in the kindness of his youthful espousals to
Jehovah. Like other inspired books, its sense is not to be restricted to
that local and temporary one in which the writer may have understood it;
it extends to all ages, and shadows forth everlasting truth ([Pe1
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011); [Pe2
1:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020)).

"Oh that I knew how all thy lights combine, and the configurations of
their glorie,

Seeing not only how each verse doth shine, but all the constellations of
the storie."--HERBERT.

Three notes of time occur \[MOODY STUART\]: (1) The Jewish Church speaks
of the Gentile Church ([Sol 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008))
towards the end; (2) Christ speaks to the apostles ([Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)) in the middle; (3) The Church
speaks of the coming of Christ ([Sol
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)) at the beginning. Thus we have,
in direct order, Christ about to come, and the cry for the advent;
Christ finishing His work on earth, and the last supper; Christ
ascended, and the call of the Gentiles. In another aspect we have: (1)
In the individual soul the longing for the manifestation of Christ to
it, and the various alternations in its experience ([Sol
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002), [Sol
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004); [Sol
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008); [Sol
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001), [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004), [Sol
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006)) of His manifestation; (2) The
abundant enjoyment of His sensible consolations, which is soon withdrawn
through the bride's carelessness ([Sol
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001), &c.), and her longings after
Him, and reconciliation ([Sol 5:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008);
[Sol 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003), &c.; [Sol
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001), &c.); (3) Effects of Christ's
manifestation on the believer; namely, assurance, labors of love,
anxiety for the salvation of the impenitent, eagerness for the Lord's
second coming ([Sol 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010), [Sol
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012); [Sol
8:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008), [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](sol001)

</div>
