<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

NINTH TO FOURTEENTH CHAPTERS ARE PROPHETICAL. (Zec. 9:1-17)

in . . . Hadrach--rather, concerning or against Hadrach (compare [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)). "Burden" means a prophecy
BURDENED with wrath against the guilty. MAURER, not so well, explains
it, What is taken up and uttered, the utterance, a solemn declaration.

Hadrach--a part of Syria, near Damascus. As the name is not mentioned in
ancient histories, it probably was the less-used name of a region having
two names ("Hadrach" and "Bikathaven," [Amo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005), Margin); hence it passed into
oblivion. An ancient Rabbi Jose is, however, stated to have expressly
mentioned it. An Arab, Jos. Abassi, in 1768 also declared to MICHAELIS
that there was then a town of that name, and that it was capital of the
region Hadrach. The name means "enclosed" in Syrian, that is, the west
interior part of Syria, enclosed by hills, the CÅ“lo-Syria of STRABO
\[MAURER\]. JEROME considers Hadrach to be the metropolis of
CÅ“lo-Syria, as Damascus was of the region about that city. HENGSTENBERG
regards Hadrach as a symbolical name of Persia, which Zechariah avoids
designating by its proper name so as not to offend the government under
which he lived. But the context seems to refer to the Syrian region.
GESENIUS thinks that the name is that of a Syrian king, which might more
easily pass into oblivion than that of a region. Compare the similar
"land of Sihon," [Neh 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#022).

Damascus . . . rest thereof--that is, the place on which the "burden" of
the Lord's wrath shall rest. It shall permanently settle on it until
Syria is utterly prostrate. Fulfilled under Alexander the Great, who
overcame Syria \[CURTIUS, Books 3 and 4\].

eyes of man, as of all . . . Israel . . . toward the Lord--The eyes of
men in general, and of all Israel in particular, through consternation
at the victorious progress of Alexander, shall be directed to Jehovah.
The Jews, when threatened by him because of Jaddua the high priest's
refusal to swear fealty to him, prayed earnestly to the Lord, and so
were delivered ([Ch2 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#012); [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)). Typical of the effect of God's
judgments hereafter on all men, and especially on the Jews in turning
them to Him. MAURER, PEMBELLUS and others, less probably translate, "The
eyes of the Lord are upon man, as they are upon all Israel," namely, to
punish the ungodly and to protect His people. He, who has chastised His
people, will not fail to punish men for their sins severely. The "all,"
I think, implies that whereas men's attention generally (whence "man" is
the expression) was directed to Jehovah's judgments, all Israel
especially looks to Him.

[Zechariah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 9:2</span></span>

Hamath--a Syrian kingdom with a capital of the same name, north of
Damascus.

shall border thereby--shall be joined to Damascus in treatment, as it is
in position; shall share in the burden of wrath of which Damascus is the
resting-place. MAURER understands "which"; "Hamath, which borders on
Damascus, also shall be the resting-place of Jehovah's wrath" (the
latter words being supplied from [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)). Riblah, the scene of the Jews'
sufferings from their foe, was there: it therefore shall suffer ([Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033); [Kg2
25:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#006), [Kg2
25:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#020)).

Tyrus . . . Zidon--lying in the conqueror's way on his march along the
Mediterranean to Egypt (compare Isa. 23:1-18). Zidon, the older city,
surrendered, and Abdolonymus was made its viceroy.

very wise--in her own eyes. Referring to Tyre: [Zac
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003) shows wherein her wisdom
consisted, namely, in building a stronghold, and heaping up gold and
silver ([Eze 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003), [Eze
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005), [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012), [Eze
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)). On Alexander's expressing his
wish to sacrifice in Hercules' temple in New Tyre on the island, she
showed her wisdom in sending a golden crown, and replying that the true
and ancient temple of Hercules was at Old Tyre on the mainland. With all
her wisdom she cannot avert her doom.

[Zechariah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 9:3</span></span>

The heathen historian, DIODORUS SICULUS \[17.40\], confirms this. "Tyre
had the greatest confidence owing to her insular position and
fortifications, and the abundant stores she had prepared." New Tyre was
on an island seven hundred paces from the shore. As Isaiah's and
Ezekiel's (Eze. 27:1-36) prophecies were directed against Old Tyre on
the mainland and were fulfilled by Nebuchadnezzar, so Zechariah's are
against New Tyre, which was made seemingly impregnable by a double wall
one hundred fifty feet high, as well as the sea on all sides.

[Zechariah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 9:4</span></span>

([Eze 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004), [Eze
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012); [Eze
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027)).

cast her out--Hebrew, "dispossess her," that is, will cast her
inhabitants into exile \[GROTIUS\]. Alexander, though without a navy, by
incredible labor constructed a mole of the ruins of Old Tyre (fulfilling
[Eze 26:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004), &c., by "scraping her
dust from her," and "laying her stones, timber, and dust in the midst of
the water"), from the shore to the island, and, after a seven months'
siege, took the city by storm, slew with the sword about eight thousand,
enslaved thirteen thousand, crucified two thousand, and set the city on
"fire," as here foretold \[CURTIUS, Book 4\].

smite her power in the sea--situated though she be in the sea, and so
seeming impregnable (compare [Eze
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002), "I sit in the seat of God, in
the midst of the sea"). "Her power" includes not only her
fortifications, but her fleet, all of which Alexander sank in the sea
before her very walls \[CURTIUS, Book 4\]. [Eze
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017) corresponds, "How art thou
destroyed which wast strong in the sea!"

[Zechariah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 9:5</span></span>

Ashkelon, &c.--Gath alone is omitted, perhaps as being somewhat inland,
and so out of the route of the advancing conqueror.

Ekron . . . expectation . . . ashamed--Ekron, the farthest north of the
Philistine cities, had expected Tyre would withstand Alexander, and so
check his progress southward through Philistia to Egypt. This hope being
confounded ("put to shame"), Ekron shall "fear."

king shall perish from Gaza--Its government shall be overthrown. In
literal fulfilment of this prophecy, after a two month's siege, Gaza was
taken by Alexander, ten thousand of its inhabitants slain, and the rest
sold as slaves. Betis the satrap, or petty "king," was bound to a
chariot by thongs thrust through the soles of his feet, and dragged
round the city.

[Zechariah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 9:6</span></span>

bastard--not the rightful heir; vile and low men, such as are bastards
([Deu 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002)) \[GROTIUS\]. An alien; so
the Septuagint; implying the desolation of the region wherein men shall
not settle, but sojourn in only as aliens passing through \[CALVIN\].

[Zechariah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 9:7</span></span>

take . . . his blood out of . . . mouth--Blood was forbidden as food
([Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004); [Lev
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#026)).

abominations--things sacrificed to idols and then partaken of by the
worshippers ([Num 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002); [Act
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)). The sense is, "I will cause
the Philistines to cease from the worship of idols."

even he shall be for our God--"even he," like Hamath, Damascus, Tyre,
&c., which, these words imply, shall also be converted to God ([Isa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003), "son of the stranger joined
himself to the Lord") \[ROSENMULLER\]. The "even," however, may mean,
Besides the Hebrews, "even" the Philistine shall worship Jehovah (so
[Isa 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)) \[MAURER\].

he shall be as a governor in Judah--On the conversion of the Philistine
prince, he shall have the same dignity "in Judah as a governor"; there
shall be no distinction \[HENDERSON\]. The Philistine princes with their
respective states shall equally belong to the Jews' communion, as if
they were among the "governors" of states "in Judah" \[MAURER\].

Ekron as a Jebusite--The Jebusites, the original inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who, when subjugated by David, were incorporated with the
Jews ([Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016), &c.), and enjoyed
their privileges: but in a subordinate position civilly ([Kg1
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#020)). The Jebusites' condition
under Solomon being that of bond-servants and tributaries, CALVIN
explains the verse differently: "I will rescue the Jew from the teeth of
the Philistine foe (image from wild beasts rending their prey with their
teeth), who would have devoured him, as he would devour blood or flesh
of his abominable sacrifices to idols: and even he, the seemingly
ignoble remnant of the Jews, shall be sacred to our God (consecrated by
His favor); and though so long bereft of dignity, I will make them to be
as governors ruling others, and Ekron shall be a tributary bond-servant
as the Jebusite? Thus the antithesis is between the Jew that remaineth
(the elect remnant) and the Ekronite.

[Zechariah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 9:8</span></span>

encamp about-- ([Psa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)).

mine house--namely, the Jewish people ([Zac
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007); [Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001)) \[MAURER\]. Or, the temple:
reassuring the Jews engaged in building, who might otherwise fear their
work would be undone by the conqueror \[MOORE\]. The Jews were, in
agreement with this prophecy, uninjured by Alexander, though he punished
the Samaritans. Typical of their final deliverance from every foe.

passeth by . . . returneth--Alexander, when advancing against Jerusalem,
was arrested by a dream, so that neither in "passing by" to Egypt, nor
in "returning," did he injure the Jews, but conferred on them great
privileges.

no oppressor . . . pass through . . . any more--The prophet passes from
the immediate future to the final deliverance to come ([Isa
60:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#018); [Eze
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#024)).

seen with mine eyes--namely, how Jerusalem has been oppressed by her
foes \[ROSENMULLER\] ([Exo 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007); [Exo
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#025)). God is said now to have seen,
because He now begins to bring the foe to judgment, and manifests to the
world His sense of His people's wrongs.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

From the coming of the Grecian conqueror, Zechariah makes a sudden
transition, by the prophetical law of suggestion, to the coming of King
Messiah, a very different character.

daughter of Zion--The theocratic people is called to "rejoice" at the
coming of her King ([Psa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)).

unto thee--He comes not for His own gain or pleasure, as earthly kings
come, but for the sake of His Church: especially for the Jews' sake, at
His second coming ([Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)).

he is just--righteous: an attribute constantly given to Messiah ([Isa
45:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#021); [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011); [Jer
23:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005)) in connection with salvation.
He does not merely pardon by conniving at sin, but He justifies by
becoming the Lord our righteousness fulfiller, so that not merely mercy,
but justice, requires the justification of the sinner who by faith
becomes one with Christ. God's justice is not set aside by the sinner's
salvation, but is magnified and made honorable by it ([Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), [Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021)). His future reign "in
righteousness," also, is especially referred to ([Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)).

having salvation--not passively, as some interpret it, "saved," which
the context, referring to a "king" coming to reign, forbids; also the
old versions, the Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate, give Saviour. The
Hebrew is reflexive in sense, "showing Himself a Saviour; . . . having
salvation in Himself" for us. Endowed with a salvation which He bestows
as a king. Compare Margin, "saving Himself." Compare [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021), in the Greek, "Himself shall
save His people"; that is, not by any other, but by Himself shall He
save \[PEARSON On the Creed\]. His "having salvation" for others
manifested that He had in Himself that righteousness which was
indispensable for the justification of the unrighteous ([Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030); [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021); [Jo1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)). This contrasts beautifully with
the haughty Grecian conqueror who came to destroy, whereas Messiah came
to save. Still, Messiah shall come to take "just" vengeance on His foes,
previous to His reign of peace ([Mat
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)).

lowly--mild, gentle: corresponding to His "riding on an ass" (not a
despised animal, as with us; nor a badge of humiliation, for princes in
the East rode on asses, as well as low persons, [Jdg
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010)), that is, coming as "Prince of
peace" ([Zac 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010); [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)); the "horse," on the contrary is
the emblem of war, and shall therefore be "cut off." Perhaps the Hebrew
includes both the "lowliness" of His outward state (which applies to His
first coming) and His "meekness of disposition," as [Mat
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005) quotes it (compare [Mat
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)), which applies to both His
comings. Both adapt Him for loving sympathy with us men; and at the same
time are the ground of His coming manifested exaltation ([Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027); [Phi
2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)).

colt--untamed, "whereon yet never man sat" ([Luk
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#030)). The symbol of a triumphant
conqueror and judge ([Jdg 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010); [Jdg
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004); [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014)).

foal of an ass--literally, "asses": in Hebrew idiom, the indefinite
plural for singular (so [Gen 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004),
"mountains of Ararat," for one of the mountains). The dam accompanied
the colt ([Mat 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#002)). The entry of
Jesus into Jerusalem at His first coming is a pledge of the full
accomplishment of this prophecy at His second coming. It shall be "the
day of the Lord" ([Psa 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)), as
that first Palm Sunday was. The Jews shall then universally ([Psa
118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)) say, what some of them said
then, "Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord" (compare [Mat
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009), with [Mat
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039)); also "Hosanna," or "Save now,
I beseech thee." "Palms," the emblem of triumph, shall then also be in
the hands of His people (compare [Joh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013), with [Rev
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)). Then also, as on His former
entry, shall be the feast of tabernacles (at which they used to draw
water from Siloam, quoting [Isa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003)).
Compare [Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015), with [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016).

[Zechariah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 9:10</span></span>

([Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004); [Hos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018); [Mic
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010)).

Ephraim . . . Jerusalem--the ten tribes, and Judah and Benjamin; both
alike to be restored hereafter.

speak peace--command it authoritatively.

dominion . . . from sea . . . river . . . ends of . . .
earth--fulfilling [Gen 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018); [Exo
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031); and [Psa
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008). "Sea . . . sea," are the Red Sea
and Mediterranean. The "river" is the Euphrates. Jerusalem and the Holy
Land, extended to the limits promised to Abraham, are to be the center
of His future dominion; whence it will extend to the remotest parts of
the earth.

[Zechariah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 9:11</span></span>

As for thee also--that is, the daughter of Zion," or "Jerusalem" ([Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)): the theocracy. The "thee also,"
in contradistinction to Messiah spoken of in [Zac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010), implies that besides cutting off
the battle-bow and extending MESSIAH'S "dominion to the ends of the
earth," God would also deliver for her her exiled people from their
foreign captivity.

by the blood of thy covenant--that is, according to the covenant
vouchsafed to thee on Sinai, and ratified by the blood of sacrifices
([Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008); [Heb
9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018)).

pit wherein . . . no water--Dungeons were often pits without water, miry
at the bottom, such as Jeremiah sank in when confined ([Gen
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024); [Jer
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006)). An image of the misery of the
Jewish exiles in Egypt, Greece, &c., under the successors of Alexander,
especially under Antiochus Epiphanes, who robbed and profaned the
temple, slew thousands, and enslaved more. God delivered them by the
Maccabees. A type of the future deliverance from their last great
persecutor hereafter ([Isa 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014); [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)).

[Zechariah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 9:12</span></span>

stronghold--in contrast to the "pit" ([Zac
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)); literally, "a place cut off
from access." MAURER thinks, "a height" ([Psa
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033)). An image for the security
which the returning Jews shall have in Messiah ([Zac
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)) encamped about His people ([Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001), [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005); compare [Isa
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009); [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)).

prisoners of hope--that is, who in spite of afflictions ([Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015); [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011)) maintain hope in the
covenant-keeping God; in contrast to unbelievers, who say, "There is no
hope" ([Jer 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025); [Jer
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)). Especially those Jews who
believe God's word to Israel ([Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017)), "there is hope in the end,
that thy children shall come again to their own border," and do not say,
as in [Eze 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011), "Our hope is lost."
Primarily, the Jews of Zechariah's time are encouraged not to be
dispirited in building by their trials; secondarily, the Jews before the
coming restoration are encouraged to look to Messiah for deliverance
from their last oppressors.

even to-day--when your circumstances seem so unpromising; in contrast
with the "day of the Lord," when Zion's King shall come to her
deliverance ([Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)).

I will render double--Great as has been thy adversity, thy prosperity
shall be doubly greater ([Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007)).

[Zechariah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 9:13</span></span>

bent Judah--made Judah as it were My bow, and "filled" it "with
Ephraim," as My arrow, wherewith to overcome the successor of the
Grecian Alexander, Antiochus Epiphanes (compare Notes, see on [Dan
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009); [Dan
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032); I Maccabees 1:62; 2:41-43), the
oppressor of Judah. Having spoken ([Zac
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)) of Alexander's victories, after
the parenthesis ([Zac 9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)) as to
Messiah the infinitely greater King coming, he passes to the victories
which God would enable Judah to gain over Alexander's successor, after
his temporary oppression of them.

O Zion . . . O Greece--God on one hand addresses Zion, on the other
Greece, showing that He rules all people.

[Zechariah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 9:14</span></span>

Another image: "Jehovah shall be seen (conspicuously manifesting His
power) over them" (that is, in behalf of the Jews and against their
foes), as formerly He appeared in a cloud over the Israelites against
the Egyptians ([Exo 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019), [Exo
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)).

his arrow . . . as . . . lightning--flashing forth instantaneous
destruction to the foe ([Psa 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014)).

blow . . . trumpet--to summon and incite His people to battle for the
destruction of their foe.

go with whirlwinds of the south--that is, go forth in the most furious
storm, such as is one from the south ([Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)). Alluding, perhaps, to Jehovah's
ancient miracles at Sinai coming "from Teman" ("the south," in the
Margin).

[Zechariah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 9:15</span></span>

devour--the flesh of their foes.

drink--the blood of their foes; that is, utterly destroy them. Image (as
[Jer 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)) from a sacrifice, wherein
part of the flesh was eaten, and the blood poured in libation (compare
[Isa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), &c.).

subdue with sling-stones--or, "tread under foot the sling-stones" hurled
by the foe at them; that is, will contemptuously trample on the hostile
missiles which shall fall harmless under their feet (compare [Job
41:28](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#028)). Probably, too, it is implied
that their foes are as impotent as the common stones used in slinging
when they have fallen under foot: in contrast to the people of God ([Zac
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)), "the (precious) stones of a
crown" (compare [Sa1 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029))
\[MAURER\]. English Version is good sense: The Jews shall subdue the foe
at the first onset, with the mere slingers who stood in front of the
line of battle and began the engagement. Though armed with but
sling-stones, like David against Goliath, they shall subdue the foe
([Jdg 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016); [Ch1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002)) \[GROTIUS\].

noise--the battle shout.

through wine-- ([Zac 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007)). The Spirit
of God fills them with triumph ([Eph
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018)).

filled--with blood.

like bowls--the bowls used to receive the blood of the sacrifices.

as . . . corners--or "horns" of the altar, which used to be sprinkled
with blood from the bowls ([Exo 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#012);
[Lev 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#018)).

[Zechariah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 9:16</span></span>

save them . . . as the flock of his people--as the flock of His people
ought to be saved ([Psa 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)). Here
the image of war and bloodshed ([Zac
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015)) is exchanged for the shepherd
and flock, as God will give not only victory, but afterwards safe and
lasting peace. In contrast to the worthless sling-stones trodden under
foot stand the (gems) "stones of the crown ([Isa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#003); [Mal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)), lifted up as an ensign," that
all may flock to the Jewish Church ([Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Isa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)).

[Zechariah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 9:17</span></span>

his goodness . . . his beauty--the goodness and beauty which
Jehovah-Messiah bestows on His people. Not as MAURER thinks, the
goodness, &c., of His land or His people ([Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019); [Jer
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012)).

make . . . cheerful--literally, "make it grow."

new wine the maids--supply, "shall make . . . to grow." Corn and wine
abundant indicate peace and plenty. The new wine gladdening the maids is
peculiar to this passage. It confutes those who interdict the use of
wine as food. The Jews, heretofore straitened in provisions through
pressure of the foe, shall now have abundance to cheer, not merely the
old, but even the youths and maidens \[CALVIN\].

Call to prayer to Jehovah, as contrasted with the idol-worship which had
brought judgments on the princes and people. Blessings promised in
answer to prayer: (1) rulers of themselves; (2) conquest of their
enemies; (3) restoration and establishment of both Israel and Judah in
their own land in lasting peace and piety.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010)

</div>
