<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac010)  [Next](zac012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

[Zechariah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 11:1</span></span>

DESTRUCTION OF THE SECOND TEMPLE AND JEWISH POLITY FOR THE REJECTION OF
MESSIAH. (Zec. 11:1-17)

Open thy doors, O Lebanon--that is, the temple so called, as being
constructed of cedars of Lebanon, or as being lofty and conspicuous like
that mountain (compare [Eze 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003); [Hab
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017)). Forty years before the
destruction of the temple, the tract called "Massecheth Joma" states,
its doors of their own accord opened, and Rabbi Johanan in alarm said, I
know that thy desolation is impending according to Zechariah's prophecy.
CALVIN supposes Lebanon to refer to Judea, described by its north
boundary: "Lebanon," the route by which the Romans, according to
JOSEPHUS, gradually advanced towards Jerusalem. MOORE, from
HENGSTENBERG, refers the passage to the civil war which caused the
calling in of the Romans, who, like a storm sweeping through the land
from Lebanon, deprived Judea of its independence. Thus the passage forms
a fit introduction to the prediction as to Messiah born when Judea
became a Roman province. But the weight of authority is for the former
view.

[Zechariah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 11:2</span></span>

fir tree . . . cedar--if even the cedars (the highest in the state) are
not spared, how much less the fir trees (the lowest)!

forest of . . . vintage--As the vines are stripped of their grapes in
the vintage (compare [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)), so
the forest of Lebanon "is come down," stripped of all its beauty.
Rather, "the fortified" or "inaccessible forest" \[MAURER\]; that is,
Jerusalem dense with houses as a thick forest is with trees, and
"fortified" with a wall around. Compare [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012), where its desolate state is
described as a forest.

[Zechariah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 11:3</span></span>

shepherds--the Jewish rulers.

their glory--their wealth and magnificence; or that of the temple,
"their glory" ([Mar 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#001); [Luk
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)).

young lions--the princes, so described on account of their cruel
rapacity.

pride of Jordan--its thickly wooded banks, the lair of "lions" ([Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005); [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019)). Image for Judea "spoiled" of
the magnificence of its rulers ("the young lions"). The valley of the
Jordan forms a deeper gash than any on the earth. The land at Lake Merom
is on a level with the Mediterranean Sea; at the Sea of Tiberias it
falls six hundred fifty feet below that level, and to double that
depression at the Dead Sea, that is, in all, 1950 feet below the
Mediterranean; in twenty miles' interval there is a fall of from three
thousand to four thousand feet.

[Zechariah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 11:4</span></span>

The prophet here proceeds to show the cause of the destruction just
foretold, namely, the rejection of Messiah.

flock of . . . slaughter-- ([Psa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)). God's people doomed to
slaughter by the Romans. Zechariah here represents typically Messiah,
and performs in vision the actions enjoined: hence the language is in
part appropriate to him, but mainly to the Antitype, Messiah. A million
and a half perished in the Jewish war, and one million one hundred
thousand at the fall of Jerusalem. "Feed" implies that the Jews could
not plead ignorance of God's will to execute their sin. Zechariah and
the other prophets had by God's appointment "fed" them ([Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)) with the word of God, teaching
and warning them to escape from coming wrath by repentance: the type of
Messiah, the chief Shepherd, who receives the commission of the Father,
with whom He is one ([Zac 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)); and
Himself says ([Zac 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)), "I will feed
the flock of slaughter." Zechariah did not live to "feed" literally the
"flock of slaughter"; Messiah alone "fed" those who, because of their
rejection of Him, were condemned to slaughter. Jehovah-Messiah is the
speaker. It is He who threatens to inflict the punishments ([Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006), [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)). The typical breaking of the
staff, performed in vision by Zechariah ([Zac
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010)), is fulfilled in His breaking
the covenant with Judah. It is He who was sold for thirty pieces of
silver ([Zac 11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)).

[Zechariah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 11:5</span></span>

possessors--The buyers \[MAURER\], their Roman oppressors, contrasted
with "they that sell men." The instruments of God's righteous judgment,
and therefore "not holding themselves guilty" ([Jer
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#007)). It is meant that they might use
this plea, not that they actually used it. Judah's adversaries felt no
compunction in destroying them; and God in righteous wrath against Judah
allowed it.

they that sell them--(Compare [Zac
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)). The rulers of Judah, who by
their avaricious rapacity and selfishness ([Joh
11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048), [Joh
11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050)) virtually sold their country to
Rome. Their covetousness brought on Judea God's visitation by Rome. The
climax of this was the sale of the innocent Messiah for thirty pieces of
silver. They thought that Jesus was thus sold and their selfish interest
secured by the delivery of Him to the Romans for crucifixion; but it was
themselves and their country that they thus sold to the Roman
possessors."

I am rich--by selling the sheep ([Deu
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019); [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008)). In short-sighted selfishness
they thought they had gained their object, covetous self-aggrandizement
([Luk 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014)), and hypocritically
"thanked" God for their wicked gain (compare [Luk
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)).

say . . . pity--In Hebrew it is singular: that is, each of those that
sell them saith: Not one of their own shepherds pitieth them. An
emphatical mode of expression by which each individual is represented as
doing, or not doing, the action of the verb \[HENDERSON\]. HENGSTENBERG
refers the singular verbs to JEHOVAH, the true actor; the wicked
shepherds being His unconscious instruments. Compare [Zac
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006), For I will no more pity, with
the Hebrew "pitieth not" here.

[Zechariah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 11:6</span></span>

Jehovah, in vengeance for their rejection of Messiah, gave them over to
intestine feuds and Roman rule. The Zealots and other factious Jews
expelled and slew one another by turns at the last invasion by Rome.

his king--Vespasian or Titus: they themselves ([Joh
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)) had said, unconsciously
realizing Zechariah's words, identifying Rome's king with Judah's
("his") king, "We have no king but CÃ&brvbr;sar." God took them at their
word, and gave them the Roman king, who "smote (literally, 'dashed in
pieces') their land," breaking up their polity, when they rejected their
true King who would have saved them.

[Zechariah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 11:7</span></span>

And--rather, "Accordingly": implying the motive cause which led Messiah
to assume the office, namely, the will of the Father ([Zac
11:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)), who pitied the sheep without
any true shepherd.

I will feed--"I fed" \[CALVIN\], which comes to the same thing, as the
past tense must in Zechariah's time have referred to the event of
Messiah's advent then future: the prophets often speaking of the future
in vision as already present. It was not My fault, Jehovah implies, that
these sheep were not fed; the fault rests solely with you, because ye
rejected the grace of God \[CALVIN\].

even you, O poor of the flock--rather, "in order that (I might feed,
that is, save) the poor (humble; compare [Zac
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011); [Zep
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012); [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)) of the flock"; literally, not
you, but, "therefore (I will feed)" \[MOORE\]. See Margin, "Verily the
poor." It is for the sake of the believing remnant that Messiah took
charge of the flock, though He would have saved all, if they would have
come to Him. They would not come; therefore, as a nation, they are "the
flock of (that is, doomed to) slaughter."

I took . . . two staves--that is, shepherds' staves or rods ([Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)). Symbolizing His assumption of
the pastor's office.

Beauty--The Jews' peculiar excellency above other nations ([Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)), God's special manifestation to
them ([Psa 147:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019)), the glory of
the temple ("the beauty of holiness," [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002); compare [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004); [Psa
90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017); [Ch2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021)), the "pleasantness" of their
land ([Gen 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015); [Dan
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009); [Dan
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016)), "the glorious land."

Bands--implying the bond of "brotherhood" between Judah and Israel.
"Bands," in [Psa 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061), Margin, is
used for confederate companies: The Easterns in making a confederacy
often tie a cord or band as a symbol of it, and untie it when they
dissolve the confederacy \[LUDOVICUS DE DIEU\]. Messiah would have
joined Judah and Israel in the bonds of a common faith and common laws
([Zac 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014)), but they would not;
therefore in just retribution He broke "His covenant which He had made
with all the people." Alexander, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Pompey were
all kept from marring utterly the distinctive "beauty" and "brotherhood"
of Judah and Israel, which subsisted more or less so long as the temple
stood. But when Jehovah brake the staves, not even Titus could save the
temple from his own Roman soldiery, nor was Jurian able to restore it.

[Zechariah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 11:8</span></span>

Three shepherds . . . I cut off--literally, "to cause to disappear," to
destroy so as not to leave a vestige of them. The three shepherds whom
Messiah removes are John, Simon, and Eleazar, three leaders of factions
in the Jewish war \[DRUSIUS\]. Or, as Messiah, the Antitype, was at once
prophet, priest, and king, so He by the destruction of the Jewish polity
destroyed these three orders for the unbelief of both the rulers and
people \[MOORE\]. If they had accepted Messiah, they would have had all
three combined in Him, and would have been themselves spiritually
prophets, priests, and kings to God. Refusing Him, they lost all three,
in every sense.

one month--a brief and fixed space of time ([Hos
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007)). Probably alluding to the last
period of the siege of Jerusalem, when all authority within the city was
at an end \[HENDERSON\].

loathed them--literally, "was straitened" as to them; instead of being
enlarged towards them in love ([Co2
6:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)). The same Hebrew as in [Num
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004), Margin. No room was left by them
for the grace of God, as His favors were rejected \[CALVIN\]. The mutual
distaste that existed between the holy Messiah and the guilty Jews is
implied.

[Zechariah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 11:9</span></span>

Then said I--at last when all means of saving the nation had been used
in vain ([Joh 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024)).

I will not--that is, no more feed you. The last rejection of the Jews is
foretold, of which the former under Nebuchadnezzar, similarly described,
was the type ([Jer 15:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001); [Jer
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017); [Jer
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#011); [Eze
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012)). Perish those who are doomed to
perish, since they reject Him who would have saved them! Let them rush
on to their own ruin, since they will have it so.

eat . . . flesh of another--Let them madly perish by mutual discords.
JOSEPHUS attests the fulfilment of this prophecy of threefold calamity:
pestilence and famine ("dieth . . . die"), war ("cut off . . . cut
off"), intestine discord ("eat . . . one . . . another").

[Zechariah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 11:10</span></span>

covenant which I made with all the people--The covenant made with the
whole nation is to hold good no more except to the elect remnant. This
is the force of the clause, not as MAURER, and others translate. The
covenant which I made with all the nations (not to hurt My elect people,
[Hos 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018)). But the Hebrew is the term
for the elect people (Ammim), not that for the Gentile nations (Goiim).
The Hebrew plural expresses the great numbers of the Israelite people
formerly ([Kg1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020)). The article is,
in the Hebrew, all the or those peoples. His cutting asunder the staff
"Beauty," implies the setting aside of the outward symbols of the Jews
distinguishing excellency above the Gentiles (see on [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)) as God's own people.

[Zechariah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 11:11</span></span>

poor . . . knew--The humble, godly remnant knew by the event the truth
of the prediction and of Messiah's mission. He had, thirty-seven years
before the fall of Jerusalem, forewarned His disciples when they should
see the city compassed with armies, to "flee unto the mountains."
Accordingly, Cestius Gallus, when advancing on Jerusalem, unaccountably
withdrew for a brief space, giving Christians the opportunity of obeying
Christ's words by fleeing to Pella.

waited upon me--looked to the hand of God in all these calamities, not
blindly shutting their eyes to the true cause of the visitation, as most
of the nation still do, instead of referring it to their own rejection
of Messiah. [Isa 30:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018) refers
similarly to the Lord's return in mercy to the remnant that "wait for
Him" and "cry" to Him ([Zep 3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012)).

[Zechariah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 11:12</span></span>

I said--The prophet here represents the person of Jehovah-Messiah.

If ye think good--literally, "If it be good in your eyes." Glancing at
their self-sufficient pride in not deigning to give Him that return
which His great love in coming down to them from heaven merited, namely,
their love and obedience. "My price"; my reward for pastoral care, both
during the whole of Israel's history from the Exodus, and especially the
three and a half years of Messiah's ministry. He speaks as their
"servant," which He was to them in order to fulfil the Father's will
([Phi 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)).

if not, forbear--They withheld that which He sought as His only reward,
their love; yet He will not force them, but leave His cause with God
([Isa 49:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004)). Compare the type Jacob
cheated of his wages by Laban, but leaving his cause in the hands of God
([Gen 31:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041)).

So . . . thirty pieces of silver--thirty shekels. They not only refused
Him His due, but added insult to injury by giving for Him the price of a
gored bond-servant ([Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032); [Mat
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015)). A freeman was rated at twice
that sum.

[Zechariah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 11:13</span></span>

Cast it unto the potter--proverbial: Throw it to the temple potter, the
most suitable person to whom to cast the despicable sum, plying his
trade as he did in the polluted valley ([Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)) of Hinnom, because it furnished
him with the most suitable clay. This same valley, and the potter's
shop, were made the scene of symbolic actions by Jeremiah (Jer.
18:1-19:15) when prophesying of this very period of Jewish history.
Zechariah connects his prophecy here with the older one of Jeremiah:
showing the further application of the same divine threat against his
unfaithful people in their destruction under Rome, as before in that
under Nebuchadnezzar. Hence [Mat 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009),
in English Version, and in the oldest authorities, quotes Zechariah's
words as Jeremiah's, the latter being the original author from whom
Zechariah derived the groundwork of the prophecy. Compare the parallel
case of [Mar 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002) in the oldest
manuscripts (though not in English Version), quoting Malachi's words as
those of "Isaiah," the original source of the prophecy. Compare my
Introduction to Zechariah. The "potter" is significant of God's absolute
power over the clay framed by His own hands ([Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009); [Jer
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006); [Rom
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)).

in the house of the Lord--The thirty pieces are thrown down in the
temple, as the house of Jehovah, the fit place for the money of
Jehovah-Messiah being deposited, in the treasury, and the very place
accordingly where Judas "cast them down." The thirty pieces were cast
"to the potter," because it was to him they were "appointed by the Lord"
ultimately to go, as a worthless price (compare [Mat
27:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006), [Mat
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010)). For "I took," "I threw," here
Matthew has "they took," "they gave them"; because their (the Jews' and
Judas') act was all His "appointment" (which Matthew also expresses),
and therefore is here attributed to Him (compare [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023); [Act
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028)). It is curious that some old
translators translate, for "to the potter," "to the treasury" (so
MAURER), agreeing with [Mat 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006). But
English Version agrees better with Hebrew and [Mat
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010).

[Zechariah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 11:14</span></span>

The breaking of the bond of union between Judah and Israel's ten tribes
under Rehoboam is here the image used to represent the fratricidal
discord of factions which raged within Jerusalem on the eve of its fall,
while the Romans were thundering at its gates without. See JOSEPHUS
\[Wars of the Jews\]. Also the continued severance of the tribes till
their coming reunion ([Rom 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015)).

[Zechariah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 11:15</span></span>

yet--"take again"; as in [Zac 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)
previously he had taken other implements.

instruments--the accoutrements, namely, the shepherd's crook and staff,
wallet, &c. Assume the character of a bad ("foolish" in Scripture is
synonymous with wicked, [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001))
shepherd, as before thou assumedst that of a good shepherd. Since the
Jews would not have Messiah, "the Good Shepherd" ([Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)), they were given up to Rome,
heathen and papal, both alike their persecutor, especially the latter,
and shall be again to Antichrist, the "man of sin," the instrument of
judgment by Christ's permission. Antichrist will first make a covenant
with them as their ruler, but then will break it, and they shall feel
the iron yoke of his tyranny as the false Messiah, because they rejected
the light yoke of the true Messiah ([Dan
11:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Th2
2:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)). But at last he is to perish
utterly ([Zac 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)), and the elect
remnant of Judah and Israel is to be saved gloriously.

[Zechariah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 11:16</span></span>

in the land--Antichrist will probably he a Jew, or at least one in
Judea.

not visit . . . neither . . . seek . . . heal . . . broken, nor feed . .
. but . . . eat . . . flesh . . . tear--Compare similar language as to
the unfaithful shepherds of Israel in [Eze
34:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002). This implies, they shall be
paid in kind. Such a shepherd in the worst type shall "tear" them for a
limited time.

those . . . cut off--"those perishing" \[Septuagint\], that is, those
sick unto death, as if already cut off.

the young--The Hebrew is always used of human youths, who are really
referred to under the image of the young of the flock. Ancient
expositors \[Chaldee Version, JEROME, &c.\] translate, "the straying,"
"the dispersed"; so GESENIUS.

broken--the wounded.

standeth still--with faintness lagging behind.

tear . . . claws--expressing cruel voracity; tearing off the very hoofs
(compare [Exo 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#026)), giving them
excruciating pain, and disabling them from going in quest of pasture.

[Zechariah 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 11:17</span></span>

the idol--The Hebrew expresses both vanity and an idol. Compare [Isa
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013); [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036); [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004); [Rev
13:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005), as to the idolatrous and
blasphemous claims of Antichrist. The "idol shepherd that leaveth the
flock" cannot apply to Rome, but to some ruler among the Jews
themselves, at first cajoling, then "leaving" them, nay, destroying them
([Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Dan
11:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030)). God's sword shall descend
on his "arm," the instrument of his tyranny towards the sheep ([Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)); and on his "right eye,"
wherewith he ought to have watched the sheep ([Joh
10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012)). However, Antichrist shall
destroy, rather than "leave the flock." Perhaps, therefore, the
reference is to the shepherds who left the flock to Antichrist's
rapacity, and who, in just retribution, shall feel his "sword" on their
"arm," which ought to have protected the flock but did not, and on their
"eye," which had failed duly to watch the sheep from hurt. The blinding
of "the right eye" has attached to it the notion of ignominy ([Sa1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 12](zac012)

</div>
