<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Commentary, Critical, Practical, and Explanatory on the Old and New
Testaments*, by Robert Jamieson, A.R. Fausset and David Brown \[1882\]
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 0:0</span></span>

THE name Zechariah means one whom Jehovah remembers: a common name, four
others of the same name occurring in the Old Testament. Like Jeremiah
and Ezekiel, he was a priest as well as a prophet, which adapts him for
the sacerdotal character of some of his prophecies ([Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013)). He is called "the son of
Berechiah the son of Iddo" ([Zac 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001));
but simply "the son of Iddo" in [Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001); [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014). Probably his father died when he
was young; and hence, as sometimes occurs in Jewish genealogies, he is
called "the son of Iddo," his grandfather. Iddo was one of the priests
who returned to Zerubbabel and Joshua from Babylon ([Neh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004)).

Zechariah entered early on his prophetic functions ([Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)); only two months later than
Haggai, in the second year of Darius' reign, 520 B.C. The design of both
prophets was to encourage the people and their religious and civil
leaders, Joshua and Zerubbabel, in their work of rebuilding the temple,
after the interruption caused by the Samaritans (see Introduction to
Haggai). Zechariah does so especially by unfolding in detail the
glorious future in connection with the present depressed appearance of
the theocracy, and its visible symbol, the temple. He must have been
very young in leaving Babylonia, where he was born. The Zechariah, son
of Barachias, mentioned by our Lord ([Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)) as slain between the porch and
the altar, must have been the one called the son of Jehoiada in [Ch2
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#021), who so perished: the same
person often had two names; and our Lord, in referring to the Hebrew
Bible, of which Second Chronicles is the last book, would naturally
mention the last martyr in the Hebrew order of the canon, as He had
instanced Abel as the first. Owing to [Mat
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009) quoting [Zac
11:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012) as the words of Jeremiah,
MEDE doubts the authenticity of the ninth through the fourteenth
chapters, and ascribes them to Jeremiah: he thinks that these chapters
were not found till after the return from the captivity, and being
approved by Zechariah, were added to his prophecies, as Agur's Proverbs
were added to those of Solomon. All the oldest authorities, except two
manuscripts of the old Italian or Pre-Vulgate version, read Jeremiah in
[Mat 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009). The quotation there is not
to the letter copied from Zechariah, [Jer
18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001); [Jer
32:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006), may also have been in the
mind of Matthew, and perhaps in the mind of Zechariah, whence the former
mentions Jeremiah. HENGSTENBERG similarly thinks that Matthew names
Jeremiah, rather than Zechariah, to turn attention to the fact that
Zechariah's prophecy is but a reiteration of the fearful oracle in Jer.
18:1-19:15, to be fulfilled in the destruction of the Jewish nation.
Jeremiah had already, by the image of a potter's vessel, portrayed their
ruin in Nebuchadnezzar's invasion; and as Zechariah virtually repeats
this threat, to be inflicted again under Messiah for the nation's
rejection of Him, Matthew, virtually, by mentioning Jeremiah, implies
that the "field of blood" ([Mat
27:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#008)), now bought by "the reward of
iniquity" ([Act 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018)) in the valley of
Hinnom, was long ago a scene of prophetic doom in which awful disaster
had been symbolically predicted: that the present purchase of that field
with the traitor's price renewed the prophecy and revived the curse--a
curse pronounced of old by Jeremiah, and once fulfilled in the
Babylonian siege--a curse reiterated by Zechariah, and again to be
verified in the Roman desolation. LIGHTFOOT (referring to B. BATHRA and
KIMCHI) less probably thinks the third division of Scripture, the
prophets, began with Jeremiah, and that the whole body of prophets is
thus quoted by the name "Jeremiah." The mention of "Ephraim" and
"Israel" in these chapters as distinct from Judah, does not prove that
the prophecy was written while the ten tribes existed as a separate
kingdom. It rather implies that hereafter not only Judah, but the ten
tribes also, shall be restored, the earnest of which was given in the
numbers out of the ten tribes who returned with their brethren the Jews
from captivity under Cyrus. There is nothing in these characters to
imply that a king reigned in Judah at that time. The editor of the
Hebrew canon joined these chapters to Zechariah, not to Jeremiah; the
Septuagint, three hundred years B.C., confirms this.

The prophecy consists of four parts: (1) Introductory, [Zac
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001). (2) Symbolical, [Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007), to the end of the sixth chapter,
containing nine visions; all these were vouchsafed in one night, and are
of a symbolical character. (3) Didactic, the seventh and eighth chapters
containing an answer to a query of the Beth-elites concerning a certain
feast. And (4) Prophetic, the ninth chapter to the end. These six last
chapters predict Alexander's expedition along the west coast of
Palestine to Egypt; God's protection of the Jews, both at that time and
under the Maccabees; the advent, sufferings, and reign of Messiah; the
destruction of Jerusalem by Rome, and dissolution of the Jews' polity;
their conversion and restoration; the overthrow of the wicked
confederacy which assailed them in Canaan; and the Gentiles' joining in
their holy worship \[HENDERSON\]. The difference in style between the
former and the latter chapters is due to the difference of subject; the
first six chapters being of a symbolical and peculiar character, while
the poetical style of the concluding chapters is adapted admirably to
the subjects treated. The titles ([Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001); [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001)) accord with the prophetic matter
which follows; nor is it necessary for unity of authorship that the
introductory formulas occurring in the first eight chapters should occur
in the last six. The non-reference in the last six chapters to the
completion of the temple and the Jews' restoration after the captivity
is just what we should expect, if, as seems likely, these chapters were
written long after the completion of the temple and the restoration of
the Jews polity after the captivity, in circumstances different from
those which engaged the prophet when he wrote the earlier chapters.

The style varies with the subject: at one time conversational, at
another poetical. His symbols are enigmatical and are therefore
accompanied with explanations. His prose is like that of
Ezekiel--diffuse, uniform, and repetitious. The rhythm is somewhat
unequal, and the parallelisms are not altogether symmetrical. Still,
there is found often much of the elevation met with in the earlier
prophets, and a general congruity between the style and the subjects.
Graphic vividness is his peculiar merit. ChaldÃ&brvbr;isms occur
occasionally. Another special characteristic of Zechariah is his
introduction of spiritual beings into his prophetic scenes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 1](zac001)

</div>
