<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act001)  [Next](act003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Disciples Gathered Together. The Baptism of the Spirit.
The Apostles Speak as the Spirit Gives Utterance. The Gospel Heard in
Many Tongues. The Theory of the Scoffers. Peter's Sermon. The Prophecy
of Joel Fulfilled. Christ and the Resurrection Preached. The Jews
Convicted of Crucifying the Lord. The Inquiry of Convicted Sinners.
Peter's Reply. Three Thousand Baptized. Continuing in the Apostles'
Doctrine. The Progress of the Church.

[Acts 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 2:1</span></span>

When the day of Pentecost was fully come. The entire period between it
and the passover, the waiting period of the disciples, was filled full.
Pentecost, one of the three great annual festivals of the Jews, lasted
only one day, was on the fiftieth day from the morrow after the passover
Sabbath ([Lev 23:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015).md). The Savior,
crucified on Friday, was in the tomb on the passover Sabbath, and rose
on Sunday, the day from whence the count began. The Sunday following
would be the eighth day, and the fiftieth day would fall on Sunday, the
first day of the eighth week. Hence, the ancient church observed
Pentecost on the first day of the week. For fuller discussion, see
Meyer, Howson and Milligan on this passage. All agree that Pentecost
came on Sunday. Pentecost was the feast of the grain harvest ([Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016.md); [Exo
34:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#022).md), and was also held by the
Jews to be the anniversary of the giving of the law.

They were all . . . in one place. Not only the apostles, but the hundred
and twenty disciples. They probably had an intimation that the promised
day had come.

[Acts 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 2:2</span></span>

There came a sound. As this day, the day of the founding of the church,
was to be a day of signs and wonders, the shedding forth of the Spirit
was made perceptible to all. The sound was heard, the tongues of fire
were seen, the word was spoken in many languages.

It filled the house. The mighty sound. At the same time the disciples
were filled with the Holy Spirit, their spirits baptized in the Spirit.

[Acts 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 2:3</span></span>

There appeared unto them cloven tongues. Luminous tongues sat on each of
them, "parting asunder" (Revision), or "distributing themselves"
(margin). Meyer says that the idea is that they parted and distributed
themselves on those present. These tongues symbolized the fact that the
kingdom now inaugurated was to conquer by the spoken word, by the sword
of the Spirit.

[Acts 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 2:4</span></span>

They were all filled with the Holy Spirit. All the disciples present. To
be filled implies that the human spirit within was overwhelmed by, or
immersed in, the Holy Spirit. The baptism of the Spirit was not a
sprinkling, but an outpouring that overwhelmed the human spirit.

Began to speak. This was the "Beginning." See [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md) and [Act
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015.md).

With other tongues. In the languages of all the different countries from
which Jews had come up to Pentecost. Many would be unable to understand
the Hebrew dialect of Judea in that period, and hence, they must be
preached to in the tongue of their own country if they understood. That
the gospel on this, the first day the Great Commission was ever
preached, was preached in all tongues, symbolized the fact that it is
for all nations.

As the Spirit gave them utterance. They were not allowed to preach the
Great Commission until now, in order that every word uttered on this day
might be the word of the Spirit, not of man. The words were to be spoken
to an audience, not of those in Jerusalem only, but to our whole race in
all time, in order to show how sinners are to be saved under the gospel.

[Acts 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 2:5</span></span>

There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men. Devout Jews who had
come up to the great feast of Pentecost. The Jews were already scattered
in many nations, but foreign Jews were wont to flock to the great
national feasts. Some, too, had come to end their days at Jerusalem.

Under heaven. From all quarters of the world. Jews, in foreign lands,
attended Pentecost in larger numbers than the other feasts, because the
time of year favored travel.

[Acts 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 2:6</span></span>

The multitude came together. Led by the sound (Revised Version) and the
marvellous events.

Speak in his own language. Of the foreign country in which he had been
reared.

[Acts 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 2:7</span></span>

Are not all these who speak Galileans? Most of the disciples to this
time were. The Galileans were not generally learned men, yet now all
hear, every man his own tongue.

[Acts 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 2:9</span></span>

Parthians. The long list of nations embraces the various races embraced
in the we of [Act 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#008.md). Parthia was
east of the Tigris.

Elam was an ancient name of Persia.

Media, another part of the Medo-Persian empire, east of the Tigris.

Mesopotamia was the seat of Babylon. These four countries just named
were thickly populated with Jews descended from those carried into
captivity by Nebuchadnezzar.

Cappadocia. A Roman province not far from the Black Sea.

Pontus. A province south and east of the Black Sea.

Asia. The Roman province of which Ephesus was the capital. All the
"seven churches" were in the province called "Asia."

[Acts 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 2:10</span></span>

Phrygia and Pamphylia. Parts of what is called Asia Minor.

Egypt. The great African province where many ten thousands of Jews had
their home.

Parts of Libya. Of Africa.

About Cyrene. A great Grecian city on the coast west of Egypt. It is
said that one-fourth of the population of Cyrene was Jewish.

Strangers of Rome. Roman Jews sojourning at Jerusalem.

Proselytes. Gentiles who had been converted to Judaism.

[Acts 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 2:11</span></span>

Cretes. From the island of Crete.

Arabians. Many Jews dwelt in the desert lands south and east of
Palestine, all called generally Arabia.

[Acts 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 2:13</span></span>

Others mocking. Some were amazed and bewildered; others, stubbornly
skeptical, scoffed and suggested that the speakers were drunk.

New wine. More exactly, sweet wine, a wine made by soaking raisins,
pressing out and fermenting the juice, which was very intoxicating. Most
wines of Palestine had very slight intoxicating qualities.

[Acts 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 2:14</span></span>

Peter, standing up. In the name of all the apostles. Jesus had said
([Mat 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019).md) that Peter should receive
the keys of the kingdom, and they are now to be used to open its doors.

With the eleven. Eleven other apostles besides himself. He now begins
the first gospel sermon. He and the apostles now begin their witness to
Christ.

[Acts 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 2:15</span></span>

These are not drunken. It was only the third hour, nine o'clock. The
Jews at their festivals seldom ate before this hour, and as their drink
was taken at a meal, could not be drunken.

[Acts 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 2:16</span></span>

This is that which was spoken. He turns to their prophets for an
explanation.

By the prophet Joel. Who lived about 800 B. C. See [Joe
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001.md).

[Acts 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 2:17</span></span>

It shall come to pass in the last days. The phrase "Last days" was used
by the Jews to denote the last dispensation, that of Christ. See [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md).

I will pour out of my Spirit. A figurative expression to indicate
abundant gifts of the Spirit.

On all flesh. On all races, not on the Jews alone.

Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy. "To prophesy" in the New
Testament means to communicate religious truth by divine authority, as
well as to foretell the future. The prophecy was fulfilled in the
inspired speaking on Pentecost and afterwards, as well as by the
daughters of Philip ([Act 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#009).md). It
will be seen that both sexes are included.

See visions . . . dream dreams. Such visions as that of Peter at Joppa.
Such dreams as that of Paul at Troas, where he saw the Macedonian asking
him to "Come and help us."

[Acts 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 2:19</span></span>

I will shew wonders in heaven. Peter not only quotes that part of the
prophecy of Joel which was applicable to the events now transpiring, but
he quotes that part also which pertains to the calamities coming on the
Jewish nation, and to the final judgment. I understand [Act
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#019.md) to apply directly to the
overthrow of Judea and Jerusalem.

[Acts 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 2:20</span></span>

The sun shall be turned into darkness. See notes on [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md).

[Acts 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 2:21</span></span>

Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, etc. To turn to the Lord
for salvation in his appointed way. It means far more than simply
prayer. He who would call on the name of the Lord for salvation must do
more than say, "Lord, Lord, open unto us." He must hear and obey ([Mat
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021).md).

[Acts 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 2:22</span></span>

Hear these words. Peter now begins to preach Christ directly to them. He
boldly declares that they knew of his miracles, and wonders and signs.
He demonstrates the Messiahship in [Act
2:22-36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md) : 1. By the miracles of which
they were witnesses. 2. By his Resurrection, proved (1) by the prophecy
of David; (2) by the testimony of all the apostles present who were
witnesses; (3) by the phenomena then witnessed, which could be only due
to his exaltation to the right hand of God.

[Acts 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 2:23</span></span>

Being delivered by the determinate counsel. It was the will of the
Father that he should die, and was known to the Father before his
coming. See Isaiah, chapter 53.

By wicked hands have crucified. By the hands of wicked Romans, whom they
caused to crucify the Lord.

[Acts 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 2:24</span></span>

Because it was not possible that he should be holden. It was not
possible that Jesus be held by death, because he had life in himself,
and, besides, it was the Father's will that he should arise. This verse
epitomizes the four Gospels.

[Acts 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 2:25</span></span>

David speaketh. [Psa 16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008.md).

Not leave my soul in hell. In hades, the unseen abode of the dead. The
meaning is that he would not remain under the power of death. David did
not speak this of himself, but of the Son of David. See [Act
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029.md).

Thy Holy One. The Lord Jesus. The promised Messiah.

[Acts 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 2:29</span></span>

He is both dead and buried. David. His sepulchre was in their midst,
within the walls of the city. All his hearers had seen it.

[Acts 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 2:30</span></span>

Knowing that God had sworn. God had promised to David that Christ should
sit on his throne. See [Sa2 7:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011.md);
[Psa 89:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md), [Psa
89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035.md), [Psa
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037.md); [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011.md).

[Acts 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 2:32</span></span>

This Jesus hath God raised up. David foretold it; we are all witnesses
of it. There were, including himself, at least twelve witnesses there
who had seen the risen Lord again and again. The next point is the
exaltation of Christ to a heavenly throne.

[Acts 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 2:33</span></span>

He hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. The supernatural
marvels of this wonderful day were the proof of Christ's exaltation. He
had shed them forth.

[Acts 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 2:34</span></span>

For. Peter now shows that David had foretold the exaltation of Christ.

David . . . saith. [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md). Jesus
([Mat 22:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043).md) quotes the same
passage and applies it to himself.

The Lord. God, the Father.

My Lord. Christ.

Sit thou on my right hand. See [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md). "To sit at the right hand"
implies participation in the Supreme Government.

[Acts 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 2:35</span></span>

Until I make, etc. When the work of the Mediator is ended and all
conquered to Christ, then all power is given up to the Father. See [Co1
15:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md).

[Acts 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 2:36</span></span>

Therefore let all the house of Israel know, etc. This is the grand
climax, the conclusion to which the whole discourse had been directed.

[Acts 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 2:37</span></span>

When they heard this. The conclusion, supported by such convincing
demonstration. Before Peter began to speak they did not understand the
signs; but now it was clear to them that they had rejected and crucified
the Lord.

Pricked in their heart. Convicted of their sins, and pierced with
sorrow. They believed Peter's affirmation; their faith revealed their
sin in rejecting Christ. Overwhelmed with sorrow, they ask, What shall
we do? Is there any way that such sinners can be pardoned?

[Acts 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 2:38</span></span>

Repent, and be baptized. For the first time the terms of pardon under
the New Covenant and the Great Commission are given; given once for all
time, and always the same. The convicted, broken-hearted, sorrowing
sinner, believing that Jesus is the Christ, is to repent and be
baptized.

Repent. Not sorrow. They already sorrowed; but a change of purpose; the
internal change which resolves to serve the Lord. The Greek term
rendered repent, means a change of mind. The act of obedience in baptism
is an outward expression of both faith and repentance.

In the name of Jesus Christ. "Upon the name" (Revised Version). Upon the
ground of the name. In submission to the authority of Jesus Christ.

For the remission of sins. Thus, by complying with the conditions just
named, they shall receive remission of sins. No man can receive pardon
without faith and repentance, nor can he without submission to the will
of Christ. "Eis (for) denotes the object of baptism, which is the
remission of the guilt contracted in the state before metanoia
(repentance)."--Meyer. "In order to the forgiveness of sins we connect
naturally with both the preceding verbs. This clause states the motive
or object which should induce them to repent and be baptized."--Prof.
Hackett.

The gift of the Holy Spirit. Promised as a comforter to all who obey
Christ, but whom "the world cannot receive."

[Acts 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 2:39</span></span>

For the promise. Of pardon, and the gift of the Spirit.

Unto you. Even unto those who rejected the Lord.

To your children. Your children after you.

To all that are afar off. To the Gentiles. That he refers to the
Gentiles is shown in the next clause, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call. Peter spake as the Spirit gave him utterance, and perhaps
did not fully comprehend his own words.

[Acts 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 2:40</span></span>

Save yourselves. This was the object of the "many other words." They
could "save themselves" by complying with the conditions named in [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md), and thus accepting Christ as
their Savior.

From this untoward generation. The wicked Jewish race.

[Acts 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 2:41</span></span>

They that gladly received his word. Every believing penitent would
gladly receive it.

Were baptized. Not indefinitely in the future, but that day.

The same day there were added about three thousand souls. "It is proper
to add that pools numerous and large which encircled Jerusalem, as both
those still in use, and as the remains of others testify of at the
present day, afforded ample means for the celebration of the rite of
baptism. The habits of the East, as every traveler knows, would present
no obstacle to such a use of the public reservoirs."--Hackett,
Commentary on Acts. It has been objected to the immersion of the three
thousand that the apostles could not have done it in one day. We are not
told that the apostles only were the baptists, or even baptized at all.
There were at least 120 disciples there; perhaps even more on this great
day. Perhaps the Seventy were all there. But the apostles alone could
have discharged the office. There would be 250 to each one. Sixty
persons have been immersed easily in an hour by one person. At this rate
the whole work could have been accomplished by twelve men in about four
hours. The celebrated Chrysostom, aided by his elders, baptized
(immersed) 3,000 in a day in A. D. 404.

[Acts 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 2:42</span></span>

They continued stedfastly in the apostles' doctrine. In the things
taught by the apostles.

And fellowship. Contribution to the common fund and its distribution.

The breaking of bread. The Lord's supper. From this time it is observed
as an ordinance of the church.

In prayers. I think the prayers of the regular worship are meant. These
four items are all features of the public church life.

[Acts 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 2:43</span></span>

Fear came upon every soul. Of the unbelievers.

[Acts 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 2:44</span></span>

Had all things common. Many, perhaps most, were sojourners at, not
citizens of, Jerusalem. It was needful that they remain together for the
time, and while sojourning here, they threw their common funds together.
Alford says: "In order, however, rightly to understand this community,
we may remark, It is only found in the Church at Jerusalem. No trace of
its existence is discoverable anywhere else; on the contrary, St. Paul
speaks constantly of the rich and poor. See [Ti1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md); [Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010.md); [Co2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013.md), [Co2
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015.md); [Co2
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md); [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md); also [Jam
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md); [Jam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013.md)."

[Acts 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 2:45</span></span>

Sold their possessions. Real estate.

Goods. Personal property.

Parted them to all men. On this special liberality we may note, (1) It
partly arose from the non-resident or pilgrim character of a large part
of the converts. (2) It was not an obligatory rule; the laws of
ownership or property were not disturbed or questioned. Even Ananias
might have kept all his land unblamed,

[Acts 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 2:46</span></span>

Continuing daily . . . in the temple. They gathered there for the
purpose of teaching the multitudes.

Breaking bread from house to house. Eating their food from house to
house. It may refer to observing the Lord's Supper in private
residences.

[Acts 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 2:47</span></span>

The Lord added to the church. This is the first time the church is named
as existing. It had been founded on Pentecost.

Such as should be saved. "Those being saved" (Revised Version). Those
being saved on the conditions that the Gospel imposes the Lord added to
his church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 3](act003.md)

</div>
