<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Arrest. The Trial Before the Sanhedrim. Peter's Reply. The
Counsel of the Sanhedrists. Their Charge to Peter and John. The Appeal
of Peter and John to the Higher Law. The Meeting of the Church for
Prayer. The Divine Blessing.

[Acts 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 4:1</span></span>

As they spake. Peter and John were both speaking, to separate groups
probably.

The priests. Those of the course then on duty in the temple. See notes
on [Luk 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005.md).

The captain of the temple. The head of the temple police, who were
composed of Levites, and whose duty it was to guard the sacred
precincts. See [Luk 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004.md).

And the Sadducees. See notes on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md) and [Mat
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023.md). They were rationalists, and
denied the resurrection of the dead. Annas and Caiaphas, the ex-high
priest and the acting high priest, were of the sect, and hence, though
the sect was not numerous, it was now very powerful.

[Acts 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 4:2</span></span>

Being grieved. There were three classes of assailants: priests,
military, and Sadducees. They had three grounds for action: that Peter
and John taught the people, that they taught in the name of Christ, and
that they bore witness of the resurrection. The last doctrine, of the
resurrection, uprooted the creed of the Sadducees. While Jesus lived,
his assailants were chiefly Pharisees; when his apostles began to preach
his resurrection the Sadducees came to the front as his chief opposers.
This will be noted throughout Acts.

[Acts 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 4:3</span></span>

Put them in hold. In prison until the next day, for it was now late in
the evening.

[Acts 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 4:4</span></span>

Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed. Became converts.
This (believed) is a usual scriptural expression for the whole change
wrought by belief. "Faith comes by hearing . . . the word of God" ([Rom
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017).md), and faith leads to obedience.

The number of the men was about five thousand. It is probable that the
meaning is that the number of men was now increased to five thousand.
The term in the Greek (andres) does not properly include women, so that
this is the number of male believers. It is probable that most of the
converts of Pentecost and of this occasion were men. Oriental women were
not likely to attend in large numbers on such public occasions.

[Acts 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 4:5</span></span>

Their rulers, and elders, and scribes. A meeting of the Sanhedrim, the
great council of seventy, is meant. These classes, with the priests
named in the next verse, constituted it. The members of the Sanhedrim
were usually called rulers; the elders were old men, selected for the
place on account of wisdom; the scribes were the lawyers, or
theologians.

[Acts 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 4:6</span></span>

Annas the high priest. Still so called, though deposed ten years before
by the Romans. The Jews held him still as high priest by right.

Caiaphas. Son-in-law of Annas, and the high priest now in office by
Roman appointment.

John and Alexander. No doubt great men at the time, but we know nothing
of them.

Kindred of the high priest. Of the family of Annas, all of priestly
rank, and many of them holding high offices. The Sanhedrim usually met
in a hall of the temple.

[Acts 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 4:7</span></span>

Set them in the midst. The high priest acted as president, and the
members were arranged in a semi-circle around him, with the prisoners in
front.

By what power? They could not deny the miracle, but they thought that it
had been done by some incantation. They ask an explanation.

[Acts 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 4:8</span></span>

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit. They had been promised the
Divine help when put on trial ([Mat
10:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019).md). It was now given. Here was
an opportunity to preach Christ to the very body that had sent him to
death.

[Acts 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 4:9</span></span>

If we this day be examined of the good deed. Observe Peter's point, that
they are prisoners on trial for a good deed.

[Acts 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 4:10</span></span>

By the name of Jesus Christ. It was the power of that one whom that very
court had condemned which had wrought the miracle.

Whom ye crucified. Peter becomes the accuser. They, his accusers, have
been guilty of crucifying the Messiah. They crucified him, but God
raised him from the dead.

[Acts 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 4:11</span></span>

This is the stone which was set at nought. Quoted from Psalm 118. A
figure drawn from a building where a rejected, despised stone is the
most important and indispensable stone of the structure. Christ quoted
the same passage, applied to himself ([Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042).md).

[Acts 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 4:12</span></span>

Salvation in none other. No other Savior but Jesus; no salvation if his
is rejected; no other name or power to save from destruction, unless he
is accepted. Why, then, should men invoke the Virgin, or the saints?

[Acts 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 4:13</span></span>

Perceived that they were unlearned. Not educated in the schools of the
rabbins. They had, however, a better learning.

They had been with Jesus. In them the crucified Jesus stands before
them, fearless as their Master.

Beholding the man. He was the unimpeachable proof of the miracle.

[Acts 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 4:15</span></span>

When they had commanded them to go aside. They sent them from their
presence in order that they might confer freely together. The substance
of their deliberations is condensed and reported. The conclusion they
arrived at was, not to punish them for a miracle that all the people
knew had taken place, but to stop their preaching by threats.

[Acts 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 4:19</span></span>

Whether it be right in the sight of God. They appeal to the higher law.
Their earthly government commanded them not to do what God had directed
them to do. In a conflict of this kind there is only one course, that
is, to obey God.

[Acts 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 4:20</span></span>

We cannot but speak. Are under a moral and spiritual obligation to
speak. They had a Divine message, and must tell it.

[Acts 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 4:21</span></span>

Let them go. With threats, afraid to punish them lest they should
exasperate the people.

Above forty years old. Therefore known to everybody as a life-long
cripple.

[Acts 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 4:23</span></span>

Came to their own company. To the body of Christians assembled together,
and there reported what had taken place.

[Acts 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 4:24</span></span>

Lifted up their voice to God with one accord. All engaged in prayer. It
was a time of trial. They were forbidden, under awful threats, to preach
Christ. Hence they go to God.

[Acts 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 4:25</span></span>

Why did the heathen rage? Quoted from the second psalm. The predicted
facts were all fulfilled in the trial and death of Christ. [Act
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027.md) shows how they were fulfilled.

[Acts 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 4:28</span></span>

To do whatsoever . . . thy counsel determined before to be done. It is
not said that God decreed that Pilate, Herod and the rulers should do
what they did, but that they did what God had decreed should be done. It
was God's will that Christ should die, but they chose, of their own
malignity, to slay him. Their will was free.

[Acts 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 4:29</span></span>

And now, Lord, . . . grant. Note their petition. They do not ask to be
saved from pain, persecution, or death. There is nothing asked for
themselves personally, but they ask (1) that they may have boldness, in
the face of threats, to speak the word, and (2) that God would bear them
witness by gifts of miraculous power. Their prayer is all for the work's
sake.

[Acts 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 4:31</span></span>

The place was shaken. As a sensible evidence that their prayer was
granted, and then they were filled with the Holy Spirit, as on
Pentecost, so inspired that all fear was shaken off.

[Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 4:32</span></span>

The multitude of them that believed. All the church.

Of one heart and soul. Perfectly united as one body and with one life.

Neither said any of them. Note the language that follows. It does not
describe a community of goods, but a miraculous benevolence: (1) the
goods were not a common fund, but each one had goods that he possessed;
(2) he did not say that his goods were his own; (3) they used all as if
it belonged to all; (4) there were none that lacked, for (5) those that
had houses and lands sold them and brought the proceeds to the apostles.
It was a time when a great liberality was called for. Thousands of Jews
from abroad had become Christians and must remain at Jerusalem until
instructed in the gospel. It was a great emergency, and the church was
equal to it, for they brought money, goods, and the proceeds of houses
and lands to sustain those who lacked. This continued until God was
ready to send them forth, and when the persecution arose about Stephen
they "went everywhere preaching the word."

[Acts 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 4:36</span></span>

Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas. His name was Joses;
but the apostles from some feature of his character called him Barnabas,
"the son of exhortation" (see Revision).

A Levite. Of the sacred tribe.

Of the country of Cyprus. The famous island of the Mediterranean. He and
Paul afterwards carried the gospel there.

Having land. Possibly a possession somewhere in Judea. See [Num
35:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001.md) and [Deu
10:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008.md). As a Levite, Barnabas would
have rights in the Levitical possessions. This is the first mention of
this celebrated companion of Paul's missionary labors. He next appears
on a mission to Antioch ([Act 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005.md)

</div>
