<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act018)  [Next](act020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 19:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Twelve of John's Disciples Rebaptized. Paul Teaches in the
School of Tyrannus. God's Presence with Paul in Power. Sceva and His
Sons. The Books of Magic Burned. Timothy and Erastus Sent into
Macedonia. The Tumult Raised by Demetrius and the Craftsmen. The Wise
Advice of the City Recorder.

[Acts 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 19:1</span></span>

Paul having passed through the upper coasts. The mountain highlands of
the interior of Asia Minor (see [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023).md). Ephesus, on the coast, was
near sea level.

Finding certain disciples. These disciples had only been baptized with
John's baptism ([Act 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003).md), and had
but an imperfect knowledge of Christ. Their case presents some
difficulties hard to explain, unless we had more of the facts. They had
evidently been baptized by some of John's disciples, possibly in Asia,
after the Great Commission was given, and were no doubt Jews. Some think
that they were baptized by Apollos before he was "instructed in the way
of the Lord more perfectly" ([Act
18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025).md).

[Acts 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 19:2</span></span>

Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? This question is
asked in order to lead their way to a knowledge of their imperfect
obedience. For their reply, see the Revision. They had heard of the Holy
Spirit; John always spoke of Christ as one who should bestow it, but
they had heard nothing of the scenes of Pentecost and the descent of the
Spirit. It must not be forgotten that they lived nearly a thousand miles
from Jerusalem, in an age when each part of the world knew little of
what transpired elsewhere.

[Acts 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 19:3</span></span>

Unto what then were ye baptized? This question implies that the
possession of the Holy Spirit is closely connected with a right baptism
(compare [Act 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038).md). The only case in
which the Spirit was received before baptism was that of Cornelius. For
the reasons of this exception to the rule, see notes on [Act
10:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md). The fact that these
disciples "know nothing of the Holy Spirit being given," showed that
there was something wrong about their baptism.

Unto John's baptism. While John's baptism differed from that commanded
in Christ's commission, the apostles, the one hundred and twenty, and
the "five hundred brethren" ([Co1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006).md), as far as we know, received no
other. We are to infer, therefore, that it was valid until Christ's
baptism took its place. Why, then, were these disciples re-baptized? The
only explanation is that their baptism took place after John's baptism
had been superseded by that of Christ, or after the Savior had been
crucified.

[Acts 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 19:4</span></span>

John verily baptized. His baptism was (1) of Repentance; (2) of Faith in
a coming Savior. Christian baptism is (1) of Repentance; (2) of Faith in
a Savior that has come, died, risen, and been exalted to the heavens;
(3) is into the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
(4) enjoys not only the promise of remission of sins, but of the gift of
the Holy Spirit.

[Acts 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 19:5</span></span>

When they heard this. Paul's explanation of the difference between
Christ's and John's baptism, to which we have only an allusion. The
example of these men shows that if a baptism is imperfect, from an
ignorance of Christ's will, it is not wrong to correct the defect by a
more perfect obedience.

[Acts 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 19:6</span></span>

When Paul had laid his hands on them. It seemed proper that these men
should enjoy, not only the ordinary influence of the Spirit, but that
some spiritual gifts should be imparted, such as were given by the
laying on of apostolic hands. Compare [Act
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017.md); [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011.md).

Spake with tongues. Of this ancient gift we learn (1) it edified only
the speaker ([Co1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#004)); (2.md) to
benefit others an interpreter was needed (1Co. 14:5-27); (3) God could
understand ([Co1 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002).md). This gift
disappeared at an early date from the church.

[Acts 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 19:7</span></span>

The men were about twelve. Thus these men appear in this episode and
then disappear from our knowledge. They were now endowed for usefulness,
and perhaps did great service in the religious revolution that soon
transformed all that part of Asia.

[Acts 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 19:8</span></span>

He went into the synagogue. Once before he had spoken in it, on his
former missionary journey ([Act
18:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019).md). Now for three months of the
three years spent in Ephesus he occupies the same pulpit. These three
years were comparatively quiet, but among the most successful of Paul's
missionary career. About seventeen years of busy toil had now passed
since his conversion.

[Acts 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 19:9</span></span>

When divers were hardened. As soon as they began to raise scenes of
strife in the synagogue, he ceased to teach there. He removed the
disciples from the synagogue, forming a separate body, and taught daily
in the school of one Tyrannus. Either a place where lectures were given
on Greek philosophy, or, as some have supposed, a rabbinical school. One
Greek New Testament manuscript says he taught "from the sixth to the
tenth hour," specifying the hours that he had the use of the building.

[Acts 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 19:10</span></span>

Continued for two years. That is, for two years he used this building.
His whole stay in Ephesus was three years ([Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031).md).

So that all they which dwelt in Asia. The Roman province of Asia of
which Ephesus was the capital. It embraced only a part of Asia Minor. We
know that Paul's preaching had a powerful effect (1) from the results
upon those who practiced magic; (2) from the alarm of Demetrius ([Act
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#024)); (3.md) from the statement of
Pliny, about forty years later, in his celebrated letter to Trajan, that
Christianity had caused the temples of the gods to be deserted.

[Acts 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 19:11</span></span>

God wrought special miracles. If miracles are wrought, it is always
God's work, and he can work them as he wills. In this case, in order to
magnify the name of his preacher, he let his power go with articles that
were carried from Paul to the sick. The Lord, in his wisdom, can make
use of any instrument he chooses.

[Acts 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 19:13</span></span>

Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists. Our Lord refers to these
Jewish exorcists in [Mat 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027.md).
Josephus (Antiq. 8:2, 5) declares that certain Jews claimed to expel
demons. He says that their knowledge of the art was derived from
Solomon. These, witnessing the wonderful power of the name of Christ,
thinking it a sort of incantation, took it upon themselves to use it
instead of their usual formula.

Seven sons of one Sceva. He is said to be "chief of the priests." Some
think he was a chief ruler of the synagogue, but it is far more probable
that he was a head of one of the twenty-four courses of priests (these
heads were called "chief priests") who had been deposed for some cause
and had wandered away from Palestine.

And the evil spirit answered. The evil spirit spoke and acted by means
of the man possessed. It is possible that in this instance the spirit
was overruled so as to magnify the gospel preached by Paul. On this
question of demoniacal possession, See notes on [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029.md).

[Acts 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 19:17</span></span>

This was known to all the Jews and Greeks. Ephesus was a great seat of
magical arts. This event would have a powerful effect on those who dealt
in charms, incantations, and magic, and of course would exalt the name
of Christ.

Many that believed came. They had not been freed before from their old
superstitions. If we are disposed to wonder at this, let us remember
that there are Christians still who wear charms, watch signs, or go to
fortune tellers.

Which used curious arts. Magical arts.

Brought their books together, and burned them. There was real
repentance, and they brought forth its fruits. These books, alluded to
by ancient writers, were manuscript volumes of charms, incantations,
recipes for love philtres, and other things of similar character.

They counted the price of them. If the "piece of silver" is the Attic
drachma or Roman denarius, as is probable (about sixteen cents), the
whole value would be about <span class="small">8,000. These "books" had
considerable money value on account of their rarity.</span>

So mightily grew the word of God. About this time the apostle wrote from
Ephesus in the First Epistle to the Corinthians: "For a great and
effectual door is opened unto me" ([Co1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009).md).

[Acts 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 19:21</span></span>

After these things were ended. What has just been recorded.

Paul purposed in the spirit. Had determined, after a journey into
Macedonia and Greece, to visit the churches planted in his former tour,
to return to Jerusalem, and then to see Rome. This was all carried out,
but in a way that at this time he did not foresee.

Sent into Macedonia. A band of missionaries always attended him and were
sent where there seemed to be need. See [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017.md); [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010.md).

Erastus. Not before named, but mentioned also in [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023.md), as "the chamberlain of
Corinth."

[Acts 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 19:23</span></span>

No small stir about that way. Thus far his labors at Ephesus had been
without violent opposition. We now have given the account of the events
that led to his departure.

A certain man named Demetrius, . . . made silver shrines. The temple of
Diana at Ephesus was counted one of the wonders of the world. It was at
this time (this was the third temple which had been built in succession)
of white marble, 425 feet long by 220 wide, with 127 columns, and of
surpassing wealth and splendor. It contained an image said to have
fallen from heaven ([Act 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035).md). It
was visited by thousands of pilgrims, and a great industry grew up in
making miniature representations of the temple, of wood, gold, or
silver. This was the work of Demetrius and his fellow-workers. After
paganism fell, much of the material of this temple was transported to
Constantinople, and was used in the construction of the church of St.
Sophia.

Sirs. Observe the argument of Demetrius: (1) By this craft we have our
wealth; (2) Paul teaches that these are not gods that are made with
hands; (3) therefore our craft is in danger; (4) the great goddess Diana
is despised; (5) great is Diana of the Ephesians! The prime incentive of
his religious zeal is that his craft is in danger. Many are like him
still.

The whole city was filled with confusion. Nothing would more quickly
arouse a mob than the belief that both their business and religion were
assailed.

Having caught Gaius. A Macedonian.

Aristarchus. Of Thessalonica.

They rushed with one accord into the theatre. The remains of the theatre
are still to be seen. It was of vast extent, and would seat, as its
remains show, from 20,000 to 30,000 persons. It was the custom to use
the theatre, not only for amusements, but for public assemblies.

The disciples suffered him not. Paul's intrepidity and zeal would have
led him to appear in person to reply to the charges, but the Ephesian
disciples thought that he would be sacrificed to the rage of the mob.

The chief of Asia. The chief officials of the province. These men,
called Asiarchs, were ten in number, and were chosen annually from the
chief towns of the province called Asia to preside over games and
festivals. The president of their body always lived in Ephesus. These
men were his friends. Possibly in sympathy with the gospel. We have many
instances in the life of Paul in which the great Roman officials treat
him with not only respect, but sympathy.

They drew Alexander out of the multitude. A Jew, evidently of great
prominence, and put forward by the Jews, in order to disavow Paul, and
to turn the tumult to their advantage. They wished to shift all blame on
the Christians. The Gentile aversion to Jews was, however, too great to
allow him a hearing.

[Acts 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 19:35</span></span>

And when the townclerk had appeased the people. Stopped their foolish
outcry so that he could be heard. This town clerk, or recorder, was an
officer of great influence in the Grecian cities of Asia. He stood next
in rank to the officer that we now call the mayor, and in the absence of
the latter acted for him. His address was a very judicious one.

The image which fell down from Jupiter. It was a common superstition
that some hideous image worshiped in a heathen temple had fallen from
heaven. Some of them were meteoric stones, of others the origin was
unknown, and the delusion was in part due to the deception of the
priests. The Palladium of Troy, the Diana of Tauris, and the Pallas of
Athena were all said to have fallen.

These men. Gaius and Aristarchus (see [Act
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029).md), men against whom there was no
charge. They were neither robbers of temples (see the Revision) nor
blasphemers of Diana.

If Demetrius. If they have anything to charge there are courts of
justice.

Deputies. Proconsuls.

We are in danger. The Roman law made it a capital offence to incite a
riot, nor did the Roman officials wink at any disturbance in the
provinces. Ephesus was what was called "a free city;" that is, it
governed itself in local matters. It might have its liberties taken away
for just such occurrences as those of this day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 20](act020.md)

</div>
