<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 6:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Complaint of the Grecians. The Choice of Seven Deacons.
Many Priests Converted. Stephen Preaches Christ with Power. His
Controversy with the Jews. The Charge of Blasphemy. Brought Before the
Sanhedrim.

[Acts 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 6:1</span></span>

In those days. About that time. It may have been several years after the
planting of the church. The believers had become very numerous in
Jerusalem.

Arose a murmuring of the Grecians. "The Grecians" were not Greeks, or
Gentiles, but foreign Jews, who were born and brought up out of
Palestine, and spoke the Greek language. This class of Jews was found in
almost every city where Paul preached. See [Act
13:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014).

The Hebrews were Jews of Palestine. They held themselves superior to the
foreign Jews, and something of this spirit showed itself in the church.

Their widows were neglected. There was "distribution to all men, as
every man had need," not to those who did not need, but to the needy,
and the dependent widows would especially need care.

[Acts 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 6:2</span></span>

The twelve. This language shows beyond doubt that Matthias was
recognized as an apostle.

Called the multitude. The masses of the church.

And said. That it was not proper that the apostles should give their
time to these matters instead of preaching.

And serve tables. To look after the distribution of food.

[Acts 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 6:3</span></span>

Look ye out. Be it noted that the church was called upon to choose these
men. The apostles did not assume the right. There is no warrant here for
pope or bishops assuming the right. The apostles guide the choice by
describing the kind of men that must be chosen.

Seven men. Why seven is only a matter of conjecture.

Of honest report. Men whose reputation was a guarantee that they would
handle the trust faithfully.

Full of the Holy Ghost. Whose lives indicated the fruit of the Spirit.

Of wisdom. Prudence and judgment would be essential.

Whom we may appoint. Ordain. The people selected under apostolic
direction; the apostle inaugurated into office.

[Acts 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 6:4</span></span>

We will give ourselves continually to prayer, etc. Observe that the
apostles regard prayer of equal importance with preaching. Every
preacher ought to heed this.

[Acts 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 6:5</span></span>

They chose Stephen. He is specially described on account of the glory of
martyrdom that so soon followed.

Philip. Distinguished as "Philip the evangelist." He gave the gospel to
Samaria, converted the eunuch, and afterwards lived and labored at
CÃ&brvbr;sarea ([Act 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008)). The others
are not again mentioned.

Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch. A Gentile (Greek) of the great city of
Antioch, who had been converted to Judaism and been circumcised. This is
the meaning of "proselyte" in the New Testament.

[Acts 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 6:6</span></span>

When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. The scriptural
method of inducting into office. The prayer and imposition of hands was
an appeal to God to give the necessary gifts rather than their
impartation. See [Num 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#023); [Gen
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#013). There has been some discussion
whether these seven were deacons, and whether this is the origin of the
deacon's office in the church. They are never called deacons, but the
Greek word rendered to serve ([Act
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)), is the verb form of which the
word deacon is the noun. The usual view is that they were deacons.

[Acts 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 6:7</span></span>

A great company of the priests were obedient. There was harmony and
progress after the trouble was adjusted. The seven became preachers and
greatly aided. Not only vast multitudes of the people, but even many of
the priesthood obeyed. The priests were very numerous. [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036) says that 4,289 priests returned
from Babylon, and they must have been much more numerous at this time.

The faith. The Gospel, which is faith in and obedience to Christ.

[Acts 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 6:8</span></span>

And Stephen . . . did great wonders. He is the first gospel preacher,
not an apostle, whose work is named. He is also the first, not an
apostle, under the new dispensation, to work miracles. Philip, also, of
the seven, possessed miraculous power ([Act
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#006)). Both received the imposition of
apostolic hands. This seems to have been necessary to impart this power
([Act 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#015), [Act
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017), [Act
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019)). See also [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011). As far as we know, it was
limited to apostles, and to those whom whom the apostles laid hands.

[Acts 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 6:9</span></span>

There arose certain of the synagogue. This was the ordinary place of
worship where Jews met on the Sabbath. The Rabbins say (Talmud) that
there were 480 synagogues in Jerusalem.

Of the Libertines. "The Freedmen." Thousands of Jews had been carried
away captives and sold into slavery by Pompey in 63 B. C. These, or
their children, were mostly freed at a later period. Those of them who
returned to Jerusalem had a synagogue of their own.

The Cyrenians. A synagogue of. See Revision. See note on [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010). The Cyrenian Jews who returned
to the city of their fathers, like those of other countries, had their
own synagogue.

Alexandrians. Jews from the great city of Alexandria in Egypt, where
they were said to be almost one-third of the population.

Of Cilicia. Of this synagogue the brilliant disciple of Gamaliel, born
at Tarsus of Cilicia, was no doubt a member, and one of the most active
opposers of Stephen. See [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058).

Of Asia. The Roman province in Asia Minor of which Ephesus was capital.

Disputing with Stephen. These synagogues were all composed of
"Grecians," foreign Jews. Stephen's name is also Grecian, and he
probably preached especially to his own class.

[Acts 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 6:10</span></span>

They were not able to resist. They attempted to argue, but were
silenced.

[Acts 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 6:11</span></span>

They suborned men. Induced men to give perverted testimony. They
determined to silence Stephen.

Heard him speak blasphemous words. This was the charge against Christ.
It is likely that, like Paul, he plainly preached that the Old Covenant
had given place to the New, and that God's people were no longer under
Moses, but under Christ. This was perverted into blaspheming Moses.

[Acts 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 6:12</span></span>

They stirred up the people. By their misrepresentations. Thus far the
gospel seemed to enjoy great popular favor. It was needful to arouse
their hostility. This could be done by perversion of what was preached.
The Pharisees, apparently neutral since Pentecost until now, were
aroused by Stephen's attack on legalism.

The elders, and the scribes. See notes on [Act
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005).

Brought him to the council. The Sanhedrim.

[Acts 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 6:13</span></span>

Set up false witnesses. False, in that they perverted what he said, so
as to give it a meaning not meant.

Against this holy place. The temple. He may have said that it would be
destroyed (see [Mat 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002)).

And the law. He probably said what Paul so often said. See [Gal
3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024). The next verse shows the
tenor of his preaching. He no doubt did preach the end of the Jewish
dispensation and the reign of Christ, but he neither blasphemed Moses
nor God.

[Acts 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 6:15</span></span>

Fastening their eyes on him. To see what effect the charges had on him.
One of those who thus looked was Saul of Tarsus. It was probably from
him that Luke obtained his account of this trial.

As it had been the face of an angel. His face was radiant, either with
his own divinely inspired peace and joy, or shining with a supernatural
splendor. I incline to the first view, for had the latter been the case
it would have awed the Sanhedrim, and probably suspended their
proceedings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007)

</div>
