<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act013)  [Next](act015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 14:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul and Barnabas at Iconium. Flight to Lystra and Derbe. The
Cripple at Lystra Healed. The Heathen Seek to Worship Paul and Barnabas
as Gods. A Persecution Raised by the Jews. Paul Stoned Until Supposed to
Be Dead. They Return to Visit the New Churches. Elders Ordained. The
Return to the Syrian Antioch. The Report of Their Labors.

[Acts 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 14:1</span></span>

They went . . . into the synagogue of the Jews. Just as in the island of
Cyprus and at Antioch. In almost every principal place a colony of Jews
and a synagogue were found. Here, among their own nation, and in
accordance with the customs of the synagogue, they spoke, and first
declared the gospel. The result seemed uniformly to reach some Jews, and
a number of the "devout Greeks" who attended the synagogue to learn more
of God. Thus was formed the nucleus of the church. At Iconium, "a great
multitude both of the Jews and the Greeks believed."

[Acts 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 14:2</span></span>

The unbelieving Jews. Here, as elsewhere, there was division. Those who
stubbornly rejected the gospel were filled with hatred and opposed in
every possible way. As they could do nothing without the aid of the
Gentiles in that Gentile city, they sought to prejudice them.
Notwithstanding, for a long time, Paul and Barnabas, continued to preach
there with great success. How long they continued at Iconium is unknown,
but as the first missionary journey occupied three or four years, they
probably were here several months.

[Acts 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 14:5</span></span>

There was an assault made. Hardly an assault, so much as a movement to
make one. The Greek term implies a sudden movement. The attempt was
avoided by the preachers receiving information and escaping from the
city. In this effort there was concert of action between the Gentiles
and Jews, the rulers of the synagogue joining, and the purpose was
murderous. Paul ([Co2 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)) says,
"Once was I stoned." That stoning was at Lystra. There was an attempt to
stone at Iconium, but not a stone was thrown.

Fled to Lystra and Derbe. These were Lycaonian cities, not far from
Iconium. Neither now exists, but the ruins of Lystra, and those of Derbe
it is thought, are identical. The first is called by a name meaning "The
Thousand and One Churches," on account of the ruins of so many sacred
edifices. Lystra is named frequently in early church history as a center
of Christian influence.

[Acts 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 14:8</span></span>

There sat a certain man at Lystra. The account of the healing of this
cripple is related, not as an unusual occurrence, but because it led to
the attempt to deify Paul and Barnabas. As to the frequency of the
miracles, see [Act 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003) above.

The same heard Paul speak. He might have been carried by his friends to
the place of speaking, some open square or thoroughfare, to gratify his
curiosity, or even to ask alms.

He had faith to be healed. Wrought by hearing the word. As faith is a
gospel requisite that we should be healed of our sins, so it was
required as a condition of miraculous healing of bodily diseases. Note
that this miracle, like those of Christ, is a parable of redemption.
There is (1) Hearing of the Word; (2) faith which comes by hearing ([Rom
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)); (3) the command that calls for
an exercise of faith; (4) the effort to obey in faith; (5) salvation
from the infirmity by obedience. As Christ so often said, so might Paul,
"Thy faith hath saved thee."

[Acts 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 14:11</span></span>

When the people saw what Paul had done. It must be kept in mind that the
people of Lystra were heathen, that they believed in many gods, that
their legends taught them that the gods had often come down in the form
of men and interfered in human affairs. Hence, it is not strange that
when they witnessed this miracle, unlike anything ever seen before in
their city, they exclaimed, "The gods are come down to us in the
likeness of men."

In the speech of Lycaonia. Paul had preached in Greek, which was
understood over all the East, but the native dialect of the Lycaonians
was different, and in that they confer together.

Called Barnabas, Jupiter. The chief of the gods in the Greek and Roman
Pantheon. Barnabas was no doubt a more stately man than Paul, who says
that his own "bodily presence was weak and speech contemptible," and
there was also a reason why they thought Paul, Mercurius. Mercury was
the "interpreter of the gods." His Greek name, Hermes, is the origin of
our word Hermeneutics. Paul, eloquent, persuasive, active, was thought
to represent the part of Mercury.

Then the priest of Jupiter. There was a temple of Jupiter before the
gates of the city, with the usual priest, and carried away by their
idea, they prepared to offer sacrifices to the gods whom they supposed
to have visited them.

Brought oxen and garlands. The oxen for sacrifices; the sacrifices
before being offered were crowned with garlands. Floral crowns were also
worn by the priest offering sacrifice.

[Acts 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 14:14</span></span>

Which when the apostles. The term "apostles" is used in [Act
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#004). It is applied in the New
Testament a number of times to persons not of the twelve, but apostolic
men (see [Co2 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023)). Paul was an
apostle, chosen by the Lord, and Barnabas was an apostolic missionary,
sent out (apostle means "one sent") by the Holy Spirit.

They rent their clothes. A sign of great grief, and even of indignation
and horror. See [Gen 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#029) and [Mat
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065).

We are men. Not gods, but human, human as you are. See in this protest
the unfaltering devotion to truth of these men. No advantage to
themselves would induce them to permit a deception.

Should turn from these vanities. From this idolatry. Instead, they
called them to the worship of the Living God, the Creator of all things.

Who in times past. He had left the nations to their own conceits until
it should be demonstrated that man by searching cannot find out God. The
efforts of human wisdom were a failure.

Nevertheless he left not himself without witness. Nature with many
voices testified of him. See [Rom
1:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018).

[Acts 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 14:19</span></span>

Came thither Jews. These inveterate opposers followed from the late
scenes of gospel triumphs, and found the Lystrians disappointed that
they had not been allowed to adore Paul and Barnabas. From one extreme
they were easily led to the other. If they were not gods, they were bad
men. The fickle populace was easily stirred to riot, and, led by the
Jews, they seized and stoned the great apostle until they supposed he
was dead. This, the first bodily injury he suffered for Christ, of which
we have record, is alluded to in [Co2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025), where he gives some account of
what he had endured. After the stoning, his enemies dragged him out of
the city as they would a carcass. When Paul's enemies had gone, the
disciples gathered around, and to their joy and surprise he rose up, and
came into the city. Whether he had received a blow that rendered him
unconscious and apparently dead, until he recovered from the swoon, or
whether his restoration was miraculous, cannot be surely determined. As
commanded by Christ, when persecuted in one city, they departed and came
the next day to Derbe, to labor for a time.

[Acts 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 14:21</span></span>

They returned again to Lystra. After a season of work at Derbe. The Jews
had gone, the excitement had subsided, and it was needful to revisit
their fields of labor to organize the churches. It is well to remember
that one of the converts was Timothy ([Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)).

Confirming the souls of the disciples. Not an outward rite, but words of
cheer that strengthened their souls.

Through much tribulation. They taught them that they must expect trials
and persecutions. All have to bear the cross. See [Rom
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003); [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017); [Heb
12:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005).

And when they had ordained them elders. Observe (1) that elders were not
appointed as soon as the churches were planted; time must be taken so as
to know what men were fitted for the office; (2) that elders were not
appointed to preside over a district, but in every church; (3) that
there was a plurality; (4) that they were set apart with fasting,
prayer, and imposition of hands. It is not here stated who selected the
men, but from [Act 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006) we would infer
that they were chosen by the church under the advice of the apostles.

[Acts 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 14:24</span></span>

Preached the word in Perga. Here they had landed early in this
missionary journey, but did not then, from some cause, pause to preach
the gospel. See [Act 13:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013).

Went down into Attalia. A seaport not far from Perga.

Thence they sailed to Antioch. The Syrian Antioch, the first Gentile
church, the mother church of Gentile missions, the church that sent them
forth several years before ([Act 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001),
[Act 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)). Exactly how long a time
had been occupied in this missionary tour cannot be ascertained, but it
is almost certain that the visit to Jerusalem, recorded in [Act
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029) and [Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025), took place in A. D. 44, while
that mentioned in [Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002) took place
in A. D. 51, there being six or seven years between. This time was
occupied with the missionary journey and the stay at Antioch. The first
probably extended over three or four years.

They rehearsed all that God had done with them. They very properly made
a report to the church that had sent them forth. It was a very cheering
report. The gospel had been planted in the great island of Cyprus,
received by the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, and extended through
Pamphylia, Pisidia and Lycaonia, strong churches having been planted in
their principal cities.

Abode there a long time. As near as we can learn about two years, no
doubt busy all the time preaching in the great city.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 15](act015)

</div>
