<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act023)  [Next](act025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 24:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The High Priest and Elders Come Down to Accuse Paul. The
Speech of Tertullus, Their Lawyer. Paul's Reply. Declares His Manner of
Life, That He is a Christian, Why He Came to Jerusalem, How He Acted.
Felix Defers a Decision for Further Inquiry. Paul Preaches Before Felix
and Drusilla.

[Acts 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 24:1</span></span>

After five days. Five days after Paul departed from Jerusalem. The Roman
usage was to investigate a case promptly. The deep animosity of the Jews
is shown by the fact that the high priest himself came down to
prosecute, attended by a delegation from the Sanhedrim (elders).

A certain orator named Tertullus. A lawyer acquainted with the forms of
Roman courts. Some have supposed that he was not a Jew, from his name,
but it is probable that he was a Jew who had been educated in Roman law,
perhaps at Rome. The name signifies nothing. That of Paul (Paulus) was
itself Roman. The first three verses of the address of Tertullus are
compliments to Felix, intended to secure a favorable hearing. In the
fifth verse the charges begin, the first one of which is false.

A ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. This was the offence of Paul.
All their hatred was due to the fact that he was the great Christian
leader. The reason why this urged was to show that Paul preached a
religion not authorized by Roman law. See notes on [Act
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#013). Nazarenes was for hundreds of
years the term was applied to Christians by the Jews. This is the only
instance, however, in the New Testament where it so applied. The
Mohammedans still use it.

Hath gone about to profane the temple. This false charge is repeated,
because this was the cry when Paul was seized ([Act
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028)). Note that there are three
charges: (1) That Paul was the author of sedition; (2) preached an
unlawful religion; (3) profaned the temple. The penalty of the last by
Jewish law was death, and the Romans usually permitted it to be
enforced.

Whom we took, and would have judged. This part of the sixth verse, all
of the seventh, and the first clause of the eighth, are not found in the
Revision, or the best MSS. Whom ([Act
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#008)) in the Common Version becomes
him in the Revision and refers to Paul.

And the Jews joined in the charge. Those who had come down from
Jerusalem affirmed that Tertullus had spoken in the facts.

[Acts 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 24:10</span></span>

Paul answered. He had the right to reply to his accusers. The Roman law
condemned no one unheard.

Thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation. For six or seven
years Felix had been governor and was therefore familiar with the state
of affairs in Judea. Upon this fact Paul courteously congratulates
himself.

It is not more than twelve days. It would be easy for Felix to ascertain
the facts, for only twelve days had passed since he returned to Judea,
after many years absence. Of these twelve, the first is the day Paul
meets James and the elders, the second he enters upon his vow, the
seventh he is seized in the temple, the eighth tried before the
Sanhedrim, the eleventh day he is delivered to Felix, and the thirteenth
appears before his court. [Act 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#012)
is in answer to the first charge, that of sedition. He had been
perfectly quiet in Jerusalem.

But this I confess. [Act 24:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014) are
in answer to the second charge, that he is of the sect of Nazarenes." He
confesses that he worships God after that way they call a sect (see
Revision). Yet he is a true Jew, believing all things which are written
in the law and the prophets. In becoming a Christian, he had not,
therefore, as they asserted, apostatized from the faith of his fathers.

And have hope toward God. This hope of the resurrection, the great
doctrine of Christianity, was one that the law and the prophets
foreshadow, and which they themselves also allow. The Jews held this
same hope. Apart from the Sadducees, a small minority, the Jews believed
in a future life and judgment. Hence, even in this matter, he was not
preaching a new, unknown and illegal doctrine, for Judaism was
acknowledged by Roman law. Josephus says, "The Sadducees were able to
persuade none but the rich. The Pharisees had the multitude on their
side."

Herein do I exercise myself. In this belief of a resurrection. His
belief was not a theory, but a life, and hence he sought to keep his
conscience pure in the sight of God and man.

Now after many years I came. Here he begins his reply to the third
charge, that of profaning the temple. He came to Jerusalem with the most
benevolent motives, to bring alms to my own nation. These were the sums
of money gathered in the Gentile churches for the poor in Jerusalem. See
[Rom 15:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025); [Co1
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009).

Offerings. Such as were customary at the temple. It was while engaged in
the preparations for a Nazarite offering that he was seized. He thus
accounts for his presence in the temple.

Certain Jews from Asia found me. He states how these Jews who raised the
outcry found him engaged. He was engaged in a Jewish rite.

Who ought to have been here. These foreign Jews were the legal accusers.
The Sanhedrim was a court of trial, and its members present were not the
accusers. The Roman custom required the accusers to face the accused.

Let these same here say. Let those present testify if they know one
thing against me, save that I declared before the Sanhedrim that
Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question. This was
the real offence in the eyes of the high priest and his fellow
Sadducees.

[Acts 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 24:22</span></span>

Felix heard these things. The speeches on each side.

Having more perfect knowledge. Understanding the real animus of the
charges. He was well acquainted with the Jewish hatred of Christians,
and understood something of that way, the Christian doctrine.

He commanded a centurion to keep Paul. Two reasons caused him to keep a
prisoner that had done no wrong: (1) He did not like to offend the Jews;
(2) he hoped to be bribed by the Christians to let Paul go. Paul was not
put in confinement, but under the charge of an officer who was
responsible for him. Usually in this kind of imprisonment the prisoner
was bound to a soldier.

[Acts 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 24:24</span></span>

Felix came with his wife Drusilla. This woman, a Jewess, was the
daughter of the Herod who died miserably at CÃ&brvbr;sarea ([Act
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023)), and the sister of King Agrippa
and Bernice ([Act 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023)). She was very
beautiful and very profligate, had been the wife of Azizus, the king of
Emesa, but had left him and married Felix. Perhaps the interest she felt
in Paul was due to the fact that her father had been a persecutor of the
Christians, had died a singular death, and this had been pronounced a
judgment.

As he reasoned. They, no doubt, expected that he would speak of
doctrine, but instead he spoke of the life that ought to be lived, with
special reference to those who sat before him in such state and glory.
When he spoke of righteousness, he spoke of justice to a judge who held
this office only for the sake of gain and who took bribes. When he spoke
of temperance, he rebuked the unbridled sway of the passions and of
lust. When he spoke of judgment, he pictured the judgment scene when the
unjust and impure of earth shall be called to account. With such power
he spoke that the stern Roman trembled before the poor prisoner in his
power.

Go thy way. Felix does not resent; he is too powerfully moved, but he
puts off. Thus thousands destroy their souls.

He hoped that money. Almost every Roman governor took a province in
order to enrich himself, and hence would welcome bribery and every
species of corruption. Felix was no worse than the average official of
his time.

But after two years. It was in the autumn of A. D. 60 that Felix was
removed.

Porcius Festus came in Felix' room. This officer was more upright,
according to Josephus, than most Roman governors, but died in the second
year of his office.

Felix, willing to shew the Jews a pleasure. He was recalled, because
grave accusations were made against him. Had he released Paul, it would
have intensified the enmity of the Jews, and hence he was turned over as
a prisoner to his successor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 25](act025)

</div>
