<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act008)  [Next](act010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 9:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Saul's Journey to Damascus. The Lord Meets Him on the Way.
Called to Be a Witness to the Gentiles. Baptized by Ananias. Preaches
Christ to the Jews in Damascus. They Seek His Death. His Escape to
Jerusalem and Meeting with the Apostles. Departure to Tarsus. Peter
Heals Ã†neas at Lydda. Raises Dorcas at Joppa.

[Acts 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 9:1</span></span>

And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter. See [Act
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003), from which the narrative is now
resumed. As the great change in the life of Saul is now recorded, it is
proper to state what can be known of him before his conversion. Probably
about a year before he appears in the history at the death of Stephen.
He was of the tribe of Benjamin ([Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)); his father, though a Jew, had
been admitted to Roman citizenship, and Paul was therefore a "Roman"
([Act 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#028)); he was born at Tarsus, a
Grecian city, the capital of Cilicia; there he had become familiar with
Grecian literature, as well as educated in the law; at what time we know
not, but while still young he went to Jerusalem to study in the great
Rabbinical schools, and had the celebrated Gamaliel for his teacher
([Act 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003)); he had, according to
Jewish custom, learned a trade, being a tent-maker ([Act
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003)); he was a Pharisee after the
strictest manner of the sect ([Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)). How long he had been in
Jerusalem when he appears in this history, whether he was there for the
second time, or had not returned after his attendance at the school of
Gamaliel, is uncertain, but when we first behold him he is a "young
man," prominent and influential, active in his opposition to the church,
and a trusted leader of its enemies.

Went unto the high priest. Probably Theophilus, the son of Annas, who
was made high priest by the Romans in A. D. 37. He was a Sadducee.

[Acts 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 9:2</span></span>

Desired of him letters. A commission and letter addressed to the rulers
of synagogues. The sway of the high priest was recognized in the
synagogues of all the East. He was a sort of pope with the Sanhedrim for
his cardinals.

To Damascus. Situated about 140 miles northeast of Jerusalem, east of
Mt. Hermon, in Syria, a beautiful city in a fertile spot redeemed from
the desert by the mountain streams, Abana and Pharpar. It is one of the
oldest cities in the world, existed in the time of Abraham, and now has
about 150,000 inhabitants.

Of this way. The way of Christ, a phrase often applied in the New
Testament to Christianity. Paul's commission, while given in the name of
the high priest, was from the Sanhedrim ([Act
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010)).

[Acts 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 9:3</span></span>

And as he journeyed. It would require six or seven days to make the
journey. It was probably made on foot.

There shined round about him a light. Brighter than the sun ([Act
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013)). It was the splendor of the
glorified Savior as seen at the Transfiguration, or by John at Patmos.
In order to get the full history of this revelation of Christ and Paul's
conversion, we must compare the accounts given by Paul himself in
chapters 22 and 26 with Luke's account here.

[Acts 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 9:4</span></span>

Heard a voice. After he had fallen. Not a sound merely, but words that
he could understand.

Why persecutest thou me? Observe how Christ sympathizes with his
persecuted followers. The blows that fall upon them, fall upon him. If
Saul strikes the disciples in Damascus, Christ feels the blows in
heaven.

[Acts 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 9:5</span></span>

Who art thou, Lord? Sure that it was a supernatural communication,
though he might possibly suspect its source, he did not yet know that it
came from Christ. Perhaps at times he had had misgivings that he might
be wrong, but he was sincere.

I am Jesus. It is not said, "the Christ," but Jesus, the crucified one
against whom Saul was raging. Had the answer been "the Christ," or the
Son of God, Saul might still have doubted whether this was Jesus.

It is hard for thee to kick, etc. Omitted here by the Revision, but
found in [Act 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#014). The idea is, that
he is injuring himself, like the ox that kicks back on the goads used to
urge him forward.

[Acts 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 9:6</span></span>

Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee, etc. The
question, to which this seems to be the answer is omitted in the
Revision and the oldest MSS. He must enter the church just as others.
The Lord had appeared to him in order that he might be qualified for
apostleship by having seen Christ, but he must learn the way of the
gospel from one of its preachers. Christ never told a mortal how to be
saved after he gave the Great Commission to the church.

[Acts 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 9:7</span></span>

And the men . . . hearing a voice, but seeing no man. They were dumb
with amazement, but did not see Christ, who was only revealed to Saul.
They heard the sound, but the words were for Saul and only understood by
him. Compare with [Act 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009). The two
passages taken together mean that they heard a sound, but no words.

[Acts 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 9:8</span></span>

He saw no man. His eyes were blinded by the brightness of the Lord. He
who had come with such power to Damascus had to be led helpless into the
city.

[Acts 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 9:10</span></span>

A certain disciple . . . named Ananias. He is named nowhere but in
connection with the conversion of Saul. As in the case of Philip sent by
the angel to the eunuch, so he is sent by revelation to Saul. A
revelation was needful from the fact that Saul was a terror to the
church and all would avoid him.

[Acts 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 9:11</span></span>

Go into the street which is called Straight. This street ran in a direct
line from gate to gate, east and west, and was anciently 100 feet wide
and celebrated for its magnificence. It is now contracted and mean.

Inquire in the house of Judas. Nothing more is known of this Judas.

For Saul, of Tarsus. As the name was not uncommon, he is designated by
his native city, "no mean city," a place of 30,000 inhabitants, 20,000
at present, then celebrated for its schools. It was the Cilician
capital.

He prayeth. An assurance that Ananias would be favorably received.
Besides, in his prayer, the vision came that Ananias would come.

[Acts 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 9:13</span></span>

Ananias answered. In view of the terrible record of Saul the fears of
Ananias were not unreasonable.

[Acts 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 9:15</span></span>

He is a chosen vessel unto me. On this account the Lord appeared to him.
See ([Act 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016)). The Lord appeared
unto him, "for this purpose to make him a minister and a witness."
Unless a man is called like Saul to be an apostle he need not expect
such a vision.

To bear my name before the Gentiles. His mission as the apostle to the
Gentiles is pointed out.

And kings. He not only bore witness before the Roman rulers, but before
King Agrippa and the emperor Nero.

[Acts 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 9:17</span></span>

Ananias . . . putting his hands on him. Not to convey a gift, but as a
friendly act, significant of God's blessing.His sight returned
immediately after. There is no proof whatever that any spiritual gifts
were imparted, nor that any but apostles could confer these gifts, and
Paul always asserted that he received his signs of apostleship, not of
men, but of Christ. See [Gal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001), [Gal
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011). "The being filled with the
Holy Spirit" took place after the baptism at the hands of Ananias.

[Acts 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 9:18</span></span>

He arose, and was baptized. The account is more fully given by Paul
himself ([Act 22:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#013)). Ananias said,
"Receive thy sight, and in the same hour I looked upon him." Then, after
stating why the Lord had called him, he added: "Why tarriest thou?
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of
the Lord." Note (1) that "tarrying" for weeks or months before baptism
was then unknown; (2) that there would be no necessity of "arising," if
water was applied in baptism, but there would be if he had to go to a
place suitable for immersion; (3) that the term wash (Greek, "bathe")
implies more than a sprinkling or pouring; (4) that neither Ananias nor
Paul ([Act 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016)) understood that his
sins were remitted before baptism. Compare [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038) and [Act
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016).

[Acts 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 9:19</span></span>

Then was Saul certain days with the disciples. In worship and
intercourse with them. He must learn more experimentally of the church
before preaching.

[Acts 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 9:20</span></span>

Straightway. Following this he began to preach Christ in the synagogues.
Jesus in the Revision. He preached that the Crucified Jesus is the Son
of God.

[Acts 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 9:21</span></span>

All that heard him were amazed. They had heard of his former zeal
against the church and of his being sent to Damascus, but as yet had not
learned of his conversion.

[Acts 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 9:22</span></span>

Saul increased the more in strength. Grew continually in power to preach
Christ.

[Acts 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 9:23</span></span>

After that many days were fulfilled. A long period, probably at least
three years. Luke's narrative is very condensed. He is not writing a
history of Saul, but of the founding of the church. We learn from Paul
([Gal 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)) that he spent at this
time a long period in Arabia, and after this returned to Damascus. It
was at his return that this persecution broke out.

The Jews took counsel to kill him. See [Co2
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032), for additional information. At
this time Damascus was in the temporary possession of Aretas, an Arabian
potentate. Less scrupulous than the Roman rulers, he was willing to
please Saul's Jewish enemies, who were numerous and influential, by
putting him to death.

[Acts 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 9:24</span></span>

They watched the gates. "The governor, under Aretas the king, kept the
city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me" ([Co2
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032)).

[Acts 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 9:25</span></span>

Let him down by the wall. As the gates were guarded, there was no escape
that way. Houses built against or on the wall, would afford an
opportunity of letting him down on the outside. "And through a window,
in a basket, was I let down by the wall and escaped his hands" ([Co2
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)).

[Acts 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 9:26</span></span>

And when Saul was come to Jerusalem. Three years had passed since he
left the city, a proud, talented young Pharisee, with brilliant worldly
prospects, the honored agent of the Sanhedrim, commissioned to stamp out
Christianity at Damascus. He now returns a disciple of him whom he
sought to destroy, his bright worldly prospects all forfeited, an
outcast from his own nation, persecuted and hated. Why this change? No
explanation is possible, save that given in this history and by himself.

They were afraid of him. Little was known in the church of the change. A
great part of the three years were spent in Arabia, probably in study
and preparation of his great work. They had known so much of his fury in
the past that they feared him still. His appearance in the church would
be much like that of Robert G. Ingersoll in a Christian convention.

[Acts 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 9:27</span></span>

Barnabas took him. See [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).
Barnabas was a Hellenist like Saul. When he vouched for him to the
apostles, their distrust ended. Paul ([Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)) gives an account of this visit
to the apostles.

[Acts 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 9:29</span></span>

He disputed against the Grecians. The Jews in Jerusalem who had been
born in foreign countries and spoke the Greek language. See notes on
[Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001).

[Acts 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 9:30</span></span>

They brought him down to CÃ&brvbr;sarea. The same class of Jews who had
raised the persecution against Stephen now sought the death of Saul. By
the aid of the brethren he was taken to the seaport of CÃ&brvbr;sarea
and sailed for his old home at Tarsus. Some think, however, from [Gal
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021), that the journey was made by
land through Syria. It is more likely that he sailed from CÃ&brvbr;sarea
to Seleucia in Syria, and from thence made his way to Tarsus. Four or
five years pass before the next mention of Saul in Acts ([Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025)), an interval passed in
preaching Christ ([Gal 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)), and
resulting in the planting of churches in Cilicia ([Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023), [Act
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041)).

[Acts 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 9:31</span></span>

Then had the churches rest. After the departure of Saul there was a
cessation of persecution for several years. The reason is found in the
history of the times. The Roman emperor, Caligula, had ordered his
statue to be placed in the temple at Jerusalem for worship, a
desecration of the temple, and the Jews were too much engaged in their
efforts to prevent this to persecute the church.

Edified. Built up.

Were multiplied. The result, always, of "walking in the fear of the Lord
and comfort of the Holy Spirit."

[Acts 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 9:32</span></span>

As Peter passed throughout all quarters. Visiting the churches of Judea.

At Lydda. A town in the sea-coast plain, now called Ludd, not far from
Joppa. Here he healed a cripple of eight years. Observe that he ascribes
the power to Christ.

[Acts 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 9:35</span></span>

All that dwelt at Lydda and Saron. In the plain of Sharon, a term often
applied to the sea-coast plain between Joppa and CÃ&brvbr;sarea. See
[Sol 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001). The passage means, not that
every soul turned, but that there was a general turning as the result of
the miracle.

[Acts 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 9:36</span></span>

There was at Joppa. The seaport of Jerusalem from the times of David to
the present day, situated in a fertile plain now celebrated for its fine
oranges, of which vast quantities are shipped from the port. Here named
as the home of Tabitha, or Dorcas in the Greek (meaning "gazelle"), a
saintly Christian noted for her deeds of love.

[Acts 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 9:37</span></span>

Washed, . . . laid her in an upper chamber. Prepared for burial. The
place was the large upper room on the upper floor of Eastern houses,
usually used as a guest chamber.

[Acts 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 9:38</span></span>

They sent unto him two men. The fame of his miracles was so well known
that they probably hoped that he might restore her to life.

The widows stood by him weeping. They had been the objects of her
benevolence.

[Acts 9:40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 9:40</span></span>

Peter put them all forth. Compare [Kg1
17:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#019); [Kg2
4:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032); [Mat
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025). Perhaps that his whole soul
might be fixed on the Lord in prayer. It was on his knees that he was
made to feel that the Lord had given him power. In his prayer he called
on the name of Christ, was answered, and only needed to say, "Tabitha,
arise," and "she opened her eyes." It was the first miracle in which
death was overcome at the hands of an apostle.

[Acts 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 9:42</span></span>

Many believed in the Lord. The knowledge of the miracle worked this
result.

[Acts 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 9:43</span></span>

Tarried many days. Perhaps a year. Joppa was a large city and a
favorable field of work. Here Peter was found, at "the house of Simon
the tanner," when called to CÃ&brvbr;sarea by the messengers of
Cornelius. It was by the seaside ([Act
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#032)), and a house is still pointed
out, close to the sea-shore, as that of Simon, which Dean Stanley
believes to be on the original site.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 10](act010)

</div>
