<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act025)  [Next](act027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 26:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Agrippa's Knowledge of the Law and the Jews. Paul's Early
Career and Hatred of Christ. The Great Doctrine of the Resurrection. The
Manifestation of the Risen Lord to Paul Near Damascus. Paul's Preaching
of the Suffering Christ. The Interruption of Festus and the Reply.
Paul's Personal Appeal to Agrippa. The Decision That Paul Had Done
Nothing Worthy of Bonds.

[Acts 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 26:1</span></span>

Thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Not Agrippa, but Festus had the
authority in the province, but this meeting was arranged in order that
Agrippa might investigate the case and assist Festus in formulating the
charges (see [Act 25:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026).md); hence the
king calls upon Paul to speak.

[Acts 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 26:2</span></span>

I think myself happy, king Agrippa. Agrippa had been brought up in the
Jewish religion, professed to be a steadfast Jew, was the legal guardian
of the temple, and hence was well versed in all the Jewish customs. He
was therefore competent to be a judge of an accusation of treason to the
religion and law of their forefathers. Paul felt it a privilege to
defend himself before one who was prepared to decide whether his
preaching was contrary to Moses and the prophets, or, on the other hand,
a fulfillment of them.

[Acts 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 26:4</span></span>

My manner of life from my youth. He appeals to his life to show that it
had been consistent with the law. The Jews all knew that he had been
educated and had lived a Pharisee, the strictest of Jewish sects. It was
not because of a departure from the faith of his fathers that he was
accused, but he was judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto
the fathers. That glorious promise, running through all the Jewish
Scriptures, was that the Messiah should come. For examples of the
promise, see [Gen 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md); [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md); [Deu
18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md); [Isa
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md). Paul not only believed in Moses
and the prophets, but believed that the promise God made to them was
fulfilled.

Unto which promise. This promise was the hope of Israel. The twelve
tribes, in their constant, never-ceasing service of God, were simulated
by the hope that they would enjoy the fulfillment of the promise.

Our twelve tribes. Paul, like James ([Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001).md), speaks of the twelve tribes as
having the same glorious hope. Since the Captivity, the tribal existence
of the ten northern tribes had not been preserved, but descendants of
all the tribes were mingled in the Jewish nation. Paul was of the tribe
of Benjamin, John the Baptist of Levi, Joseph and Mary of Judah, Anna
([Luk 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036).md) of the tribe of Asher.

Why should it be thought incredible with you? This hope of Israel
involved the resurrection of Christ. This Moses and the prophets taught.
His countrymen accepted Moses and the prophets, but denied the
resurrection as a thing incredible. It was for this hope's sake, of a
risen Redeemer, that he was called in question. There was no doubt much
said which our record does not preserve, as we have only the outlines of
addresses.

[Acts 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 26:9</span></span>

I verily thought with myself. Next, in order to show his zeal for
Judaism, he describes his course as a persecutor. He was thoroughly
conscientious then in opposing Christ. For his course as a persecutor,
see [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md); [Act
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001.md); [Act
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004.md).

I gave my voice against them. "Vote," in the Revision. This has been
held to indicate that he was a member of the Sanhedrim. This would
hardly be doubted were it not that tradition declares that the members
of the Sanhedrim had to be married and fathers of a family. Hence, some
have held that Paul was a member of some lesser court appointed by the
Sanhedrim to try the Christians.

I punished them oft in every synagogue. "All the synagogues" (Revision).
Scourging was a not uncommon punishment in the synagogue ([Mat
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017.md); [Mat
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034).md).

Compelled them to blaspheme. Terrified them into denying Jesus.

Even unto strange cities. Of these Damascus was one. That he was a
terrible persecutor, "exceedingly mad," raging, even fanatical cannot be
doubted from his own account.

[Acts 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 26:12</span></span>

As I went to Damascus. Compare [Act
9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001.md). This is the third account of
Paul's conversion, the first being in chapter 9, and the second in [Act
22:4-16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004.md). There are a few new details
given here: (1) The over-powering glory of the Lord is specially dwelt
upon here; (2) we are here told that the voice heard was in the Hebrew
tongue (he was now speaking Greek to King Agrippa). This fact that he
here states is remarkable. Bengel says: "The Hebrew tongue, Christ's
language when on earth; his language, too, when he spoke from heaven."
It was in the Aramaic, a Hebrew dialect, that the Savior taught when on
earth, and it is a significant circumstance that Paul heard his voice in
the same tongue to which Peter, James and John had listened. Not only is
this true, but critics hold that the Hebraisms are so prominent in the
Book of Revelation as to indicate that the revelations there recorded
were made in Hebrew, and afterward translated by John into Greek. See
Howson on Acts, p. 546. The proverb, It is hard for thee to kick against
the goad, is here added. The mission of Paul to the Gentiles is
described as being a part of the Lord's communication.

I have appeared for this purpose. In order that he might be a minister
and a witness. It was needful that the apostle of the Gentiles should
see Christ. He must be a witness that the Lord had risen. He was chosen
for this work before conversion, because he was honest, deeply
conscientious, and possessed the great qualities that were needful to
fit him for the most important work ever assigned to man.

[Acts 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 26:19</span></span>

I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision. He could still have
disobeyed. His will was free, but he could only act in good conscience
by obeying Christ. He not only was baptized by Ananias in Damascus, but,
after some preparation, he began to preach, first in Damascus ([Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027).md), and then at Jerusalem, where he
disputed against the Grecians ([Act
9:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#028).md). Just when he preached
throughout the coasts of Judea we are not informed. Hackett thinks it
was when he came up with help at the time of the famine ([Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030).md).

That they should repent. He preached more than a theory; he preached a
new life.

[Acts 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 26:21</span></span>

For these causes the Jews caught me. Because he obeyed and preached
Christ.

I continue to this day. By the divine help. That had protected him,
because he was doing God's work, and he was enabled to witness to all
ranks.

Both to small and great. What he witnessed was only what Moses and the
prophets had said should come, viz.: That Christ should suffer, rise,
shew light to the people, and to the Gentiles. In these things he had
the support of Moses and the prophets, and for these things he was
accused. He was not at variance with Moses and the law, but preached
their meaning.

[Acts 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 26:24</span></span>

Paul, thou art beside thyself. The earnestness and fervor of Paul were
so strange to Festus, his doctrine of the resurrection so novel, his
manner so sincere, and his testimony so startling, that the Roman could
only explain it by a mental delusion. The display of such vast knowledge
of the Hebrew Scriptures to Agrippa convinced him that intense study
resulted in derangement. It must not be forgotten that Festus had just
come into his position, and knew little of Paul.

I am not mad, most noble Festus. The courteous answer shows the mistake
of Festus, a mistake due to his ignorance of the subject.

The king knoweth. The facts that he had cited in his discourse were well
known to the king, viz., the predictions of the prophets, the hope of a
Messiah, the death of Jesus, and the spread of the congregations of
those who believed that he was a risen Lord.

[Acts 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 26:27</span></span>

King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? The king professed to believe
them. Yet those very prophets, as Paul had shown, testified to all the
facts of the career of Jesus of Nazareth and his claims to Messiahship.
This personal appeal deeply moved the king, as his reply shows.

Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. The Revision changes the
translation somewhat, but I have little doubt but that the Common
Version gives the idea. The king, like Felix ([Act
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025).md), was deeply moved; the fact
that he and Festus decided ([Act
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#032).md) that Paul was not a
transgressors show that they were favorably impressed; it was no
occasion for an ironical answer, and Paul took the remark as in earnest,
and added still another appeal. Chrysostom, Luther, Beza, Bengel and
Howson take this view.

Paul said, I would to God, etc. His reply is courteous, but of intense
earnestness, a last effort to save souls that were deeply stirred. He
would that king and governor, all, Jew and Gentile, shared his hope of a
glorious inheritance, and were, like himself, at peace with God;--such
as he, save these bonds. It is probable that his chains were then
hanging upon his arms, and that he indicated them by a gesture.

[Acts 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 26:31</span></span>

When they had gone aside. Retired for private conference. Their decision
was that Paul had done nothing justifying his imprisonment. The
accusations of the Jews were groundless.

This man might have been set at liberty. His innocence was clear, but
after the appeal to CÃ&brvbr;sar, the case belonged to the higher
courts, and Festus had no more power to clear than to condemn. It was
God's will that Paul should be carried to Rome. There was work for him
to do in the capital of the world (see [Act
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 27](act027.md)

</div>
