<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act007)  [Next](act009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 8:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Persecution at Jerusalem. Saul's Zeal in Persecution.
Philip's Conversion of the Samaritans. Simon the Sorcerer Believes.
Peter and John Sent Down to Bestow the Miraculous Powers of the Holy
Spirit. Simon's Wicked Offer and Peter's Rebuke. Philip Sent to Preach
to the Ethiopian Eunuch. He Explains the Scriptures on the Way and
Preaches Jesus. The Eunuch's Request for Baptism. Baptized and Goes on
His Way Rejoicing.

[Acts 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 8:1</span></span>

Saul was consenting unto his death. The first three verses of this
chapter ought to be attached to the one preceding. Saul consented, that
is, approved and gave his voice to the death of Stephen. He did not
actively take part in the stoning, but aided and abetted. The memory of
this sad event clung to him painfully even to old age. See [Act
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020.md). Luke no doubt here records the
facts given him by the apostle himself.

At that time. "On that day." See Revision. Not satisfied with the blood
of Stephen, their persecutors turned their rage at once on the whole
church.

They were all scattered. The meetings of the saints were for the time
broken up, and the disciples generally fled from the storm, into the
country portions of Judea and the adjoining district of Samaria. The
apostles, in some way not explained, shielded from the destruction,
remained, and many of the scattered brethren, residents of Jerusalem,
soon afterwards returned, while others that were foreign Jews went to
other regions, carrying the gospel.

[Acts 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 8:2</span></span>

Devout men carried Stephen to his burial. Not disciples, but pious Jews,
deeply impressed by the gospel, but not yet brought to its acceptance.
They were "devout" like Cornelius the Gentile before his conversion.

Made great lamentation over him. They made their protest against the
deed by a public funeral with all the usual Jewish demonstrations of
mourning.

[Acts 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 8:3</span></span>

As for Saul, he made havoc of the church. This mad violence he often
recalled and mentioned while serving Christ. See [Act
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004.md); [Act
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010.md); [Co1
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009.md); [Gal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013.md); [Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006.md); [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013.md).

Entering into every house. Where he supposed disciples could be found.

Haling. Hauling, dragging with violence. As we learn from Paul's
statements elsewhere, the saints were not only committed to prison, but
scourged in the synagogues and persecuted unto death.

[Acts 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 8:4</span></span>

Went every where preaching the word. The rage of the persecutors only
extended the reign of Christ. The scattered saints, long prepared at the
feet of the apostles, went everywhere as preachers of Christ. The blood
of Stephen was the seed of the church.

[Acts 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 8:5</span></span>

Philip went down to the city of Samaria. This was not Philip, the
apostle, for all the apostles remained at Jerusalem, but Philip, one of
the seven ([Act 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005).md).

The city of Samaria. The Greek does not render it certain that this was
the capital named Samaria, as there is no definite article. It is
literally "a city of Samaria." The district (see map) lies between Judea
and Galilee. Samaria and Sychar were, at this time, two of its principal
cities. It was probably one or the other of these to which Philip went.

[Acts 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 8:6</span></span>

The people with one accord gave heed. It was the miracles that, at
first, fixed their attention. Observe that Philip, another of the seven,
has the gift of miracles, the second recorded instance in the church of
the possession of this power by one not an apostle. The next verse
describes the nature of his miracles, similar to those of Christ. See
note on [Mat 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md). See also [Mar
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#011.md) and [Luk
4:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#041.md).

[Acts 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 8:9</span></span>

There was a certain man, called Simon. Called the sorcerer, or magician,
who bewitched the people by his enchantments. Whether this was done by
the conjurer's art or by the power of Satan, it is perhaps impossible
for us to know.

Giving out that himself was some great one. Claiming to be more than a
mere man.

[Acts 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 8:10</span></span>

This man is the great power of God. Unable to explain the things that he
did, the Samaritans ascribed them to divine power manifested through
Simon.

[Acts 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 8:12</span></span>

When they believed Philip. This verse states in the concisest manner the
apostolic order of converting men: (1) Philip preached; (2) he preached
the kingdom and name of Jesus Christ; (3) faith came by hearing, for the
Samaritans believed; (4) when they believed they were baptized. This
describes the uniform course in apostolic days.

Both men and women. Note that (1) only believers are baptized, (2) that
men and women are both included, but children are not named.

[Acts 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 8:13</span></span>

Then Simon himself believed also. There has been much needless
discussion whether Simon was sincere. It would never have been doubted
had we not been told that later he fell into sin. It is best to take the
Scripture in its manifest sense. He became a believer like the rest. He
was baptized like the rest; then, like many others, at a later period,
under temptation, he fell into sin. It is impossible to believe that a
man of his power and influence in Samaria would have yielded outwardly
to the gospel and shown the deference he manifested to Philip unless he
was at the time sincere. But he was of the class described by the Savior
when the seed of the sower fell among among thorns.

[Acts 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 8:14</span></span>

The apostles . . . heard. They had remained at Jerusalem. The word
reached them of Philip's faithful work. Christ had directed that the
gospel be carried to "Jerusalem, and unto Judea, and unto Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the earth." In this order it had been
carried to Samaria and been received. The preacher sent there was not an
apostle. He had miraculous powers, but could not confer them. It seemed
needful, now that the gospel was accepted by a new people, not Jewish,
that spiritual gifts, such as had been given to the apostles on the day
of Pentecost and imparted through them to others, should be bestowed
upon this alien nation. Observe, (1) when the Jews first had the gospel
on the day of Pentecost these gifts were imparted by the descent of the
Holy Spirit; (2) when the Samaritans were converted these were imparted
by the presence of the apostles; (3) when the first Gentiles were
converted, an apostle being present, they were imparted. There is no
record of their impartation, save in or by apostolic presence. See [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011.md).

Sent unto them Peter and John. This is positive proof that Peter was not
a pope. The body which sends is superior to the one sent. He and John go
at the bidding of the whole apostolic body. This is the last mention of
John in Acts.

[Acts 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 8:15</span></span>

Prayed for them. That the Holy Spirit might fall on them. They had been
born of water and the Spirit ([Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005).md), but had not received that
baptism of the Spirit which conferred miraculous powers. This was
bestowed by apostolic prayer and the laying on of hands. I suppose, not
on all, but on those selected for teachers and preachers among the
Samaritans. "The prayer clearly pointed to such a power of the Holy
Spirit as had been bestowed on Pentecost."--Plumptree. "Luke speaks not
of the common grace of the Holy Spirit, but of those singular gifts with
which God would have certain endowed at the beginning of the
gospel."--Calvin.

Laid . . . hands on them. "This was part of that miraculous supremacy of
the apostles that they could not communicate to any successor."--Whedon.
This reception of the Holy Spirit was manifest in speaking with tongue
and other powers.

[Acts 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 8:18</span></span>

When Simon saw . . . he offered them money. Uninstructed in the lofty
spirit of the gospel, ambitious to possess this power peculiar to the
apostles, he is sordid enough to offer money for it. His sin was not
that he aspired to this power, but that he sought to buy it. He had very
crude conceptions of the spirit of Christianity. It is not stated, but
it is easy to infer, that he was not one of those upon whom the apostles
had bestowed the divine gift.

[Acts 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 8:20</span></span>

Peter said. Peter's outburst of indignation is characteristic.

Thy money perish with thee. Not an anathema, but the statement of a
fact, unless he repents.

Because thou hast thought. Observe that, in Peter's rebukes, the thought
is, not that he has never been converted, but that he has now committed
an awful sin. It is one sin, not his sins, that stands out in every
sentence.

Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter. In these gifts of the
Holy Spirit. He can neither receive them, nor impart them. Perhaps
salvation is also included.

For thy heart is not right. This offer to purchase the gift of God shows
that it was not. Because it is not, he can have no part nor lot, etc.

Repent, therefore, of this. Observe that Peter does not bid him to
repent of his sins, but of this one great sin.

If perhaps the thought of thine heart. This one sin is so great that
Peter seems doubtful whether it will be forgiven, even on repentance and
prayer.

For I perceive that thou art. His great sin had brought him into the
state now described.

Gall of bitterness. The gall of reptiles was considered by ancients the
source of their venom. The expression would denote moral corruption.

Bond of iniquity. Bound by iniquity.

Pray ye to the Lord for me. Simon's language indicates that he was
terror-stricken and perhaps deeply touched. The sacred record is silent
concerning his future career. Whether he repented or relapsed into his
old life is conjecture. Tradition insists that he pursued the latter
course.

[Acts 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 8:25</span></span>

When they had testified. Peter and John did not return until they
preached in many Samaritan villages.

[Acts 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 8:26</span></span>

The angel of the Lord spake unto Philip. In some way he was
supernaturally directed to go far south of Samaria to the road from
Jerusalem to Gaza for his next work.

Gaza. An old Philistine city, on the sea-coast plain in southwest
Palestine. It was taken by Alexander the Great, and had endured many
sieges, but is still a town of 15,000 or 16,000 inhabitants.

[Acts 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 8:27</span></span>

A man of Ethiopia. The term is applied to that portion of Africa which
lies south of Egypt.

A eunuch of great authority. This mutilated class of men often rose to
great power in Oriental countries. This one was the royal treasurer.

Under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians. Candace had her seat of power on
the island of Meroe, a large island of the Nile, about a thousand miles
from the mouth of the river. The name Candace seems to have belonged to
several queens of this kingdom. It is still seen inscribed on the ruined
palace walls of Meroe.

Come to Jerusalem for to worship. He was probably a proselyte to the
Jewish faith. His long journey, his study of Scripture, and his ready
hearing all indicate a believer in Jehovah, a devout man, and one
seeking for the Christ.

[Acts 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 8:28</span></span>

Was returning and . . . reading. Reading aloud in the Oriental manner.
Perhaps he had heard at Jerusalem of Jesus and the Christians. At any
rate, he was reading in Isaiah a prophecy of Christ.

[Acts 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 8:29</span></span>

The Spirit said. How we are not told. Philip promptly obeyed, ran to the
chariot, listened and heard what he read, and then asked his question,
the result of which was that he was asked to take his place in the
chariot to explain the Scripture.

[Acts 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 8:32</span></span>

The place of the scripture . . . was this. See [Isa
53:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md). The whole chapter is a
wonderful delineation of the sufferings of Christ. Philip found Christ
in the text, and from it he preached to him Jesus.

Led as a sheep. Unresisting.

Opened he not his mouth. Made no defence.

His judgment was taken away. Justice was trampled under foot.

Who shall declare his generation? Meyer, De Wette, Robinson and Hackett
all agree that this refers to portraying the wickedness of the
generation which slew him. Others insist that it means Christ's
spiritual posterity, his followers.

[Acts 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 8:34</span></span>

Of whom speaketh the prophet? This gave Philip the opportunity of
preaching Jesus. He showed the prophecies of the Messiah, that it
behooved him to suffer, die, and rise again, and that he commanded his
gospel to be preached and believers to be baptized in his name. That the
eunuch calls for baptism, shows that in preaching Jesus Philip preached
the rite.

[Acts 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 8:36</span></span>

They came to a certain water. The locality of the baptism is not
certain. There are several roads from Jerusalem to Gaza. The one by
Hebron is through "desert" more than the others. Eusebius and Jerome
state that the baptism occurred at a perennial stream, coming from a
fountain at Bethsur, not far from Hebron. Robinson places the baptism
not far from Gaza, at the old site of Eglon.

See. The Greek is, "Behold! Water!" As if his soul was filled with joy
that he could obey.

What doth hinder me? Nothing, if he was a believer and the means were at
hand.

[Acts 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 8:37</span></span>

If thou believest, etc.? This verse is omitted in the Revision. It is
not found in the oldest extant manuscripts, but was certainly in
manuscripts older than any now extant. It is referred to by
IrenÃ&brvbr;us in the second century, and by Augustine in the fourth.
Whether written by Luke or not, it shows that the custom of the early
church was to require such a confession of faith.

With all thine heart. A living faith must seize upon and control the
heart.

[Acts 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 8:38</span></span>

They both went down into the water. "The original undoubtedly implies a
going, not to, but into, the water."--Abbott. "No sufficient reason can
be given why the parties went down into the water, but for the sake of
the immersion of the new convert."--Ripley.

[Acts 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 8:39</span></span>

When they were come up out of the water. They did not go to and come
away from the water, but they went, "both Philip and the eunuch," down
into (Greek, eis) and came up out of (Greek, ek) the water.

The Spirit . . . caught away Philip. Led him to depart abruptly. He was
snatched away.

Went on his way rejoicing. In his new-found Savior.

But Philip was found at Azotus. The old Philistine city of Ashdod, near
the sea-coast, between Gaza and Joppa. It is now a ruin. Here he
preached in all the sea-coast cities, probably founding churches (see
[Act 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032.md), [Act
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036).md), till he came to CÃ&brvbr;sarea,
the seaport northwest of Jerusalem, the Roman capital of Judea. We are
not told how soon he reached CÃ&brvbr;sarea. It may have been months or
years. At any rate, it is likely that it did not take place until after
Peter's missionary work there. Many years later we find Philip living in
this city ([Act 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008).md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 9](act009.md)

</div>
