<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 15:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Judaizing Teachers at Antioch. Opposed by Paul and
Barnabas. The Question Referred to Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas Report
to the Apostles and Elders Their Work Among the Gentiles. Pharisees
Insist That These Gentiles Must Be Circumcised. Peter's Address. Paul
and Barnabas Show How God Was with Them. The Judgment of James the
Lord's Brother. His Views Accepted by All. The Apostolic Letter to the
Gentile Christians. The Joy at Antioch When the Letter Is Read. Judas
and Silas.

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

Certain men which came from Judea. This chapter records the first
intimation of the great controversy that agitated the apostolic church,
and of which we find traces in many of Paul's letters, the question
whether Christianity was merely a development and a sort of culmination
of Judaism, or was a New Dispensation that had supplanted the Old and
taken its place. At first the Christians of Jerusalem and Judea remained
strict Jews, still keeping the ordinances of Moses. The Samaritans
converted by Philip were a circumcised people. The idea of the apostles,
at first, seems to have been that Gentiles might become Christians, but
must first be circumcised. It was a matter of astonishment to Peter and
the brethren that he was required to baptize the Gentile Cornelius and
his friends without circumcision. Then came the formation of the Gentile
church at Antioch and the successful labors of Paul and Barnabas in
western Asia. The influx of the Gentiles to the church, and their
acceptance on the same terms as the old covenanted people of Jehovah,
stirred those Jewish brethren of the more bigoted type to bitter
opposition, and they began to send their teachers abroad with the
declaration, Except ye be circumcised. . . . ye cannot be saved. Thus
they came to Antioch; thus, at a later period, they disturbed the
churches of Galatia and called out the Galatian letter. In order to
destroy their influence, it was needful at once to settle whether they
spoke the sentiment of the apostles and elders at Jerusalem, and hence
Paul and Barnabas were sent to lay this question before the great mother
church. This caused the conference described in this chapter, spoken of
in church history as THE COUNCIL OF JERUSALEM. The reader should form
some idea of the importance of this question. It was none other than
whether Christendom should be Jewish Christian, or delivered from the
bondage of the Jewish law into the liberty of the children of God. Paul
([Gal 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)) calls these "certain men"
"false brethren."

[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 15:2</span></span>

No small dissension. These men were opposed by Paul and Barnabas, but
the fact that they were from Jerusalem, and probably contended that they
had the authority of the apostles, gave them an influence.

[Acts 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 15:3</span></span>

Being brought on their way by the church. A special escort of church
members attended them on their journey. It was mark of honor. See [Act
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#038) and [Act
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#005).

Passed through Phenice. Phoenicia. They went by the land route, visiting
the churches of Phoenicia and Samaria, causing great joy by their
account of so great success among the Gentiles.

Were received of the church. Had a cordial reception, a warm greeting.

[Acts 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 15:5</span></span>

There rose up certain of the Pharisees. Men of that sect who, like Paul,
had become Christians, but unlike him had retained their Jewish bigotry.
Perhaps some of them were Paul's old friends. They seem to have sprung
the controversy when the missionaries gave account of their work ([Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004)).

[Acts 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 15:6</span></span>

The apostles and elders came together. A meeting of the apostles and the
elders of Jerusalem was called. It was in the year A. D. 51, about
twenty years after the ascension of Christ. One apostle had suffered
martyrdom; eleven, including Matthias, remained, though some might have
been in distant parts. James, the "brother of the Lord," though not one
of the Twelve, was a chief man now in the Jerusalem church, and is often
spoken of by historians as its pastor, or bishop. Though his sentiment
decided the question this day, he has been regarded as a leader of the
Judaizing Christians. See [Gal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012).

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

When there had been much disputing. One side insisted that the Gentiles
must keep the law of Moses, the other that they were not under the
Mosaic covenant at all.

Peter rose up. Probably silent until this time. He arose to rehearse his
own experiences which had given him new light.

A good while ago. Nine or ten years before. For the account of Peter's
conversion of the Gentiles, see chapters 10 and 11.

Put no difference between us and them. Accepted them just as he accepted
us, and gave the Holy Spirit as a proof to us that he had accepted them.

Purifying their hearts by faith. The Jews held that Gentiles were
unclean, but Peter declared that faith, the true circumcision, that of
the heart, not of the body, purified them into fitness for the
ordinances of Christ. Observe Peter's doctrine: not circumcision of the
flesh, but the faith that leads to obedience cleanses from uncleanness.

To put a yoke. To impose Jewish obligations on Gentile Christians. The
law of Moses was a yoke that neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear. So strict in its requirements that none could keep it perfectly.

Through the grace of the Lord. This is the hope of both Jew and Gentile,
not obedience to the ceremonials of Moses.

[Acts 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 15:12</span></span>

All the multitude kept silence. After Peter's reminder of his work among
the Gentiles, Paul and Barnabas were probably called on to show whether
their work, like Peter's, showed that God was with them. They therefore
gave some account of the miracles that God had wrought by their hands,
thereby attesting the Divine favor.

[Acts 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 15:13</span></span>

James answered, saying. For other references to James see [Co1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#007); [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019) and [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009), and the Epistle of James. He is
also mentioned several times in the Gospels, and seems, before the death
of Jesus, to have been an unbeliever. It is probable that the speech of
Peter, followed by the account given by Paul and Barnabas, convinced
him, and led to the views he now expresses.

Simeon. Simon Peter.

To this agree the . . . prophets. The quotation he gives is from [Amo
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011).

Build again the tabernacle of David. Restore the splendors of his family
in the reign of the Messiah, "the Son of David."

That the residue of men. The Gentile world. This grand prophecy of the
calling of the Gentiles makes no mention of circumcision.

Known unto God are all his works. The meaning is, that this calling of
the Gentiles is a part of the Divine plan known to God from the
beginning.

Wherefore. Since it is evidently God's will, "My sentence is, that we do
not trouble them."

Sentence. Decision.

That they abstain from the pollutions of idols. Four items are
mentioned, which are all embraced in the apostolic letter as things
forbidden. They were four common customs of the Gentile world, and
matters on which there should be a clear understanding. The first does
not mean only to refrain from worshiping idols, or eating meat offered
in idol sacrifice, but from all the pollutions of the system of
idolatry. Licentiousness and drunkenness received a sanction from
religion. See Lecky's European Morals, chap. V., and Conybeare and
Howson's Paul, chap. IV.

Fornication. Chastity was the exception instead of the rule among
Gentiles at this period.

From things strangled. Because in strangling the blood was retained in
the flesh. The use of blood was prohibited by the Mosaic law, and for
wise reasons this prohibition was extended to Gentiles. The Roman
epicures were wont to drown fowls in wine and then use the flesh. It was
a common thing to drink wine mingled with blood. The only way to strike
at these savage practices was to prohibit its use.

For Moses . . . hath. There are synagogues in every city. The use of
blood would shock the Jews who have membership in these.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

Then pleased . . . with the whole church. All acquiesced in the judgment
of James. The church is not before mentioned as taking part. The
decisions seem to have been submitted to its voice.

To send chosen men. As the messengers of the church at Jerusalem.

Judas. Little is known of him to save that he was a prophet ([Act
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032)).

Silas. Well known after this as the companion of Paul. See Acts 16; [Th1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001); [Co2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019).

They wrote letters. A letter. Luke gives it, I suppose, verbatim.

Send greeting. Observe that the greeting is not only from the apostles
and elders, but from the church.

It seemed good unto us. It seemed good to them to send men, but the
decision made "seemed good to the Holy Spirit" ([Act
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028)).

Men that have hazarded their lives. This high praise is given to Paul
and Barnabas. It is the tribute of the church at Jerusalem to the two
men sent from the church at Antioch.

Seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us. The decision was inspired.

That ye abstain from meats. See note on [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020).

[Acts 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 15:30</span></span>

They rejoiced for the consolation. When they returned and the letter was
read to the church at Antioch, it caused great joy.

Judas and Silas, being prophets. Inspired speakers. Such speakers were
necessary to the church until it had the New Testament for a guide.

They were let go in peace. They were dismissed for Jerusalem with
benedictions of peace.

It pleased Silas to abide there still. This verse is not found in the
Revision, nor in the oldest MSS.

Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch. Probably for the greater
part of a year, preaching, and assisted by many other laborers.

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

Paul said unto Barnabas. This is a proposal to start on a second
missionary journey, in order to visit and strengthen the churches
already planted, as well as to extend the work.

Barnabas determined to take with them John. He had abandoned them on the
first tour ([Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)), and his
reasons did not satisfy Paul; hence he declined to take him.

The contention was so sharp. Neither would yield, so they determined to
work separately. Barnabas, with Mark, went to visit the churches of
Cyprus, while Paul chose Silas as his fellow laborer. He seems to have
returned from Jerusalem.

Being recommended . . . to the grace of God. Evidently a meeting of the
church was held to commend them to God.

Went through Syria and Cilicia. We have no account of the founding of
these churches, but we know that Paul had before this labored in these
parts. See [Gal 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
