<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 23:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Insult of the High Priest. Paul's Rebuke. His Appeal to
the Pharisees. Their Favor. The Dissension. Paul Removed. The Vision of
the Lord in the Night. The Plot of the Sicarii. Revealed to the Chief
Captain by Paul's Nephew. Paul Sent Under an Escort of Soldiers to
CÃ&brvbr;sarea. The Letter of Claudius Lysias to Felix.

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

Paul, earnestly beholding. Attentively studying his audience, and no
doubt seeking whether there were old acquaintances among the members of
the Sanhedrim. He probably knew at least a part of the body. Many years
before he had been its trusted agent, to execute its orders against
Christians; now he is on trial before it for being one of that body
which it formerly employed him to destroy. They regarded him a renegade,
much as our countrymen regard Benedict Arnold, and their hate was so
vindictive that they were utterly unable to listen calmly to his
defence. Hence, as soon as he began by declaring that he had acted in
all good conscience until this day, the high priest ordered that he be
smitten in the mouth.

[Acts 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 23:2</span></span>

To smite him on the mouth. The high priest flamed up in an instant at
the statement of Paul that he had acted in good conscience. "How could
such a renegade from Judaism be conscientious?" It is common in the
despotic East to order the mouths that are supposed to have spoken
falsely to be smitten. Ananias was high priest at this time, but was
removed on a charge brought by King Agrippa ([Act
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013).md) in A. D. 59. He was at last
assassinated.

God shall smite thee, thou whited wall. These words, spoken by the
prisoner, indignant at the mockery of justice, were rather a prediction
than an imprecation. I have just stated that this violent man came to an
untimely death. The insult to Paul reminds us of a similar one to his
Master before the same body ([Joh
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022).md). By whited wall Paul means a
hypocrite. See note on [Mat 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027.md).

I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest. It was contrary to
the law of Moses ([Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028).md) to
revile one in high authority. Paul's reply to the charge that he had
violated the law has been variously explained. Howson gives what appears
to me the most probable view: "I did not take thought, at the moment, in
my indignation over the command to smite a defenceless prisoner on
trial, that he was the high priest. I am well aware that it is said,
'Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.'" His words were
an apology for his hasty speech. I wist not is used in the sense of "I
did not bear in mind."

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

Perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees.
When the Savior was condemned, the Sanhedrim was composed of both
parties, and now, nearly thirty years later, we find it the same. The
chief priests, as a rule, were Sadducees, while the scribes were mainly
of the Pharisees. It was the doctrine of the resurrection that
especially inflamed the Sadducees against the gospel (see [Act
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#002).md). This was the ground of battle
between the two sects, and Paul, himself once a Pharisee, now preaching
a gospel of which the great fact is the resurrection, not only avails
himself of the opportunity to proclaim the fundamental truth of
Christianity, but in so doing divides his enemies. Alford, says,
concerning his declaration, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of
the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question, that,
"All prospect for a fair trial was hopeless. Paul well knew from
experience that personal odium would bias his judges, and violence
prevail over justice. He therefore uses in the cause of truth the maxim
so often perverted to the use of falsehood, Divide and conquer."

There arose a dissension. The Pharisees were at once reminded that Paul
was with them in their great ground of contention with the Sadducees.
His appeal to them makes them at once his champions against the rival
sect.

The Sadducees say that there is no resurrection. See notes on [Mat
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023.md) for the doctrinal view of the
Sadducees. The statement here is fully confirmed by Josephus. See Wars
of the Jews, 2:8, 14.

The scribes . . . arose. These were mostly Pharisees, and were a learned
class.

We find no evil in this man. There was more to them in common with him
than with the materialistic Sadducees.

If a spirit or an angel. See the Revision. They throw this out as a
defiance to the Sadducees who denied both angel and spirit. The clause
"Let us not fight, etc.," is not found in the best MSS.

There arose a great dissension. One party took Paul's side, the other
opposed; one sought to lay hands on him, the other to defend him. The
chief captain interposed and removed Paul to the castle.

[Acts 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 23:11</span></span>

The night following. Paul's conditions seemed most forlorn. He was even
suspected by the church in Jerusalem. He was a prisoner to the Romans.
His own nation was thirsting for his life. He had twice, within two
days, narrowly escaped death. He needed comfort, and hence the Lord
stood by him, cheered him, and gave him encouragement concerning his
future work. It not doubt was like a ray of light, as he passed a
sleepless night in his prison cell, to learn that the dear Lord still
had work for him.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

Certain of the Jews banded together. Perhaps these Jews were of the
bitter enemies from Asia who had laid hands on him in the temple. They
may have belonged to a wild fanatical association of Jewish assassins,
who, a few years later, played a prominent part, called Sicarii. The
Talmud says that those who took such a vow were released from it, if it
was impossible to carry it out. Their purpose was to induce the chief
priests, who were Sadducees, to have Paul appear before the Sanhedrim
the next day, and then they would murder him.

Paul's sister's son heard. This is the only mention in Acts of any of
Paul's relations. It is possible that this nephew was studying in
Jerusalem, as Paul had done many years before, and heard of the plot
from those who did not know that he was in any way related to Paul.
Whether he was a Christian or not, he took pains to inform his uncle.
There was no difficulty of access, for Paul was a Roman, and would be
treated with courtesy. Paul, at once, sent him to the chief captain with
his information.

Took him by the hand. To show how carefully he was listening to the
story.

Called unto him two centurions. These were told to prepare four hundred
and seventy soldiers for an escort, a large force, but the country was
in a disturbed condition, and all the occurrences connected with Paul
confused and alarmed the commander.

Bring him safe unto Felix. Of this man, then governor, we will hear
more. He was originally a slave, but had risen by base arts to a high
position. His brother Pallas was the emperor's favorite, and secured the
important post of governor for Felix in A. D. 52. In A. D. 60 he was
removed.

[Acts 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 23:25</span></span>

He wrote a letter. Roman law required that when a prisoner was sent by a
lower official to a higher for trial, a letter should be sent stating
the charges. That of Lysias states his understanding of the case.

I rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman. Like many modern
officials, he prevaricates. He found out he was a Roman after he rescued
him.

I sent him straightway to thee. "Though I held him to be innocent,
hearing of the plot against his life, I thought it best to send him to
thee." Had he released Paul in Jerusalem, the conspirators would have
murdered him.

[Acts 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 23:31</span></span>

Brought him by night to Antipatris. They departed by night so that the
Jews would know nothing of Paul's departure until the next day.
Antipatris was about thirty-eight miles from Jerusalem. The march was
not probably made by night, but begun at night and was completed the
next day.

On the morrow. The morrow after they reached Antipatris, all returned
but the horsemen. CÃ&brvbr;sarea was now only twenty-six miles distant,
and the danger was over.

He asked of what province he was. Felix was governor of Judea under the
proconsul of Syria. Had he found the prisoner to be of some other
province under the proconsul, he would probably have turned him over to
its governor (compare [Luk 23:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006).md),
but when he found he was of Cilicia, a distant part of the empire, he
retained him.

Kept in Herod's judgment hall. The palace built by Herod the Great in
CÃ&brvbr;sarea for his own residence, but now occupied by Felix.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024.md)

</div>
