<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act024)  [Next](act026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 25:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Jewish Leaders Accuse Paul to Festus. Trial Before Festus
at CÃ&brvbr;sarea. Rather Than Be Sent to Jerusalem, Paul Appeals to
CÃ&brvbr;sar. King Agrippa and Bernice Visit Festus. They Ask to See and
Hear Paul. On the Morrow a Meeting in Great State. King Agrippa
Requested to Examine Paul That Festus May Know What to Report to Rome.

[Acts 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 25:1</span></span>

When Festus was come into the province. Had become governor of Judea.
The whole province of which Judea was a part was called Syria, and was
ruled by a proconsul. The divisions of one of the great proconsulships
were ruled by procurators, translated "governors." Pontius Pilate, Felix
and Festus are examples of the latter.

Then the high priest . . . informed him against Paul. Immediately after
entering upon his government, Festus went from the Roman capital of
Judea to its Jewish capital. The rulers did not lose this opportunity to
prosecute Paul. Their aim was to have him transferred from
CÃ&brvbr;sarea to Jerusalem, and thus exposed to their murderous
designs.

To kill him. This was the real object of their request. Those who will
read the account of these times given by Josephus, a Jew of this period,
will see that such a murderous purpose is not improbable. Their purpose
was for the time baffled by the decision of Festus that the case must be
tried before his court in CÃ&brvbr;sarea instead of before the
Sanhedrim.

Those who are able. Those possessing official power.

[Acts 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 25:7</span></span>

When he was come. When Festus had returned to CÃ&brvbr;sarea.

The Jews . . . laid many and grievous complaints against Paul. From the
substance of Paul's reply ([Act 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#008).md),
it is easy to determine that these charges were about the same as before
Felix, viz: (1) Teaching a new and illegal religion; (2) profaning the
temple; (3) sedition, or offending against CÃ&brvbr;sar, charges that
they could not sustain. It is evident from [Act
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#019.md) that particular stress was laid
upon the fact that he was a "ring-leader of the Nazarenes."

Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure. He desired to avoid a
difficulty with them at the very beginning of his government. He
therefore proposed to Paul to go to Jerusalem for trial. This was the
request of the Jews. The charges were in great part concerning a
violation of the Jewish law, and the Sanhedrim claimed jurisdiction in
that case. But Paul was a Roman, hence Festus could not, without his
consent, send him up to the stronghold of his enemies. He perhaps
thought that Paul would appeal to his rights as a citizen, and that
would prevent the necessity of a refusal to comply with the wishes of
the Jews.

I stand at CÃ&brvbr;sar's judgment seat. Before a Roman tribunal. The
governor was the representative of CÃ&brvbr;sar. To be delivered over to
the Sanhedrim was to be sent to certain death. Hence, he falls back on
the right of every Roman citizen to appeal to CÃ&brvbr;sar himself, or
to the imperial tribunal in Rome, a right granted by law to all Romans
in the provinces, an essential for protection against unjust governors.

When he had conferred with the council. His own counsellors, men called
"assessors," whose duty it was to advise the governor. He then announces
the decision, I suppose, in the legal language used in such cases, Hast
thou appealed unto CÃ&brvbr;sar? unto CÃ&brvbr;sar thou shalt go.

[Acts 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 25:13</span></span>

Agrippa and Bernice came. King Agrippa II., the son of Herod Agrippa,
whose death is told in [Act 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023.md).
Drusilla and Bernice were his sisters. He was the last of the Herodian
kings, and was at this time king of Calchis. Bernice, his beautiful
sister, was one of the fairest and most dissolute women of her time. She
was married several times, had been twice married before Paul saw her,
and is discreditably associated with both Vespasian and Titus. The
latter took her to Rome, and would have married her had it not been for
the storm of public disapproval.

To salute Festus. To pay their respects to the new Roman official.

Festus declared Paul's cause unto the king. He did this for advice. He
was really perplexed. He had just come into the province of Judea, and
was not acquainted with Jewish customs. He could see nothing wrong in
Paul, but the Jewish rulers accused him so vehemently that he was not
sure that he understood the case. King Agrippa was a Jew by birth, would
understand the real difference between Paul and the Sanhedrim, and could
aid Festus to formulate the charges that must be sent to Rome when Paul
was sent to appear before CÃ&brvbr;sar's tribunal.

Their own superstition. The Jewish religion.

Unto the hearing of Augustus. One of the titles of the Roman emperor. He
was styled CÃ&brvbr;sar, Augustus, and Imperator, from whence the word
emperor.

On the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp. The
account reads like that of an eye-witness, as it doubtless is. The
gathering of a king, a princess, a great Roman representative of
CÃ&brvbr;sar, with their splendid retinues, heralds, lictors, and men at
arms, as well as the great officers of the Roman army and chief men of
CÃ&brvbr;sarea, was a sight well calculated to leave a profound
impression. Then Paul was brought forth before this splendid array of
royalty and power.

Festus said. He introduces the cause by a short explanation: (1) Ye see
this man; (2) the Jews declare that he ought not to live; (3) I have
found in him nothing worthy of death; (4) he had appealed to Augustus;
(5) I have nothing certain to write in the way of charges; (6) perhaps
thou, O King Agrippa, canst help me out of this difficulty.

My lord. The emperor. This great occasion gave Paul a great opportunity.
Instead of using it to defend himself, he preached the gospel to that
great audience. His address, as given in the next chapter, is a
masterpiece.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 26](act026.md)

</div>
