<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act019)  [Next](act021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 20:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul Departs to Macedonia. And to Greece. Paul at Troas. The
Meeting on the First Day of the Week to Break Bread. The Meeting with
the Elders of the Church at Ephesus. Paul's Affectionate Warnings. The
Sorrowful Farewell.

[Acts 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 20:1</span></span>

After the uproar was ceased. It had been his purpose to go into
Macedonia ([Act 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)), but to remain
at Ephesus until after Pentecost ([Co1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008)), and that time (about the middle
of May, A. D. 57 or 58) had probably come. Hence, having exhorted the
disciples (Revision), he departed. It was on his way to Greece that the
Second Epistle to the Corinthians was written. He speaks in [Co2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014) and [Co2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001), of coming "the third time" to
Corinth. Hence, Hackett supposes that during the three years at Ephesus
he made a flying visit to Corinth by sea to correct disorders in the
church there.

When he had gone over those parts. Visited Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea
at least, and possibly other Macedonian churches.

He came into Greece. To Corinth. During the three months that he
remained in Corinth, he wrote the greatest of all his letters, the
Epistle to the Romans.

The Jews laid in wait. We have no further details, but it was, no doubt,
a murderous plot. To prevent it, his plans were changed, and instead of
sailing to Syria, he again took the route to Macedonia.

There accompanied him to Asia, Sopater. The Revision, based on the
oldest MSS, calls him "the son of Pyrrhus." He is otherwise unknown.

Aristarchus. See [Act 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029).

Secundus is not named elsewhere.

Gaius of Derbe. So named to distinguish him from another Gaius ([Act
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)). Derbe was in Lycaonia. See
[Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006).

Timotheus. This celebrated disciple was of Lystra near Derbe. See notes
on [Act 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001).

Tychicus. Supposed to be an Ephesian. See [Col
4:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007); [Eph
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021); [Ti2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012).

Trophimus. He attended Paul all the way to Jerusalem. See [Act
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#029) and [Ti2
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020).

These going before. Paul evidently tarried with the church at Philippi,
while they went on to Troas.

Us. Luke was now a companion. When Paul first passed into Europe, six or
seven years before, he was with him ([Act
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012)), but there are reasons for
thinking that he had remained and labored in Philippi until this time.
Henceforth he attends the great apostle.

Came to Troas in five days. The winds must have been contrary. Formerly
([Act 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011)) the voyage was made in
two days. For Troas, see note on [Act
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008).

[Acts 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 20:7</span></span>

On the first day of the week when, etc. The language shows that it was
the custom to meet on the first day of the week, and shows the leading
object of that meeting. This was not a farewell meeting for Paul, for
then the day of the week would not have been mentioned, but the regular
weekly assemblage of the saints. They came together, primarily, to break
bread, i. e., to observe the Lord's Supper. Dean Howson says: "We have
here an unmistakable allusion to the practice, which began evidently
immediately after the resurrection of our Lord, of assembling on the
first day of the week for religious purposes." He also shows that the
Lord arose on the first day of the week, showed himself to the apostles
a second time one week later on the first day of the week, that the
church was founded and the Holy Spirit shed forth on Pentecost, which
was on the first day of the week. On the same day the disciples at Troas
meet to break bread, the Corinthians meet, take collections ([Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)) and eat the Lord's Supper ([Co1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)), and the Lord on Patmos reveals
himself to John ([Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)). In
addition to this, the early church writers from Barnabas, Justin Martyr,
IrenÃ&brvbr;us, to Clement of Alexandria, Origen and Cyprian, all with
one consent, declare that the church observed the first day of the week.
They are equally agreed that the Lord's Supper was observed weekly, on
the first day of the week.

Paul preached. Though it was the special object of this weekly meeting
to break bread, preaching was a part of the worship.

Continued his speech until midnight. About to depart, probably never to
see them more, all were anxious to hear the great apostle, and he had
much to say.

There were many lights. This is mentioned to show how they could meet at
night. In those time public meetings and even the games of the theatre
were by daylight. Means of lighting were very imperfect.

Eutychus. Sitting in the window, and at last overcome by drowsiness, he
fell to the earth, three stories below. The language implies that he was
killed by the fall, and restored by the Divine power, exercised through
Paul. The history is plain, simple, and easy to understand. Compare [Kg2
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034).

When he . . . had broken bread and eaten. Opinions are divided whether
the Lord's Supper had been celebrated before his long discourse and this
was a common meal just before his departure in the early morning, or
whether these words allude to the celebration of the Lord's Supper. I
incline to the last opinion. The fact that the same phraseology is used
in both places shows that they refer to the same thing. Some, however,
insist that if this be true, the Lord's Supper was celebrated on Monday
morning before day. This does not necessarily follow. The Jews began
their day at sunset. Sunday began at sunset of what he call Saturday.
The early churches, composed in large part of Jews at first, often
followed the Jewish custom. It is probable that this meeting at Troas
began at the close of the Sabbath, in the evening, was continued through
the night, the Lord's Supper being celebrated in the latter part of the
night, before dawn of Sunday, and that at daybreak Paul departed. He had
remained over a week to have the privilege of observing the Lord's
Supper with them. So, too, he remained a week with the disciples at Tyre
([Act 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004)) and with the brethren at
Puteoli ([Act 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014)).

[Acts 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 20:13</span></span>

Sailed unto Assos. The distance from Troas to Assos by sea, round Cape
Lectum, was about forty miles, while across by land it was only half as
far. Paul, probably attended by a number of brethren, chose to walk
across. Vast ruins now mark the site of the seaport of Assos.

Mitylene. The next stopping place, about thirty miles from Assos, still
the capital of the island of Lesbos. It is now called Castro.

Sailed to Chios. A populous island near the Asiatic coast, famed for its
wine. In 1822, the Turks almost exterminated the inhabitants in a
frightful massacre.

Samos. All these islands are celebrated in Greek history. Samos is
separated from the coast only by a narrow channel.

Trogyllium. A promontory not far from Ephesus.

Came to Miletus. A city famous from the time of Homer, but at this
period sinking in importance on account of the prosperity of Ephesus,
only thirty miles away. A swamp and a few ruins now mark its site.

Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus. If he stopped at this scene of
three years' labor, he felt that he could not tear himself away without
a considerable stay. But it was his plan to be in Jerusalem at
Pentecost, now not far off. Hence, instead of stopping at Ephesus, he
sent for the elders to visit him at Miletus.

[Acts 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 20:17</span></span>

Called the elders of the church. No mention has been made before of
their appointment, but it was Paul's custom to "ordain elders in every
church" ([Act 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)). These elders
were also called "bishops" (see [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028), Revision). In apostolic days
there was a plurality of elders in every church; these elders were
"bishops," or overseers. There was no distinct episcopal order. This is
admitted even by the advocates of an episcopate. Dean Howson, of the
Church of England, declares (Acts, p. 475) that no special order of
bishops was created in the lifetime of Paul, or the apostles, but he
dates their origin about the close of the first or beginning of the
second century. Prof. Rothe, of Heidelberg (quoted by Lightfoot on
Philippians), supposes that after the martyrdom of Paul, Peter and James
the necessity was felt for a general supervision, and that this gave
rise to the appointment of diocesan bishops. By the admission of all
scholars, the episcopal order is post-apostolic.

Ye know. This is a pastoral address, worthy of the closest study by all
pastors and elders. First, the apostle calls attention to his own
example. Every elder ought to be an example.

Taught you publicly. Three months in the synagogue at Ephesus; two years
in the school of Tyrannus, besides his teaching in the church
assemblies.

Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord. These items embrace
the sum of Christian doctrine. Repentance of our sins against our
Creator, the resolve to turn from them; then faith in Jesus Christ as
our Savior, by trust in his grace and obedience to his will.

Now I go bound in the spirit. Urged by a sense of duty, yet knowing from
the premonitions of the Holy Spirit that bonds and afflictions awaited
him at Jerusalem.

Ye shall see my face no more. Paul does not state this as a revelation,
but as his conviction. He then thought it not improbable that he would
soon die for Christ. Many think that he was released from his first
imprisonment in Rome. Dean Howson says: "It is almost certain that Paul,
after his liberation from the imprisonment spoken of in Acts XXVIII.,
did revisit the Asian churches (see notices and greetings and directions
in 2 Tim. 4 and in [Tit 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005),
especially the words, 'Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick')."

Pure from the blood of all men. Not responsible, if they are lost, for
he had declared "the whole counsel of God."

[Acts 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 20:28</span></span>

Take heed. Here begin the special admonitions to the elders.

To yourselves. Their own lives must be the first subject of
watchfulness. No man can be so exalted that he does not need to watch
and pray.

The flock. The church, the fold of the Good Shepherd, of whom they were
under-shepherds, or pastors.

To feed the church. "On the sincere milk of the word, that it may grow
thereby."

Grievous wolves. The figure of the flock is still kept up. The "grievous
wolves" were false teachers, and the special reference is to the
Judaizing teachers, who taught that the Gentile Christians must keep the
Jewish law. Paul's ministry was a long battle with the schismatics. See
[Ti1 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003), [Ti1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020); [Ti2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015); [Ti2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017); also John's Third Epistle. By
turning to these references the names of some six of these "grievous
wolves" will be found. Also in [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006) we learn that there were false
teachers at Ephesus.

[Acts 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 20:32</span></span>

I commend you to God. In their weighty responsibility he commends them
to God.

And to the word of his grace. The word will be a guide in all their
difficulties and is able to build them up and give them an inheritance
among the sanctified. If it is followed, they cannot stray.

Sanctified. All Christians are spoken of as sanctified. See [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002); [Co1
6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009).

I have coveted no man's silver. No motives of self-interest could induce
him to labor in the work to which he was called. It offered no earthly
emoluments. We have found that at Corinth he worked with his own hands
for support. We here learn that he did the same thing at Ephesus. See
[Act 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003); [Th2
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010); [Co1
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011). He also warns Timothy to flee
from the love of money as hurtful, an admonition that should never be
forgotten.

It is more blessed to give than to receive. These words, quoted by Paul,
as well known are not found in any one of the four Gospels, but are none
the less genuine. They only preserve a fragment of the sayings and
doings of our Lord ([Joh 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)).
Giving, even here, secures more real happiness than receiving, and
besides, is Godlike and blesses forever.

[Acts 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 20:36</span></span>

He kneeled down, and prayed. This was the most appropriate parting for
these ancient men of God.

Fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him. An Eastern custom of exhibiting
great affection.

That they should see his face no more. This thought caused their
greatest sorrow, but we have seen that it is probable that they did see
him again. It was not, however, until after Acts was written. See note
on [Act 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 21](act021)

</div>
