<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1000)  [Next](co1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

SUMMARY.--Greetings to the Church. Thanksgiving for the Grace of God. An
Exhortation to Unity. Schisms Rebuked. The Sin of Honoring Human Leaders
Instead of Christ. The Preaching of the Cross the Power of God to
Salvation. Not the Worldly Wise and Proud, but the Humble and Lowly
Converted.

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ. Some of the Judaizing
teachers, who had visited the church at Corinth after the departure of
Paul, in order to lessen his authority, had asserted that he was not an
apostle, divinely called like the Twelve. Hence, at the beginning, he
asserts his apostleship, and refers to his divine call. See [Co1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001), and [Co2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012).

Sosthenes, our brother. A Sosthenes is named in [Act
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017), who was then the chief ruler of
the synagogue at Corinth. The Sosthenes whom Paul associated with
himself in the letter must have been well known to, and influential
among, the Corinthians, and was probably the former chief ruler, who had
been converted. Apollos, Priscilla and Aquila, all well known to the
church, were at Ephesus with Paul (see chap. 16), but Sosthenes is
chosen to appear with him in the salutation.

Unto the church of God. This designation of the church appears oftener
than any other in the New Testament.

To them that are sanctified. All of "the church of God at Corinth" were
"sanctified in Christ Jesus;" that is, they were set apart from the
world and consecrated to God. All Christians are "sanctified" in the
sense of the term in the New Testament, and "called to be saints." The
humblest Christian is a saint, as well as Peter or Paul.

With all that in every place call, etc. The letter is intended for all
Christians, as well as for those at Corinth.

Call upon the name of Jesus Christ. Recognize him as their divine
Savior.

Both theirs and ours. The Lord of the saints everywhere as well as ours
([Co1 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006); [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)). Since there is only one Lord and
Master, all Christians should be brethren.

Grace be unto you. The favor of God; the divine blessing. This is the
apostolical benediction.

Peace. This is always an appropriate benediction, since peace is one of
the greatest blessings, but was especially appropriate to a church which
was torn by dissensions.

[1 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 1:4</span></span>

I thank my God always on your behalf. Before speaking of the faults
which he must rebuke, he speaks of the grounds for praise and hope. He
did not forget these, because there was much that he could not praise.
He could see their improvement on their former condition, as well as
their present faults. A good example for all critics.

That in every thing ye are enriched by him. "The grace of God" ([Co1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)) had "enriched" them.

In all utterance. The reference is especially, but not exclusively, to
the supernatural gifts of tongues and of knowledge which were imparted
to the early church. See [Co1 12:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008);
and [Co2 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007); [Co2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006).

Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you. It was confirmed
by the fruits which it brought forth; their belief and the spiritual
gifts which were bestowed upon some of them.

So that ye come behind in no gift. They were "enriched" by the grace of
God, so that they were not inferior to other Christians in privileges.

Waiting for the coming. They, like other Christians, were eagerly
waiting for the return of the Lord to the earth.

Who shall confirm you. He will do his part to confirm you; give you
strength to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day, etc. Free from
blame when they are called to meet the Lord.

God is faithful. Hence he will faithfully discharge his part of the
covenant. His promises may be relied upon. The fact that he had called
the saints to fellowship with his Son, is proof that their salvation
will be completed.

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

Now I beseech you, brethren, etc. How earnest and imploring is the
Apostle's exhortation that they should maintain unity!

That ye all speak the same thing. Have no distinctive party
declarations. This is violated in the modern sectarian symbols and
confessions.

That there be no divisions. "No schisms," in the Greek. If there were
none, and all "were perfectly joined together in the same mind and in
the same judgment," all would "speak the same thing." There would be no
variance in their declarations. It is evident, from what follows, that,
while the Corinthians had not separated into various church
organizations, they had formed several parties within the church.
Organized sects, claiming to be "branches of the church," were unknown
till centuries later.

For it hath been declared unto me. He candidly tells them how he had
learned of their dissensions.

Them which are of the house of Chloe. Whether these were her children or
her servants, or whether she lived at Corinth and these members of her
household had come to visit Paul at Ephesus, or whether she lived at
Ephesus and these persons had made a visit to Corinth, these are all
unknown. Chloe is not elsewhere name.

Now this I say. I explain more fully what I mean. He shows that there
were four existing parties: A Pauline party, clinging to the founder of
their church; a party of Apollos, who were probably carried away by
their admiration of his Alexandrian philosophy; a party of Judaizer, who
claimed to be following Peter, called here by his Hebrew name of Cephas;
and a fourth party, who claimed to turn away from all these human
leaders, and to be only of Christ.

Is Christ divided? The church is "the Body of Christ" ([Co1
12:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)). Can that body be cut into
parts, and these assigned to human leaders?

Was Paul crucified for you? The cross binds us to Christ alone. By
baptism we are baptized in Christ's name, into his death, and into
Christ ([Rom 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)).

I thank God that I baptized none of you, etc. "The Corinthians hearing,
believed and were baptized" ([Act
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)), but the fellow-ministers of
Paul usually administered the baptismal rite. Since some of the
Corinthians were claiming to be of his party, he was glad that he had
not personally baptized them, lest some of them should say he had
baptized in his own name ([Co1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015)).

Crispus. Formerly chief ruler of the synagogue at Corinth ([Act
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)).

Gaius. See [Rom 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023). He was Paul's
host at Corinth when the Epistle to the Romans was written.

I baptized also the household of Stephanas. This household was "the
first fruits of Achaia" ([Co1 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015));
Stephanas was one of the three Corinthian brethren then visiting Paul at
Ephesus ([Co1 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017)). There is no
proof that this, or any other household named in Scripture, contained
infants, but there is proof that most of them did not. "The household"
does not mean the same as "the family," but those dwelling in the house;
often the servants only.

For Christ sent me not to baptize. Paul does not intend to disparage
baptism, but to say that, in the division of labor, the work assigned
him was to preach, while others did the baptizing. If the common views
of his physical condition are correct, he was hardly strong enough to do
a great deal of baptizing.

Not with wisdom of words. Instead of seeking eloquence or philosophical
speculation, which might hide the cross, he told the simple story of the
gospel in plain and simple language.

[1 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 1:18</span></span>

The preaching of the cross. The gospel of a Crucified Savior.

To them that perish. Those who are unregenerate.

Is foolishness. The Greek philosopher and the Jewish scribe scoffed at
the thought of a Savior who had been crucified. They held that his
crucifixion proved that he was not divine.

Unto us who are saved. There are two sections of mankind--the unsaved
and the saved. To the first, the cross is folly; to the second, the
gospel of the Crucified One comes as the power of God. See [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). To the unsaved, the cross is a
pillar of cloud; to the saved, a pillar of light.

I will destroy the wisdom of the wise ([Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)). By turning to the passage in
Isaiah, its meaning is clear. God will put aside the wisdom and
understanding of men; these will not save; but he will save by what the
world called foolishness.

Where is the wise? The Greek philosophers. In Greek, the term
"philosopher" means a lover of wisdom.

The scribe? The scribes were the Jewish learned class.

The disputer? etc. Probably the Greek teachers who "disputed daily" in
the public places.

Hath not God made foolish? etc. All their worldly wisdom is excluded
from the gospel.

For . . . knew not God. Worldly wisdom did not search out the true God.
Intellectual speculation had done its utmost, and failed. Hence it was
rejected, and the Divine Wisdom chose by the foolishness of preaching to
save, etc. That is, by preaching what the wise and puffed up of the this
world called foolishness. They called the gospel foolishness.

[1 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 1:22</span></span>

For the Jews require a sign. Not merely miracles, such as the apostles
worked, but a sign from heaven ([Mat
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)). They said, "Let Christ come
down from heaven, if he be risen."

And the Greeks seek after wisdom. While the Jews asked for a sign from
heaven, the Greeks demanded a well-argued system of philosophy ([Act
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)).

But we preach Christ crucified. Not merely Christ, but Christ Crucified;
a Crucified Savior.

Unto the Jews a stumbling-block. Because they had an entirely different
conception of the Christ. Yet it was predicted that he should be "a
stone of stumbling" ([Mat 21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)).

Unto the Greeks foolishness. It seemed to the Greeks that a being who
died so ignominious a death could not be divine.

But to them which are called. But to those who obey the gospel call,
whether Jews or Gentiles, the Crucified Christ is found to be the power
of God, and the wisdom of God. The gospel not only is found to be
mighty, but wise in meeting the wants of the soul.

The foolishness of God. In one thing that men call foolishness, in
Christ Crucified, there is greater wisdom than in all the philosophers,
and though it seemed weakness of God to let Christ be crucified, yet the
Crucified Savior is mightier than all the strength of men. If folly and
weakness be of God, these will be wiser and stronger than men.

[1 Corinthians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 1:26</span></span>

Not many wise men after the flesh. Paul now shows the weakness of the
human instrumentality chosen to convert the world; not those the world
called wise, not the mighty, not the noble, yet the work was moving on
with wonderful power.

But God hath chosen the foolish things. Men whom the world would call
foolish, with a gospel that it called foolishness; yet these "confounded
the wise" and upturned the world's philosophies.

Base things. Those of lowly birth.

Things which are not. People that the world would call "nobodies," and
things that it counts as nothing. These are chosen to bring to nought
things that are; the existing state of things; the pagan religions,
governments, and civilization; these were to be overthrown through the
influence of the gospel.

That no flesh should glory, etc. That it should be shown that the power
was of God.

Who of God is made unto us wisdom. "Christ, the power of God and the
wisdom of God" ([Co1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)), is wisdom
to us.

And righteousness. In him we are made righteous, and obtain
sanctification and redemption. Christ is all of these to us.

He that glorieth, etc. ([Jer 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023)). As
Christ is our all, imparts every grace that we enjoy, and bestows every
blessing, there is no ground for glorying in Paul, Apollos or Cephas,
but in the Lord alone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002)

</div>
