<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1006)  [Next](co1008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Marriage the Resource Against Social Sins. Not to be Lightly
Dissolved. The Mutual Obligations. The Unmarried State Freest from
Trouble in Times of Persecution. But Neither Husband nor Wife to Leave
Each Other. If They Should, to Remain Unmarried. Not to Abandon an
Unbelieving Husband or Wife Because of their Unbelief. To Rest Content
with the Secular State in which One is Converted. The Treatment of
Virgin Daughters. Let Them Marry Under Certain Conditions. Under Others,
Best Not to Marry in those Critical Times. The Remarriage of Widows.

[1 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 7:1</span></span>

Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote. In the preceding six
chapters Paul has mainly treated of irregularities in the Corinthian
church, of which he had learned through the "household of Chloe," and
other private sources. Now he begins to answer various questions asked
in a letter from the church. If we had that letter, it would aid much in
understanding what follows by revealing more clearly the state of the
church and the discussions going on within.

It is good for a man not to touch a woman. An Old Testament phrase which
means not to marry. He does not mean that marriage is wrong, but that on
account of "the present distress" it was a good thing not to be bound by
family ties. See [Co1 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026.md).
"Forbidding to marry" is one of the signs of apostasy ([Ti1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003).md). See [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004.md).

To avoid fornication. To prevent this sin, and the temptations to it in
an unmarried state, especially in a vicious community, it was best for
each sex that they be married; the normal condition of the sexes.

Let the husband render unto the wife her due. The Revision is correct.
Marriage is a state of mutual obligations. Each must yield to the other
what those obligations require.

The wife hath not power over her own body, etc. Each sex here is put on
exactly the same footing. The body of each belongs to the other, and
cannot be yielded to other parties. The spirit of the passage not only
forbids adultery, but polygamy.

Defraud ye not one the other. The married pair are not live apart,
except by mutual agreement, and that only for a season, while devoting
themselves to a period of prayer. In the East, the women have separate
apartments, and during this season the husband would not enter the
wife's apartments.

But this I say by permission, etc. What is just stated ([Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005).md) is permissible in the married
state, not commanded.

I would that all men were as I myself. Had absolute self-control, as I
have. His directions all recognize the weakness of human nature, and the
need of making no requirements too great for it.

But every man hath his proper gift. He had the gift of self-control;
others might have other gifts which he did not have.

[1 Corinthians 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 7:8</span></span>

To the unmarried and widows. If they have his self-control, it is well
for them to remain unmarried, even as he. Not that the unmarried state
is better, but on account of "the present distress" ([Co1
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026).md), the critical times. There are
times when it is best to remain unmarried; for instance, in a time of
war and invasion. The ground of his advice is not moral, but prudential.

If they cannot contain. If they cannot control their desires, it is best
to marry.

To the married I command. Some might say, "If the unmarried state is
best now, it will be better to leave our married partner." He replies,
"The Lord commands otherwise" ([Mar
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#012.md); [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md); [Mat
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009).md).

But and if she depart. Provided, despite the prohibition, there is such
disagreement that she leaves her husband, she must remain unmarried, or
be reconciled.

Let not the husband put away his wife. The wife "departs," because she
leaves the home; the husband "puts away his wife," by sending her off.
Both are equally prohibited. The same rules apply to each sex. Among the
Jews, only the husband exercised the right of divorce; among the Greeks
and Romans, the wife exercised it equally with the husband.

[1 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 7:12</span></span>

To the rest I speak, not the Lord. On the circumstances that follow, the
Lord has not directly spoken, as he did on divorce; hence, Paul speaks
by inspiration.

If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, etc. If either husband or
wife is converted, and the other is not, they must not on this account
forsake the unbelieving helpmeet, provided he or she is pleased to
remain.

For the unbelieving husband is sanctified, etc. This passage has been
much debated, and little understood. The unbelieving husband or wife is
not made personally holy, not do the children of believers have personal
holiness transmitted to them by virtue of birth relation.
Sanctification, then, means something besides personal holiness. To
sanctify is to separate to a sacred use, or relation ([Exo
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008.md); [Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038).md). In [Ti1
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md), food is "sanctified by the word
of God and prayer" Here Paul uses the term to denote that one Christian
member of a household brings a sanctifying influence to it, so that all
the members are to be regarded as separated in part from the great,
ungodly, unclean world. Nehemiah commanded Jews to part from heathen
wives on the ground that they were ceremonially unclean. Paul insists,
rather, that the believer cleanses the other, and that the unbelieving
partner, or the children, are rendered ceremonially clean.

But now are they holy. Brought into such a sacred relation that the
unbelieving partners are under the power of sacred influences, and not
to be counted as sources of defilement.

But if the unbelieving depart. If the unbelieving husband or wife
insists upon making the Christian profession a ground of separation, let
them have their way. Examples of this kind occur in every age, and the
rule is always applicable.

God hath called us to peace. Hence, if strife must prevail to prevent
separation, let the other go.

How knowest thou, O wife, etc. Let the Christian be gentle, forbearing,
unselfish, though true to Christ, and perhaps the result will be that
they will be God's means to save their partner. This has occurred in
thousands of instances.

As God hath distributed to every man. "This I would add," says Paul in
effect, "whatever may be the lot and special circumstances of each man,
single, married, or deserted on account of Christianity, let him walk in
it without seeking a change."

[1 Corinthians 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 7:18</span></span>

Was any one called being circumcised? He now applies the principle just
stated, of walking "as God called every one." The circumcised Jews were
to be content that they were circumcised; the uncircumcised Gentiles
were to remain so when they became Christians.

Circumcision is nothing, etc. Has no bearing on final salvation. The one
essential condition is "keeping the commandments of God." Nothing can
take the place of this.

Let each man abide, etc. In that secular condition of life in which he
was when called.

Art thou called being a servant? Half the population of the Roman Empire
at this time were slaves. Thousands of the early Christians were in this
condition. If a servant was converted, let him not be troubled over his
servile state; but if he had the means of becoming free, let him rather
choose freedom.

For he that is called . . . being a servant. The eternal equality of the
servant and freeman in Christ is shown. The "servant" is Christ's
freedman, since Christ has freed him from sin; the freeman, when
converted, is Christ's servant.

Ye are bought with a price. Christ has bought each alike, ransomed them
from the bondage of sin with his blood, and bound them to his service as
his own.

Be not ye the servants of men. As Christ's servants, do not become the
followers of any other religious master.

Let every man, wherein he is called, etc. Let each one remain in the
domestic and social condition in which the call of God found him.

[1 Corinthians 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 7:25</span></span>

Now concerning virgins. No doubt in the letter from Corinth it was asked
whether a father should place his virgin daughters in marriage. In the
East to this day the marriage arrangements are made by the parents.

I have no commandment. He had no revelation upon the subject, but could
give his Christian judgment.

I suppose . . . for the present distress. The critical condition in
which Christians were placed by the spirit of persecution which then
prevailed.

Good for a man so to be. To remain in the state he already is.

Art thou bound? If married, he is to remain true to the bond; if
unmarried, at present it seemed best to remain so.

But and if thou marry. Still, while it seemed prudent, with impending
persecution, not to marry, it was not wrong to do so. Nevertheless,
those who did, should have trouble in the flesh. Anxiety and distress on
account of their domestic ties.

[1 Corinthians 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 7:29</span></span>

The time is short. The precise application cannot be known. It was but a
short time until Jerusalem should be destroyed, and the early church
supposed this would be the end of the world. Life, too, is short; the
time of preparation is short. It was the general feeling then that some
awful convulsion was close at hand. There was. Within half a generation
the whole Roman world was turned up by civil war, three emperors in
succession were slain, and Jerusalem was destroyed.

As though they had none. Should look on all earthly ties as soon to be
broken. All earthly arrangements must be regarded as transitory.

Those that use this world, etc. We all have to use the world; but we
must not misuse it. That is the charge here.

I would have you free from cares. That is, I would have you free from
the causes which bring cares.

There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The sole thought
of the unmarried person who is consecrated to Christ is to please
Christ.

This I speak . . . not that I may cast a snare. Not to interfere with
your freedom to marry. A snare thrown over the head made the victim
helpless. Paul merely advises what, under the circumstances of that
period, seemed most prudent.

[1 Corinthians 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">co1 7:36</span></span>

But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin
daughter. While giving a judgment in favor of the unmarried state, at
that time, he gives full liberty. A man may give his daughter in
marriage.

Behaveth uncomely. Improperly in withholding her from marriage.

If she pass the flower of her age. If she is fully matured.

If need so require. If circumstances of any kind seem to require her
marriage.

He that standeth steadfast . . having no necessity. If no need makes
marriage necessary, and the purpose that she remain unmarried continues
steadfast, he does well to let her remain so. To choose either course is
well, but the last is the better, where circumstances permit ([Co1
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#038).md), on account of the "distress"
([Co1 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026).md).

[1 Corinthians 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">co1 7:39</span></span>

The wife is bound by the law, etc. One point remains to be discussed,
viz., The remarriage of widows. I suppose that the letter of inquiry
asked about this.

She is at liberty. In case of her husband's death, she is free from the
marriage bond, and can marry whom she will, with one limitation--she
must marry in the Lord; that is, a Christian. An alien marriage is
prohibited. Indeed, so far was an ancient Christian from marrying an
unbeliever that the question actually arose whether, when the sinner was
converted, he could still live with an unconverted partner. See [Co1
7:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012.md).

But she is happier. In his judgment, and in the conditions then
prevailing, she will consult her happiness by remaining a widow. It is
not only his judgment, but the Spirit seems to point the same lesson.
[Ti1 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014.md), might be supposed to
conflict with this, but it does not, when we remember that Paul's advice
here is due to prevailing circumstances. The question of marriage or
remarriage is one of prudential considerations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 8](co1008.md)

</div>
