<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1003)  [Next](co1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Apostles Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Forming
Judgments of Religious Teachers. The Apostles Made a Spectacle to the
World. The Apostolic Trials. Counted by the World as Offscouring. Yet,
Paul the Spiritual Father of the Corinthian Church. And His Example
should be Imitated.

[1 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 4:1</span></span>

Let a man so account of us. The apostles and evangelists. They are to be
regarded as ministers (servants) of Christ, ([Co1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)), not as leaders. The word
rendered "ministers," means, literally, "under-rowers." The figure is
that of a ship impelled by oars. The church is the ship; Christ
commands; the rowers only obey orders. Since they have no right to give
orders, no parties should be formed about them.

Stewards. Again the figure is changed, but still the idea is that they
were servants. The steward his charge of the house for his master. The
church is the house; Christ is the Master; the apostolic stewards in
charge, having the mysteries of God, the revealed knowledge, knowledge
not their own but given them, must faithfully dispense it to the
household.

Moreover it is required of stewards, etc. The supreme quality required
in a steward is fidelity to his trust.

It is a very small thing, etc. The essential matter with Paul was, not
that the Corinthians should judge him a faithful steward, or that he
should be faithful in his own judgment, but that the Lord shall count
him faithful. Of course, with factions at Corinth, some disparaged Paul.

For I know nothing by myself. In the Revision, "Against myself." In his
own judgment he had been a faithful steward at Corinth, but that did not
justify him, for he must be judged by the Lord. To the Lord, then, he
must give a satisfactory account.

Therefore, judge nothing, etc. Hence, let no one form premature
judgments. Only when the Lord comes, in the day of judgment, will all
secrets be brought to light, and the motives of hearts be manifest.
Then, when just judgments are given, shall every man shall have the
praise (due him) of God. Each shall be judged as he deserves. Only then
can the Corinthians form an infallibly correct estimate of their
religious teachers.

[1 Corinthians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 4:6</span></span>

These things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and to
Apollos. I have used the names of Paul and Apollos to illustrate lessons
that I wished to impress upon; especially the lesson not to think of men
too highly.

Be puffed up for one against another. Exalting one preacher and making
him a leader, while seeking to pull down another.

Who maketh thee to differ? Who has imparted to you graces which
distinguish you from others? All were imparted to you. If you have
nothing that you didst not receive, Why dost thou glory? Some unseemly
exaltation, probably over spiritual gifts, is rebuked.

Now ye are full, now ye are rich, etc. Paul has just rebuked their
glorying over gifts bestowed upon them. Now he uses a burst of irony.
Though receiving all the grace they had, being dependent and needy, they
boasted as if they had it of themselves. The apostles had spiritual
gifts, but were poor and persecuted; the Corinthians had these gifts,
imparted by Paul, but were puffed up, felt, in his absence, as though
they were full, had all things; were rich, well supplied; they reigned
as kings. Held their heads high as though they were made kings.

I would ye did reign. Here comes the keenness of the rebuke which
follows the irony. If they were only exalted to be kings, as they seemed
to think themselves, perhaps then those who had imparted to them all
that they boasted of might become kings also. The apostles were in the
suffering period, but these converts had got to the reigning period.

God hath set forth us the apostles last. In contrast with them, the
state of the apostles is given. The figure is drawn from the Roman
amphitheatre. At "last," near the close of the games, gladiators doomed
to die were led forth and shown to the spectators, then stripped of all
armor, and exposed naked to the attack of others. So the apostles were a
spectacle unto the world, doomed to reproach, suffering and to death.

[1 Corinthians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 4:10</span></span>

We are fools for Christ's sake. The sad worldly lot of the apostles is
set forth. For Christ's sake they chose a path of sorrow that made the
world call them fools.

Ye are wise in Christ. Think you are wise in your religious
speculations.

We are weak. See [Co1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003).

Ye are strong. In your own conceits.

Unto this present hour, etc. All through our ministry we suffer want for
the needs of life, are often in want of food and drink and clothing, are
beaten (buffeted), and, like the Master, have no certain home.

And labor. Support ourselves by our own hands, while preaching the
gospel, returned good for evil.

Are made as the filth of the world. Are accounted by the world as its
very sweepings, as scum, as refuse utterly worthless and repulsive. Such
passages, which are not overdrawn, show the greatness of faith, the
devotion, the heroism of and the debt we owe to such men as Paul.

[1 Corinthians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 4:14</span></span>

I write not these things to shame you. I do not contrast your pride and
glorying with our humiliation to shame you, but as a fatherly admonition
to beloved children.

Yet have ye not many fathers. They might have many tutors, who sought to
train them as children, but Paul was their father who had begotten them
in the gospel; that is, converted them.

Be ye followers of me. Hence, since he was their spiritual father, they
ought all to imitate him, his lowliness and self-denial. Children should
seek to be like the parent, rather than like the tutor.

For this cause I sent Timotheus. Timothy, Paul's "son in the gospel"
([Act 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)), had already been sent
onward toward Corinth ([Co1 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)),
but going round by land would not arrive until after this letter, if it
went across by sea.

Of my ways in Christ. Timothy will revive their remembrance of Paul's
life, conduct and teachings, so that they can the better "follow" him.

[1 Corinthians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 4:18</span></span>

Now some are puffed up. Some of those who were factious thought, as Paul
was sending Timothy, he would not come himself, and this encouraged them
to continue their factious conduct.

I will come to you shortly. If God permitted, he would soon follow ([Co1
16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007)), and would put to the test
those puffed up.

Not the speech, . . . but the power. He will confront these vain
boasters, and see what power is behind their swelling words.

For the kingdom of God. For in the kingdom of God it is not words or
professions which avail, but the power of God in the heart.

What will ye? When he comes, how shall he come? Will it be necessary to
rebuke and exert his apostolic authority, or will the condition of the
church be such that only love and gentleness will be called for?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 5](co1005)

</div>
