<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul's Letters of Commendation. The New Covenant and the
Covenant of the Letter; or the Law and the Gospel. The First Written on
Tables of Stone; Is a Ministration of Death; Was Glorious, But Is Done
Away. That Which Remaineth, the New Covenant, Far More Glorious. The
Veil Over the Face of Moses a Type of Blindness of Israel. The
Transforming Power of the Gospel.

[2 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 3:1</span></span>

Do we begin again to commend ourselves? Paul had just spoken of his
triumphs. Opposers, such as were in Corinth, might insist that he was
boasting.

Need we . . . epistles of commendation? No doubt there is a reference
made to letters which the Judaizing teachers, who had come to Corinth,
carried. They might need them, but he did not.

Ye are our epistle. The church itself owed its existence to him. He
could point to his work, to the disciples, as his letter of
commendation. He was known by his fruits.

Written in our hearts. When he looked into his heart, he saw them
enshrined there, and felt that he needed no commendation to them.

Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ. A beautiful
conception. Christ is the author of the letter; Paul was the penman; the
message was written on the fleshly tablets of the hearts of the brethren
at Corinth. The means employed by Christ to convey the message was the
Spirit which filled Paul. All men who could see the transformation
effected in the lives of the Corinthians could read the epistle.

Not in tables of stone. Instead of naming parchment, he mentions tables
of stone, because he is about to compare the Old Covenant, of which its
chief part, the Decalogue, was written on stone ([Exo
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)) with the New Covenant.

Such trust have we, etc. That the church of Corinth is such an epistle
as has just been described.

Not that we are sufficient of ourselves. He would claim no credit for
the work at Corinth, as though it was his own, for all his strength was
of God.

Who hath made us able ministers of the New Testament. God gave Paul and
his fellow-ministers their "sufficiency" ([Co2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)), who had made them able ministers
of the gospel.

New Testament. The New Covenant, the Covenant of Christ. This is here
contrasted with the Old Covenant, the Jewish. One is the Law; the other
the Gospel. Compare Hebrews, chapter 8.

Not of the letter, but of the Spirit. The first, the law, was written
(by letters written and engraven on stones, hence of the letter); the
gospel is the dispensation of the Spirit.

The letter killeth. The law. It condemns all who do not obey its
commands, but could make no man perfect. The law places under the
sentence of death. See notes on [Rom
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009).

The Spirit giveth life. The gospel bestows eternal life.

[2 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 3:7</span></span>

But if the ministration of death. The Old Covenant, the law is so
called, because it places under the sentence of death.

Written and engraven on stones. Only the Decalogue was written on
stones. It was the central and most important part of the Old Covenant.
Let it be noted that when Paul speaks of the law, or Old Testament, he
includes the Decalogue, and does not mean simply the ceremonial law, as
some have urged ([Exo 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)).

Was glorious. So glorious that even the face of Moses was made to shine
as he carried down the tables of the law ([Exo
34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029)) so that he had to veil his
face.

Which glory was to be done away. It was only temporary.

How shall not rather the ministration of the Spirit be with glory? The
gospel, the ministration of life, must have still greater glory. It has
a glory now, and will have a fuller glory in the day of the Lord.

If the ministration of condemnation. See [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007), the law, including the Decalogue.

The ministration of righteousness. The gospel. The first condemned; the
second justifies men with the righteousness of Christ. With such
transcendent blessings, it far exceeds in glory the Old Covenant.

For even that which was made glorious. The Old Covenant. As the glory of
the moon and stars fades out before the glory of the sun, so its glory
disappears in a comparison with the exceeding glory of the gospel.

For if that which is done away was glorious. That which was glorious in
the Old Covenant, or law. It includes the Decalogue ([Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)). The whole is done away. This
clear and emphatic statement is made on account of the Judaizing
teachers of whom we find many traces in the two Letters to the
Corinthian church. It is clearly asserted that the Old Covenant, "the
ministration of death written and engraven on stones," is done away. We
are "not under the law, but under grace." Compare [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). But if that which was done away
is glorious, much more is that glorious which abides forever.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

Seeing then we have such hope. The blessed gospel hope. With such a hope
he has boldness to declare the gospel truths boldly and without reserve.

And not as Moses, etc. The veil Moses put over his face ([Exo
34:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#033)) is used by Paul as a symbol to
show that all was not made plain in the law of Moses, and that there is
still blindness on the part of Israel.

Could not stedfastly look to the end, etc. The brightness with which the
face of Moses shone was to be done away. The veil prevented the children
of Israel from observing its fading glory. This typifies the fact that
they should not see the end of the law itself which was to be abolished.

But their minds were blinded. So blinded that they cannot see to this
day that it has been set aside by the New Covenant, and that its types,
figures and shadows find their fulfillment in Christ.

Which veil is done away in Christ. Meyer, with many other able critics,
contends that the proper translation of the latter part of the verse is:
"It not being disclosed that the Old Covenant is taken away in Christ."
So also Conybeare and Howson. This is no doubt the meaning.

When Moses is read, etc. The law, or Old Testament. They read it in
their synagogues, but do not understand it. The trouble, too, is in
their heart. They are blinded by their prejudices.

When it shall turn to the Lord. The heart. Then the veil of blindness
will fall away so that they will see clearly.

Now the Lord is that Spirit. The New Covenant is of "the Spirit." See
[Co2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003), [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006), [Co2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008). But turning to the Lord is
entering into this covenant, for the "Lord is that Spirit." The Spirit
is Christ's presence with us.

There is liberty. He who comes into this covenant of the Spirit is freed
from the bondage of the law.

But we all. All Christians.

With open face. Without a veil.

Beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord. Looking to Jesus and
beholding in his covenant, in our hearts and minds as in a mirror, and
contemplating his glory.

Are changed. To look to Jesus has a transforming power. If we gaze upon
him, we will become like him. As Moses unveiled before the Lord shone
with the glory of the Lord, so we shall reflect the glory of Christ, and
show forth his likeness.

From glory to glory. Developing from one stage of glory to a higher one.

Even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Rather, "The Lord the Spirit," as in
the Revision. [Co2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017) declares the
Lord is the Spirit. Our glory is from the Lord the Spirit. The figure
here is a very beautiful one. By gazing upon the Lord we become like him
and show forth his glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004)

</div>
