<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co1016)  [Next](co2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND CORINTHIANS.

The second Letter to the Church at Corinth is the supplement of the
first. It is due to the same circumstances which called out the first,
and to the effects that were produced in the church at Corinth by the
receipt of the first letter. We can almost be thankful for the disorders
which occasioned these two letters, not only on account of the rich fund
of practical instruction which they contain, but on account of the
picture which they present of a Gentile Church, composed of those who
had so recently been heathen, in the first century of Christianity. They
recall us to the immorality which had to be overcome, the obstacles in
the way of a Christian life, and the mighty triumph which the gospel
achieved over human nature itself in establishing the spiritual reign of
Christ where the sensuality of heathen worship had before prevailed.

The first letter was written at Ephesus in the spring of A. D. 57; the
second was written a few months later at some point in Macedonia where
Paul had journeyed to visit the churches of that province before
extending his tour to Corinth. We learn from the nineteenth and
twentieth chapters of Acts that not long after the first letter was
written, Demetrius and his fellow-craftsman aroused the terrible riot at
Ephesus in which Paul so nearly lost his life ([Co2
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008)), and that immediately after,
at the urgency of the brethren, he started on his long contemplated
journey to visit the churches of Europe. He had expected to meet Titus
at Troas with word from Corinth concerning the effect of his first
letter and was greatly disappointed when he did not find him there ([Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013)). Hence, although a fine opening
for planting the gospel was presented, he pressed on to Macedonia. Here
he met Titus, who was on his way to him, and was greatly rejoiced when
he learned that his letter had been well received and his commands
obeyed ([Co2 7:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)). Still the
circumstances required another letter before his coming and the second
letter was written, not only to express his joy over the better state of
things in the church, but in order to convey further counsels.

This Epistle naturally divides itself into three parts. In the first
part, embracing chapters 1-7, the Apostle portrays his feelings over the
condition of matters in Corinth, his anxiety, and his relief after the
coming of Titus; in chapters 8, 9, the second part, he takes up the
great collection of the Gentile churches for the poor at Jerusalem on
which he had so deeply set his heart; in the third part, chapters 10-13,
he repels the insinuations of Judaizing teachers who were seeking, not
only in Corinth but everywhere, to destroy Paul's influence so as to
bring the churches under the bondage of the Jewish law. In this section
he presents those wonderful details concerning what his service of
Christ had cost him in earthly sufferings. The whole letter is written
in the expectation of soon being at Corinth, an expectation which we
know from Acts, chapter 20 was realized.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 1](co2001)

</div>
