<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](phi004)  [Next](col001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS.

At least three Epistles, and probably four, were prepared about the same
time by the Apostle Paul at his place of imprisonment in Rome, and sent
by the same messengers to the Roman Province of Asia. One was the
Epistle to the Ephesians; a second, the present letter; a third, the
Epistle to Philemon, who was a resident of Colosse; and the fourth is
alluded to in this Epistle ([Col 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016))
as the Epistle to the Laodiceans, but has been thought by some to be
identical with the Ephesian letter. Three cities are named in this
Epistle which lay contiguous to each other in the bounds of the ancient
Kingdom of Phrygia, but in the last half of the first century were
embraced within the proconsular Province of Asia, of which Ephesus was
the capital, which had Christian congregations, and two of these were
honored with Epistles ([Col 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#013)). The
ruins of these cities have been identified, and the close association of
Colosse and Laodicea is witnessed by the fact that they were only a few
miles apart on opposite sides of the valley of the Lycus, a short
distance above where it enters into the larger river Meander.

Colosse was a city of considerable size more than four hundred years
before the date of this letter, when visited by Xenophon as the Ten
Thousand marched up into Central Asia, and is mentioned by Herodotus
still earlier. At this time, however, it was overshadowed in importance
by Laodicea, and at the present the ruins are less imposing than those
of either Laodicea or Hierapolis.

We learn in the Sixteenth Chapter of Acts that Paul, on his second
missionary journey, passed from Cilicia through the pass in the great
Taurus chain of mountains, which has always been the highway from the
coast to the interior; paused a little while in Lydia; took Timothy in
his train of attendants, and then passed through Phrygia and Galatia.
And, a second time, after his European tour, he returned and "went over
all the country of Phrygia and Galatia, strengthening the disciples"
([Act 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)). Yet it is probable that
he did not personally plant the gospel in Colosse, and possibly did not
even pass through the valley of the Lycus. The words of [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001), are understood to mean that he
had never met with the church in person, and indeed there is a marked
difference between the tone of this letter and the familiar personal
appeals of letters addressed to churches that he had certainly planted,
like those of Philippi and Galatia.

Besides, Epaphras seems to be named ([Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007)) as the founder, or at least the
evangelist, of the church. Yet, since Epaphras must have been one of his
own converts, and was working under his general supervision, Paul held
himself responsible for its condition, and looked after its welfare, as
after all the churches planted within the sphere of his labors.

It is easy to discover from certain portions of the letter why it was
written. Phrygia was a sort of border land between religions. The light,
joyous polytheism of the Greeks here met the deep, solemn mysticism of
the East. In addition, large colonies of Jews had been transplanted from
Babylon to this region by one of the Macedonian monarchs of Syria, and
brought with them a Judaism which had been greatly modified by the
doctrines of Zoroaster. The Epistle gives us ample ground for concluding
that there was danger of these mongrel philosophies corrupting the
simplicity of the gospel of Christ, and that Paul's object was to
fortify the church against doctrine which would result in evil. In the
notes of the passages which refer to these doctrines, this will be
discussed more at length.

While there is a marked difference between this Epistle and that to the
Ephesians, there is in some portions a striking similarity. Indeed there
is not only a parallelism in the thoughts, but often in the language.
The most natural way to account for this is to bear in mind that the two
letters were written at the same time; were written to the same part of
the world to congregations surrounded by conditions which were in many
respects similar, and whose spiritual needs would be much alike. Under
such circumstances it would be strange if two letters from the same
writer did not bear a strong resemblance. It would be interesting to
call attention to these parallel or similar passages, but the limited
space the plan of this work allows will not permit. One who is curious
to follow this comparison will find it given in full in Paley's Horae
Paulinae.

Concerning the genuineness of this Epistle, it has always had a place in
the New Testament Canon, and has never been questioned except by Baur,
and some other critics of the Tubingen school who have thought that it
gave too high an exaltation to Christ. This might be answered by
replying that it exalts Christ no more than Philippians and other
Epistles which are conceded to be of Pauline origin. Their theories have
been overthrown not only by historical arguments, but by the internal
evidence of the Epistle itself. Indeed, as Meyer remarks, "the forging
of such an Epistle as this would be far more wonderful than its
genuineness."

It was written at Rome, during Paul's imprisonment, probably in A. D.
62, the same date as Ephesians and Philemon, and was sent to the church
by the hands of Tychicus ([Col 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007))
and Onesimus ([Col 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 1](col001)

</div>
