<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph000)  [Next](eph002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

SUMMARY.--The Salutation. Our Election and Adoption by Grace. This the
Source of Salvation. The Mystery Made Known. The Inheritance. Prayer
that Wisdom and Knowledge Be Given to the Saints.

[Ephesians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle. It was always the custom anciently to place the name
of the writer at the beginning rather than at the end as with us.

By the will of God. Emphasis is placed in most of Paul's epistles upon
the fact that he was not an apostle by the appointment of man, but by
the will of God.

To the saints at Ephesus. All Christians were called saints in the early
church. See the salutations of other Epistles.

And to the faithful. The same as the saints. There is no article in the
Greek before "faithful." A literal translation is "To the saints
dwelling in Ephesus and faithful in Christ Jesus."

Grace. For note on the salutation, see [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

[Ephesians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God. The word rendered "blessed" is one from which our
word eulogize is derived. It means, therefore, primarily, to praise.
"Praised be the God," etc., gives the idea.

Who hath blessed us. The blessed is here from the same root. The word
means, as above, "to praise," or to "speak" good things of one; then to
"speak" good things to, or bestow blessings, as a secondary meaning.
This is the meaning here.

With all spiritual blessings. All came from God, and he has withheld
none from those in Christ.

In the heavenly. In the kingdom of heaven.

According as. "Even as," in Revision.

Chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. This does not
affirm that God chose some individuals and rejected others, but that
before the world was, before there was Jew or Gentile, God chose to have
a people for himself, the whole church of Christ, a covenant people
confined to no one earthly race.

Holy and without blame. God chose them that they might be holy. Holiness
is the proof that a church is a chosen church.

Having predestinated us. Foreordained that we, the church of Jesus
Christ, should be adopted as his children. The whole line of argument is
general instead of particular. God foreordained a church which should be
composed of those adopted as his children.

According to the pleasure of his will. The act of predestination was due
simply to God's sovereign will. His will was the cause.

To the praise of the glory of his grace. To the end that his grace in
adopting us as children may redound to his praise and glory.

In the beloved. In Christ. See [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017); [Col
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013).

[Ephesians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 1:7</span></span>

In whom we have redemption through his blood. (1) We are in bondage to
sin; (2) Christ redeems us; (3) the price paid is his blood. Compare
[Mat 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Mat
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028); [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028); [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013); [Heb
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019). Those redeemed are forgiven.

Which he made to abound. The grace of God (see [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007)). It abounded in all wisdom and
prudence. These attributes, ascribed to God, are fully shown in his
grace and mercy.

Having made known unto us. To all who receive the adoption of Christ.

The mystery of his will. The word "mystery" is used in the sense of
something beyond human comprehension until revealed. This "mystery of
his will" is revealed and is declared in the next verse.

According to his good pleasure. See [Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005).

He now states the mystery which God had revealed.

In the dispensation of the fulness of times. In the last dispensation
which came in the fulness of time; when the times were full, or ripe.
Fulness of time is often applied to the period of Christ's coming. See
[Gal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004); [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010); [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020).

That he might gather together in one all things in Christ. That the
scattered families and tribes of men, both Jews and Gentiles, should all
be gathered and united under one head, Christ. Nay, not only men, but
angels, all things in heaven and earth, all should be united under
Christ as head, so that he should be "all and in all" See [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013). Compare [Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018), and many other passages which
are parallel in thought.

In whom we were made a heritage. See the Revision. We are in Christ made
the heritage of God, or God's part.

Having been predestinated. According to his will he predestinated us,
the church, to the adoption of sons, and to be his heritage.

We should be to the praise of his glory. This is the final result of our
predestination and adoption.

We who first trusted in Christ. Jewish believers like Paul who had the
Christian hope before (see Revision) the Gentiles.

[Ephesians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 1:13</span></span>

In whom ye also trusted. The "we" of [Eph
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012) refers to Jewish believers; the
"ye," to Gentile believers, like most of the Ephesians, who also
trusted, after that they heard, etc. They not only hoped, but believed.
That is, they became believers, by trusting obedience; then they were
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise. After they were converted, the
Holy Spirit was bestowed upon them. It was a "promise" ([Act
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)). The seal was attached to a
letter or legal document to authenticate it to the world. The Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of adoption, was God's authentication to the world
that the converts to Christ were accepted as his children. The presence
of the new Spirit was shown by a new life exhibiting the fruits of the
Spirit ([Gal 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)).

Which is the earnest of our inheritance. The "earnest" money was a small
part of the purchase money given in hand to bind the bargain. Paul says
that the Holy Spirit given to God's children is such earnest of the
inheritance that he will bestow, a small part given now as a proof to
his adopted children.

Until the redemption, etc. Rather, "Unto." This "earnest" given is
looking unto the final and complete redemption from the grave of the
purchased possession, the children of God bought with Christ's blood.

[Ephesians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 1:15</span></span>

After I heard of your faith. This verse has been thought to show that
Paul was not personally acquainted with those to whom he wrote, and
hence that this letter could not be addressed to the Ephesians; but he
used similar language of Philemon, one of his own converts. See Philemon
5. The language is natural if Paul left Ephesus in the spring of A. D.
57, and wrote this letter about the close of A. D. 62 (Conybeare and
Howson), more than five years after. During this period he could only
know of the faith and love of the Ephesians by what he heard.

Cease not to give thanks. Because he heard so favorable a report.

[Ephesians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 1:17</span></span>

That. This introduces the things for which he prayed God in their
behalf.

The Father of glory. The source of all spiritual glory.

Give unto you the Spirit of wisdom. A gift of the Spirit. See notes on
[Co1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008). Divine wisdom works wisdom
in believers.

And revelation. The Spirit that reveals a knowledge of God and spiritual
mysteries. This Spirit would enable them to better comprehend the
"mystery" of God, the divine plans for human redemption in a better
knowledge of him.

The eyes of your understanding being enlightened. "Heart," in the
Revision. The moving of the Spirit gives light. See [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002). This would follow if they were
given "the Spirit of wisdom," etc.

That ye may know. Have a fuller comprehension.

The hope of his calling. The hope of eternal life to which God had
called them.

The riches, etc. See [Col 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027). The
heavenly inheritance given in the saints, rich beyond our conception.
See [Act 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032); [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018).

The exceeding greatness of his power. He prays that they may have
greater knowledge of three things: (1) Of eternal life (the hope); (2)
of the glorious inheritance, and (3) of God's mighty power towards
believers. This mighty power works to raise them from sin, as it worked
to raise Christ from the dead. However the power works, it is the same
power that raised Jesus.

[Ephesians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 1:20</span></span>

Which he wrought in Christ. God's power wrought in Christ in the tomb so
that he came forth living.

At his own right hand. The Scriptures represent Christ at God's right
hand. See [Mar 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019); [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001); [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012); [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); [Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001). His seat there indicates his
glory, and also that the work of redemption has been wrought.

Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion. Above
all the angelic hierarchy. See [Rom
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038); [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022); also [Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010). The same terms are applied to
evil spirits in [Eph 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012). Christ is
above all angels, good or evil.

Above every name. Every person, office and dignity, whether in this
present state, or in that to come.

And hath put all things under his feet. All power was given into his
hands when he was raised from the dead ([Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)). He is the rightful ruler of
all.

And gave him to be the head, etc. He was, when raised from the dead
([Eph 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)), exalted to be the ruler
of all things and made the Head of the church; not merely its ruler, but
the Head of the Body, which derives its life from the Head. Compare [Co1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017); [Co1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027). Note that this exaltation is
after the cross and the resurrection, definitely showing that Christ's
church was not organized until after our Lord's suffering.

Which is his body. His spiritual body, living by union with the Head,
pervaded by the life of Christ.

The fulness of him. The church is a manifestation of the fulness of
Christ, the body filled by his life, who filleth all in all. Filleth all
things with his majesty and power. The object of the last four verses is
to describe Christ's glories. These are: (1) His resurrection; (2) His
Exaltation to God's Right Hand; (3) His Supreme Dominion; (4) His
Headship to the Church, his Body, filled with His Fulness. These glories
all follow his stooping unto the death of the cross. He abased himself
that he might be exalted. "For the joy that was set before him endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the
throne of God."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 2](eph002)

</div>
