<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph005)  [Next](phi000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 6:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Mutual Duties of Children and Parents. Of Servants and
Masters. The Warfare of the Saints. The Armor of God. The Sword of the
Spirit. Constant Prayer Commended. Benediction.

[Ephesians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 6:1</span></span>

Children, obey your parents. The duty of obedience to parents is older
than Christianity; as old as the parental relations.

In the Lord. Unless they require of you things forbidden by the Lord.
Our duty to Christ is superior, and if parents require us to disobey
him, we must still be loyal to him. This passage has been thought to
imply that all children of Christians are baptized in infancy into the
church, but the children addressed are surely not babes, but old enough
to hear and obey the apostolic command, and hence old enough to have
heard and obeyed Christ.

Honor thy father and mother. Both of them, both alike.

Which is the first. The first of the ten commandments which has a
promise attached.

That it may be well with thee. Quoted from [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012). This is the promise. A temporal
blessing was conditioned upon the promise to Israel, and to honor
parents still brings blessing.

[Ephesians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 6:4</span></span>

And ye fathers. Parents have duties as well as children. Two are named.

Provoke not, etc. Passionate and unreasonable rebukes, intemperate
language, or cruel usage, would provoke resentment on the part of
children.

In the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The Revision reads: "Nurture
them in the chastening and admonition of the Lord." Training and
restraining as well as admonition are implied. The Lord holds all
parties responsible for a Christian training of their children.

[Ephesians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 6:5</span></span>

Servants. The term does not refer so much to hired servants, as slaves,
of whom there were many millions in the Roman Empire at that time. These
were of all races, prisoners taken in war, or their children.
Christianity did not violently destroy this relation, but regulated,
mitigated and undermined it by introducing a new element into human life
which would destroy it.

Masters according to the flesh. Earthly masters whose dominion will go
no farther than this world.

With fear and trembling. Not for fear of punishment, but for fear that
the service is not done right.

As unto Christ. Christ will see and reward your fidelity to duty, even
if an earthly master does not.

Not with eye-service. Service that seems faithful when under the eye of
the master, but relaxes when he does not see. Such is the usual service
of slaves, unless they have a high sense of duty.

With good will. With a well disposed mind towards the master.

As to the Lord. It pleases the Lord, whatever may be the relations of
life, for us to do our service well. We may engage in very lowly duties
to the glory of the Lord.

Knowing that whatsoever, etc. If a man renders good service anywhere,
whether he be bond or free, the Lord will see that he is rewarded.

[Ephesians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 6:9</span></span>

And ye masters. The Roman law allowed masters to treat their slaves as
brute beasts, to abuse and even to murder them. But Christianity at once
put Christian masters under restraint.

Do the same things unto them. Act on the same principles towards them,
that the Lord requires of them towards you. There must be mutual good
will and mutual service.

Forbearing threatening. The habit of cruel masters.

Knowing that your Master. That you have a Master who sees you, to whom
your slave is just as dear as you are, and who will hold you to account
if you wrong him.

[Ephesians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 6:10</span></span>

Be strong in the Lord. He comes to his final admonition. They are
engaged in a fearful warfare ([Eph
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)). They need to be equipped for
it. Let them be strong by using the armor, weapons and means which are
named in the next section.

[Ephesians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 6:11</span></span>

Put on the whole armor of God. The ancient soldier was not equipped for
war until he had put on his armor. Paul was at that time a prisoner,
probably living near the prÃ&brvbr;torian camp in Rome, as he was by the
Roman customs under the charge of the prÃ&brvbr;torian prefect. It is
possible that the figure was suggested by the sights he so often
witnessed.

Against the wiles of the devil. The great enemy. The armor was designed
not only to protect, but there were weapons also with which to assail
him.

For we wrestle. Fights then were a hand to hand grapple.

Not against flesh and blood. While flesh and blood may seem to assail
us, the real enemies are evil spiritual powers.

Principalities and powers. These terms designate different rank of evil
spirits. These were fallen angels. In [Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021), the same terms are applied to
the different ranks of holy angels.

Against the rulers of the darkness of this world. Satan is described as
the ruler of this world ([Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031);
[Joh 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011)) and the god of this world ([Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)). He uses for his dominion not
only evil spirits, but wicked men, and his sway is darkness rather than
light.

Spiritual wickedness. See the Revision. It is likely that the meaning is
the same as in [Eph 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002). The high
places, the air, is a dwelling-place and medium of these evil
influences.

Wherefore, take unto you. Seeing you have such enemies, arm! Put on the
whole armor of God.

In the evil day. The day of peril and assault.

To stand. To stand the assault, and to stand victorious, when it is
beaten back.

[Ephesians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 6:14</span></span>

Stand therefore . . . girt. He next gives the armor that must be worn.
The Roman soldier wore a girdle, breast-plate, shoes with iron nails, a
helmet to protect his head, and carried a great shield on his left arm
which was thrown in front of his body. His weapon was the sword. It was
with the sword, not the spear as other nations, that the Romans
conquered the world. And these represent parts of the Christian's
spiritual armor.

About with truth. The girdle kept the armor in place and supported the
sword. So truth holds the Christian armor and supports the sword of the
Spirit.

Breast-plate of righteousness. The breast-plate was over the lungs and
heart. If Christ's righteousness is over our hearts they can hardly
suffer harm.

And your feet shod. Not with shoes, but with the preparation to carry
the gospel of peace, to be a messenger of good tidings ([Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)).

Above all, taking the shield of faith. The Roman oblong shield, four and
a half feet long, covered the whole body, and was a protection of
itself. So faith, the faith that fully trusts in God and never doubts,
is the best of all defenses. It will quench, stop, put out all the
doubts, whisperings and evil suggestions of the wicked.

Fiery darts. These were missiles hurled by the hand, and very dangerous
unless stopped by the shield.

[Ephesians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 6:17</span></span>

Take the helmet of salvation. The Roman soldier wore on his head a
metallic cap to protect it from blows, called a helmet. [Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017) says: "He put a helmet of
salvation on his head." See also [Th1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008). Salvation, the consciousness that
we have a Savior "able to save unto the uttermost," gives the Christian
soldier courage for the conflict.

And the sword of the Spirit. The armor before described is to protect;
the sword to assail. It is the Christian soldier who is to wield the
sword of the Spirit. That is, the Spirit conquers through him. The word
is the word of God. Thus Peter conquered on Pentecost, and Paul in his
labors. Thus always and everywhere. The Christian soldier filled with
the Spirit must "preach the word." See [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012).

[Ephesians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 6:18</span></span>

Praying always. No one can wield the sword of the Spirit rightly without
constant prayer.

In the Spirit. As spiritual men.

For all saints. Our supplications are not to be for ourselves only, but
for all the people of God.

And for me. He especially felt the need of the supplication of his own
spiritual children. He was in bonds and enduring fiery trials. Yet he
does not desire prayers in behalf of his life or comfort, but for the
gospel's sake, that though a prisoner he may still open his mouth
boldly.

Mystery of the gospel. See notes on [Eph
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009) and [Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009).

For which. The gospel.

An ambassador in bonds. As an ambassador is sent to a foreign court to
declare the will of the king, so Paul, though in chains, was Christ's
ambassador sent to Rome to declare the will of his King.

[Ephesians 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 6:21</span></span>

Tychicus. He is named in [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004).
See also [Col 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007); [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012); [Ti2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012). He probably carried this letter,
and could tell the brethren at Ephesus and Asia Minor about Paul's
present condition. He was "a faithful minister," and could not only
satisfy their longing to know of Paul's state, but could comfort them.

[Ephesians 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 6:23</span></span>

As was his custom he closes with a benediction. Compare those of the
preceding Epistles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Introduction](phi000)

</div>
