<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](co2013)  [Next](gal001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS.

This Epistle differs from most of those written by Paul, in that it is
not addressed specially to the church in some great city, but to the
churches throughout a district of the Roman Empire. Galatia will be seen
on any map of the empire in the apostolic period in the interior of the
great peninsula called Asia Minor, which was the theatre of so large a
part of the labors of Paul. The people were of the Gallic stock, had
marched from the Rhine to Greece, and thence into Asia about B. C. 280,
and had conquered a home in the interior of Asia Minor, which henceforth
took a new name from the people (Galli, or Gauls) who made it their
seat. They learned the Greek language, but retained in part their old
tongue and the traits of their race. CÃ&brvbr;sar describes the Gauls as
restless and changeable, characteristics still of the French, and this
epistle shows that the Galatians were not unlike their European kinsmen.

It was on Paul's second great missionary tour, about A. D. 51, that he
in company with Silas and Timothy passed through from Lycaonia in
Phrygia and Galatia, and planted the seeds of the Christian faith ([Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006).md). On his third missionary
journey, about A. D. 54 or 55, he "went over all the country of Galatia
and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples" ([Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023).md). The gospel was received with
great readiness; and the apostle himself welcomed as "an angel of God"
([Gal 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014).md). A part of the converts
were no doubt Jews of whom, according to Josephus, there were many in
Galatia, but the greater part were Gentiles.

The Epistles of Paul were mostly called out by evils in the churches
which he had planted which called for correction. That to the Galatians
is not an exception. At a period not long after his second visit tidings
came to him that excited his alarm and indignation. That restless wing
of the church which clung to Judaism as well as Christianity, which had
troubled the church at Antioch ([Act
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001).md), which had made necessary the
council at Jerusalem (Acts 15:5-30), whose evil work at Corinth we note
in both Epistles, but especially in the second, whose continual warfare
made one of Paul's sorest afflictions "perils among false brethren," had
sent its emissaries into Galatia and had taught that it was needful that
the Gentile Christians be circumcised and submit to the law of Moses in
order to be saved. In order to carry their end they also insisted that
Paul was not a true apostle, or was at least inferior to the original
Twelve who had seen Christ and been instructed by him in person. It is
true that in the Council at Jerusalem they had been defeated, but they
kept up their work, and it required a life long struggle on the part of
Paul to emancipate the church from Judaism. These men seemed to follow
him everywhere, and a considerable part of his epistles is devoted to
correcting the errors due to their influence.

The Galatian letter is an indignant protest against and refutation of
the Judaizing teachers. In the first two chapters he shows that his
apostleship was not derived from the other apostles, but from Christ;
that the gospel that he taught was not revealed to him by them, but by
his Lord; that he had never met them as an inferior, but on an equal
footing; that it was agreed between them that Peter, James and John
would devote their labors to the Circumcision, while he and Barnabas
should go to the Uncircumcision, and that on one occasion it was needful
for him to rebuke and correct Peter on the very question of the proper
attitude towards Gentile Christians.

In the Second Part of the Letter, chapters 3 and 4, he contrasts the
free gospel salvation by a living faith in Christ with the slavish
legalism of the false teachers who would virtually place Moses in the
stead of Christ. The Third Part, the 5th and 6th chapters, is devoted
mainly to practical duties which grow out of the gospel.

The Place where written and the Date of the Epistle can be determined
only approximately. It must have been written after Paul's two visits to
Galatia, the last of which was in A. D. 54 or 55. See note on [Gal
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013.md). It must have been written not
very long after the second visit. See note on [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006.md). There are many points of
resemblance between Epistle and that to the Romans which indicate that
they were written nearly at the same time; since this epistle is the
less elaborate, it was probably written first. There are also points of
resemblance to Second Corinthians which indicate that they belong to the
same period. All these facts point to the last year of the Third
Missionary Journey, or about A. D. 57. As we learn from Acts that this
period was spent in Ephesus, Macedonia and Corinth, it must have been
written at one of these places.

It only remains to say concerning its Genuineness, "that the internal
evidences of the authorship of Paul is so strong that no sane divine has
ever denied or even doubted it" (Schaff). There is no other writer of
the early church who could have written it. It bears the Pauline stamp
in every line.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 1](gal001.md)

</div>
