<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal003)  [Next](gal005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Children, While Minors, Not Free. So the Israelites Under the
Bondage of the Law Until Christ Came. Christ Frees From This Bondage.
The Folly of Gentiles Seeking This Bondage. How the Galatians Had Once
Welcomed the Gospel. The Two Covenants, Hagar, and Sarah, and Their
Significance.

[Galatians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 4:1</span></span>

That the heir, as long as he is a child. In the last verse of chapter 3,
Paul speaks of heirs He now shows why the bondage of the Jewish law
preceded the gospel. Even an heir is not free when a child. It is
needful that he be controlled, even as though he were a servant. He is
kept ([Gal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)) under tutors and
governors. The tutors had charge of his person; the governors were
stewards who managed his estate. These had control until the time
appointed by his father in his will, that he should be free and have
full charge.

Even so we. Both Jews and Gentiles. We were minors, children, not yet
delivered from bondage, since the time had not come appointed by the
Father.

Under the elements of the world. The law of Moses and whatever law might
be diffused among the heathen. The law of Moses was a temporal law,
having temporal promises.

[Galatians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 4:4</span></span>

When the fulness of time. The time appointed by the Father. See [Gal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002).

Made of woman, made under the law. Not only by taking upon himself the
nature of humanity, but also subjecting himself to our legal conditions.

To redeem them that were under the law. Those under bondage need
redemption in order to secure freedom. Paul has shown that those under
the law were in bondage. From this bondage Christ came to redeem us. How
the redemption was wrought is shown in [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013).

That we might receive. This "adoption of sons" is bestowed as a gift. We
cannot have it, and still be in bondage.

Because ye are sons. The spirit is bestowed not to make us sons, but
because we have become sons by the faith. See [Joh
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012).

Crying, Abba, Father. See notes on [Rom
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015). Abba is simply the Syriac for
father. It is found also in [Mar
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#036). This spirit of adoption helps
the son to realize that he is a son, and to look up to God and to
address him, if a Semitic, as Abba; if a Greek as Pater; is an
Anglo-Saxon, as Father.

[Galatians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 4:7</span></span>

Wherefore, thou art no more a servant. Because redeemed, adopted as a
son, having received the spirit of adoption.

If a son, then an heir. Compare [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017). Heirs of a heavenly inheritance.

Howbeit, then. These Galatian brethren had been idolaters, and had
worshiped idols which were not gods at all. At that time they knew not
God, the true God, at all.

But now, after that ye have known God. Having learned the knowledge of
the true God.

Or rather, are known of God. God, himself, had sought them through the
gospel, and had offered them eternal life. They knew God because God had
taken note of them and sent them the gospel.

How turn ye again. How can they, known of God, called from the bondage
of those that are not gods ([Gal 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)),
turn back again to bondage? The bondage referred to is that of the law.
They had been delivered from the bondage of idolatry, but were relapsing
into another bondage.

Weak and beggarly elements. Weak, because they have no spiritual power
to strengthen us; beggarly, because they have no rich promises like the
gospel; elements, because they belong to a rudimentary condition, to an
undeveloped state to the childhood of the race.

[Galatians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 4:10</span></span>

Ye observe days. These are specifications of how they were "turning
back" to the Jewish law. Compare [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016). The days are the Jewish
Sabbaths. The months are the new moons; the times are the Jewish
festivals; the years are the Sabbatical years. In observing these there
was legal bondage to an obsolete system.

In vain. See notes on [Gal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002).

[Galatians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 4:12</span></span>

Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am. Literally, "Become as I am." Come
to my ground.

For I am as ye are. Rather, I become as ye are. I gave up my bondage to
Judaism, the religion of my fathers, and made myself as a Gentile to
Gentiles.

Ye did me no wrong. My complaint against you is not on personal grounds.
You have not wronged me.

Ye know how, through infirmity, etc. The Revision is clearer. Some fact,
not explained to us, but well known to the Galatians, is referred to. It
is implied that some physical weakness caused him to preach in Galatia
the first time. Perhaps he was passing through and was stopped by an
infirmity that prevented him from traveling.

The first time. This implies he had preached there more than once. The
Acts speak of two visits to Galatia.

And my temptation which was in my flesh. The Revision follows the best
manuscripts: "Your temptation, which was in my flesh." His "infirmity"
is meant. It was probably some malady which hindered his work--might
have disfigured him, and been a temptation to the Galatians to ridicule
and despise him. Probably [Co2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)
refers to the same affliction. Both these allusions show that the
infirmity was one that he severely felt. But the Galatians despised not,
nor rejected him on that account, but received him heartily, even as an
angel of God, God's messenger.

Where, then, is the blessedness? They then congratulated themselves that
Paul had come to them with the gospel.

I bear you record. So great was then their joy and sense of obligation,
that they could not do enough to show their gratitude. Why, they would
even have given him their own eyes!--a proverbial expression denoting
very strong devotion.

Am I, therefore, become your enemy, etc. Then, you were so devoted to
me; has the fact that I tell you the truth alienated you? It is probable
that he refers to truth told on his second visit.

[Galatians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 4:17</span></span>

They zealously seek you. The false, Judaizing teachers are meant. They
showed great zeal for them, but they were not seeking their good.

They would exclude you. Exclude you from the great body of Gentile
believers and bind you to their clique.

It is good to be zealously affected. To exhibit zeal and feeling is a
good thing. It was good to show this feeling when he was present with
them. But now it was changed in respect of himself. It was only when he
was present.

My little children. He addresses them very tenderly as their spiritual
parent.

Of whom I travail in birth again. He is more than a father; he travails
for them as a mother. He had done so when they were converted; he did
not now again until they were so matured in Christ that they would cling
to the gospel.

I desire to be present. When present ([Gal
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018)) they had shown warm feeling for
him. He would now that they were face to face.

To change my voice. To speak, not severely, as a letter would sound, but
tenderly.

I stand in doubt. Is perplexed by what he hears, and filled with fears.

[Galatians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 4:21</span></span>

Tell me, ye that desire, etc. What troubled him was their tendency to
accept the obsolete law of Moses. He now addressed all such a question.
Will they hear the law itself?

A bondmaid. Hagar, whose child was Ishmael.

A freewoman. Sarah, whose child was Isaac.

Was born after the flesh. The son of the bondwoman was born in the
ordinary course of nature.

Was by promise. The son of Sarah was a child of promise, born when she
was long past the age of bearing children. See [Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010), [Gen
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014); [Gen
21:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001); [Heb
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011).

Which things are an allegory. Though literally true, the facts had an
allegorical interpretation. The two women and their children were types.

Are two covenants. One, the bondwoman, represents the covenant given at
Sinai, the covenant of bondage. The other, the freewoman, represents the
covenant of Christ, the gospel.

For this Agar is Mount Sinai. Represents Sinai. This Mount Sinai is in
Arabia, the very home of Ishmael and his race. Some also add that one
name of the mountain is Hagar, but this is not certain.

Answereth to. Represents the earthly Jerusalem, under bondage, bondage
to the law herself, and also her children, as Hagar and her child were
under bondage.

But Jerusalem which is above is free. The freewoman and her free child
represent the heavenly Jerusalem, the church of Christ.

Our mother. The mother of those in Christ.

For it is written. [Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001). In that
connection the prophet speaks of the Babylonian bondage, of Abraham and
Sarah, and then of the deliverance, looking onward to the glorious
deliverance in Christ. Chapter 53 is all concerning Christ, and chapter
54 speaks of the great deliverance.

Thou barren. Sarah, the type of the church, long childless.

The desolate. Sarah, or rather the church, that has more children by far
than the children of the old covenant.

Now we, brethren. As Isaac was the child of promise, so are we, Gentile
and Jewish Christians, of the promise to Abraham of a Seed in which all
nations should be blessed.

As he then that was born after the flesh persecuted. See [Gen
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009). Ishmael persecuted Isaac. So the
Jews still persecuted God's spiritual children, the heirs of the
promise. Paul "of the Jews had five times received forty stripes save
one."

Cast out the bondwoman and her son. The allegory will hold good still
further. Abraham, when it was impossible that the two families should
get along in peace, cast out the bondwoman and her son. See [Gen
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010). So, too, the Jews, the children
of the old covenant, had lost the divine favor, and the children of the
promise, whether Jews or Gentiles, made heirs.

So then, brethren. This, then, is the conclusion. We Christians are not
children of the bondwoman, and are not under the bondage of the law. Dr.
Schaff contrasts the two covenants as follows:

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 5](gal005)

</div>
