<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb002)  [Next](heb004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Our Apostle and High Priest. He Above Moses, as the Builder is
Above the House. Moses a Servant in the House; Christ the Son. Lessons
Drawn from Israel Under Moses. How the Israelites Provoked God in the
Wilderness. How He Refused Them Admission to the Rest. Unbelief Caused
Their Fall.

[Hebrews 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 3:1</span></span>

Wherefore. Seeing Christ is so exalted as the first and second chapter
show.

Holy brethren. Christians made holy by being purged of their sins.

Partakers of the heavenly calling. Called by a gospel which came from
heaven and which will lead those who obey it, and thus become partakers,
to heaven.

Consider the Apostle and High Priest. Christ. An apostle is one sent.
Moses, in this sense, was an apostle. Christ was sent from heaven. The
Twelve were sent out by Christ. He is not only Apostle, but High Priest;
superior to both Moses and Aaron combined.

Our profession. More correctly, "Our confession," that is, of all
confessors of Christ. The confession of Peter ([Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016).md) was the confession of primitive
Christians.

Who was faithful. As Moses was faithful to his trust, so has Christ
been.

In all his house. The house of Israel, the nation, the congregation of
God. Israel, a type of the church, is spoken of under the figure of a
building. In [Num 12:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006.md), it is
declared that Moses was faithful in his house.

[Hebrews 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 3:3</span></span>

For this man was counted worthy of more glory. Jesus, the house-builder,
the builder of Israel, as well as of the church, the Divine Savior, is
more glorious than Moses, a member of the house of Israel, even as the
builder of the house is superior to the house.

Every house is builded by some one. The word man does not occur in the
Greek. The meaning is "every house has a builder, but the Builder of all
things is God." He built the house of Israel, but Christ is God manifest
to us, the Divine personality at work in human redemption; hence, the
builder of the typical church, as well as of the antitype.

Moses was faithful, etc. See [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007.md).

As a servant. Not as the builder, or as the master, but as a waiting man
in the house.

For a testimony. The whole ministry of Moses was a "testimony" to what
would follow after, a shadow of what was to come. This will be brought
out more fully in subsequent chapters.

But Christ as a son. Moses was a waiting man in the Lord's house, but
Christ, the Son, is Lord over the house, his own church.

Whose house we are. "Ye are God's building" ([Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009).md); "My church" ([Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018).md).

If we hold fast the confidence. We Christians, are Christ's house, and
will continue to be Christ's house, if we hold fast, etc. The
possibility of falling away, as Israelites fell away from God's house of
Israel, is pointed out in the following verses.

[Hebrews 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 3:7</span></span>

Wherefore. Take warning from the fate of Israel.

As the Holy Ghost saith. The words quoted are found in [Psa
95:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007.md). David there exhorts his
brethren to learn a lesson from Israel in the wilderness, and not to
provoke God.

To-day if you will hear his voice. At that very time. So to-day, and
ever, God wishes us to hear him, to-day, not to-morrow.

Harden not your hearts. To harden the heart is to reach such a state
that God's voice makes no impression.

As in the provocation. The Hebrew of the Psalm says Like Meribah. The
meaning is "Harden not your hearts as our fathers did at Meribah." See
the account in [Exo 17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001.md). See also
[Num 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#014.md), where Kadesh Meribah is
named. Both may be referred to.

Day of temptation. Day of trial.

When your fathers tempted me, proved me. Tempted me by proving me.
Seeing how much murmuring and sin I would endure.

Saw my works forty years. All his mighty manifestations in their behalf
during all the period of their sojourn in the wilderness.

Wherefore I was grieved. The word more nearly means "disgusted."

They do alway err. Not simply by making mistakes, but their hearts are
wrong.

So I sware in my wrath. A figure of speech which means that God,
indignant at their unbelief and sin, declared they should not enter
Canaan. See Num. 14:20-35.

Shall not enter my rest. Canaan, while the Israelites were yet in
bondage, was promised as a land of rest. On the weary journey in the
wilderness it was still looked to as the rest. To prohibit from entering
the rest was then to prohibit from entering Canaan. It is, however, a
type of heaven, the land of eternal rest. Hence, the warnings that are
pointed out in the next verses.

[Hebrews 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 3:12</span></span>

Take heed . . . lest, etc. They fell from unbelief, which led them to
depart from God. Take heed, lest you Hebrew Christians seeking the
heavenly rest, should so fall.

But exhort one another daily. Continually stir each other to duty, lest
you be hardened against God's voice by the deceitfulness of sin. How sin
does deceive us by making false promises of happiness and of safety.

Partakers of Christ. In fellowship with Christ, partakers of his
benefits and glory.

If we hold, etc. If we persevere to the end. The Israelites started
well, but did not persevere. The only final perseverance of the saints
is to persevere until the work of life is over.

While it is said. The thought and connection are, "You are partakers of
Christ, if you remain steadfast, and listen to the exhortation, To-day
if ye will, etc."

For some, when they had heard, did provoke. Some in the wilderness heard
God, but refused to listen, and did not provoke him.

Howbeit not all. There were a few exceptions; Joshua and Caleb, Eliezer,
and perhaps some more of the Levites.

With whom was he grieved forty years? With what sort of persons? The
answer is, with them that sinned, all of whose bodies were left in the
wilderness.

To whom sware he? etc. It was to them who sinned because of their
distrust of God. See [Num 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#020.md).

So we see . . . because of unbelief. It was unbelief that kept them out
of Canaan. Hence, the lesson which is given more fully in the next
chapter. These warnings show us that the Hebrew Christians addressed
were subjected to trials, and some of them in danger of apostasy,
falling away through unbelief. Hence, the fate of Israel in the
wilderness is pointed out. If unbelief shut out the Israelites from the
rest in Canaan, unbelief will shut the gates of heavenly rest to those
who have started on the way.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 4](heb004.md)

</div>
