<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb000)  [Next](heb002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--The Message Spoken by the Son. The Glory of the Son. His
Superiority to the Angels.

[Hebrews 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 1:1</span></span>

God, who. Instead of the introductory greetings usual in an Epistle, the
apostle plunges into the midst of his subject by a grand exordium.

At sundry times. Rather, "In divers portions," as in the Revision. The
Old Testament was give in "portions," not all at once, and at wide
intervals.

Spoke. Though prophets might be chosen as the instruments, the message
was that of God. While God spoke through them, the prophets were only
men.

Hath in these last days. "At the end of these days" (Revision). At the
end of the Jewish dispensation.

Spoken unto us by his Son. "Last of all he sent his Son." The importance
of the message is shown by the messenger. No longer an inspired prophet,
but, instead, the Son of God is the speaker.

Whom he hath appointed heir of all things. The Father delivered all
things into the hands of the Son ([Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md); [Joh
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010).md). "The heir is lord of all"
([Gal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001).md).

By whom also he made the worlds. Through his agency or instrumentality.
Christ, the Logos, is represented as God's medium in creation. See note
on [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md).

Who being the brightness of his glory. A manifestation of the glory of
God.

The very image of his substance. In Christ we have a tangible, visible
representation of the substance of God. We see God in him. "He that hath
seen me hath seen the Father" ([Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009).md).

By the word of his power. The Son hath all power, and his power was
always manifested by his word. He spoke and it was done, whether it was
to still the winds or to raise the dead. So in creation, the word was
spoken and it was done.

When he had by himself purged our sins. Made an atonement for them.

Sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Of God. The right
hand was always the place of honor. See note on [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md).

Having become so much better. Superior to the angels. His superiority is
shown in the greater name, which he received by inheritance; that of the
Son. Our Savior has other names, but this name only is received by
inheritance. This superiority is shown by the manner in which God
addresses the Son. The apostle particularly shows Christ's superiority
to the angels, because through angels the Jewish law was given. See [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053.md); [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md); [Heb
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003.md).

[Hebrews 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 1:5</span></span>

For to which of the angels. To none of them did he ever use such
language as follows. The style in which the Father addresses Christ
shows his superiority to the angels.

Thou art my Son. See [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md). The
second Psalm was regarded by the Jews as a prophecy of the Messiah.

This day have I begotten thee. What day is referred to in the prophecy?
[Act 13:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032.md) answers the question by
quoting this very passage and declaring that it was fulfilled in the
resurrection of Christ from the dead. He was born from the dead and God,
who raised him, thus demonstrated that he was his Son.

I will be to him a Father, etc. Quoted from [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014.md). They were spoken originally of
David's son Solomon, chosen to be king after him, but he was in a
certain sense a type of Christ. Expression "Son of David," "Seed of
David," while applicable to Solomon, pre-eminently refers to Christ.

When he again bringeth the first born into the world. Macknight thinks
that Christ was brought into the world the first time when he was born
at Bethlehem; that the time referred to here is when he comes again to
judge the world. Whatever the time referred to, [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007.md) shows his superiority to the
angels for it says, "Let all the angels of God worship him." But of the
angels he saith. The quotations made show how God speaks to and of the
Son, but quite different are the words used of the angels.

He maketh his angels spirits. In the Revision we have "winds" instead of
"spirits." The Greek word is Pneumata, a word which uniformly in the New
Testament means spirit, and spirits in the plural, and I believe that
"spirits" is the better rendering. The passage is quoted from [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004.md) and means that he maketh spirits
his messengers, or angels, and flaming ones (the burning seraphs) his
ministers. It is incongruous with the thought to introduce into the
passage winds and lightnings, natural phenomena, when the theme is the
status of angel intelligences.

But to the son. The quotation is from [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006.md).

Thy throne, O God. Then the Son has an eternal throne, and is divine.

The sceptre, etc. He then has a kingdom, and rules it with a righteous
scepter. The point is that he is a Divine King with an eternal throne.

Therefore God, even thy God, etc. Because of the holiness of the Son,
God the Father hath anointed him. The exaltation of the Son cometh from
the Father. He is the Anointed, and above all other anointed kings,
priests, and prophets.

And thou Lord in the beginning. From [Psa
102:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025.md). A part of the preceding
part of the Psalm speaks of the Messiah's Kingdom, and hence these
verses may well apply to the Messiah, especially as they harmonize with
what we are told elsewhere of his glory. See notes on [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md).

They shall perish. All created things shall grow old and pass away.

As a vesture shalt thou fold them up. The heavens shall be rolled away.
They are rolled up to be put away like a worn out garment.

But thou art the same. The Son is eternal, the same yesterday, to-day
and forever.

[Hebrews 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 1:13</span></span>

Sit thou on my right hand. Quoted from [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md).

Make thy enemies thy footstool. The custom is alluded to of putting the
feet on the necks of conquered enemies. See [Jos
10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024.md). This passage is applied to
Christ in [Act 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#035.md), and in [Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025.md).

Are they not all ministering spirits? The real office of the angels is
indicated. It is to give service in working out the plans of God for the
salvation of the elect. The passage does not teach that each heir of
salvation has a guardian angel, but that the angels do service in
working out the Divine plans in behalf of the saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 2](heb002.md)

</div>
