<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb011)  [Next](heb013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 12:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--How to Run the Christian Race. Enduring Affliction. The Lord's
Chastisement of Children. The Lesson from the Case of Esau. The Terrors
of Sinai Contrasted with the Gospel. Paying Heed to the Gospel.

[Hebrews 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 12:1</span></span>

So great a cloud of witnesses. The vast cloud of witnesses named in
chapter 11, who testify by their lives to the power of faith.

Let us lay aside every weight. Every hindrance. The figure used is that
of the Greek foot races in the games then practiced in every province of
the Roman Empire, including Palestine. Before running the runner laid
off every weight.

And the sin which doth so easily beset us. Our besetting sin, whatever
it may be. In the case of these Hebrew Christians the context shows that
the besetting sin was unbelief.

Let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Run the
Christian race with steadfast perseverance.

Looking unto Jesus. In running, Jesus should be constantly regarded as
the example.

Finisher of the faith. Not our faith, but the faith in the Greek. The
Gospel, which rests upon faith, is meant rather than the individual
faith of the saint. Jesus is its author and perfected it. He is the
exemplar of all who live by faith. Hence we should look to him.

For the joy that was set before him. The joy of saving men and of
sitting at God's right hand.

Endured the cross. Not only its pain, but its shame. It was in that age
the most ignominious of deaths.

Set down at the right hand, etc. In the place of heavenly honor.

Consider him. When you become faint and discouraged by persecution,
consider what Christ suffered from sinners.

Ye have not yet resisted unto blood. Have not been persecuted unto
death.

[Hebrews 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 12:5</span></span>

Ye have forgotten the exhortation, etc. Surely they must have forgotten,
or they would bear their tribulations more cheerfully.

My son, despise not, etc. This is quoted from [Job
5:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017). See also [Sa2
6:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007). The thought is, Do not murmur
at God's reproofs and chastenings.

Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth. The chastening hand does not show
the anger of God but his love. Every child is chastened and reproved for
its good.

If ye endure chastening. If you are called on to suffer, it shows that
God is treating you as his children.

If ye be without chastisement. Instead of that being a fact for
congratulation it only shows that God does not regard you as children.
You may call yourselves God's children, but you are not true sons.

We have had fathers . . . which corrected us. Every judicious father
corrects his children in some way. Shall we not then submit cheerfully
to the heavenly Father's correction?

Father of spirits. Our earthly parents are the parents of our bodies;
God is the creator of all spirits, and the author of our spiritual life.
When we are born of the Spirit our new life is due to God and we are
begotten as his children.

They chastened us. For a little while earthly parents corrected as it
pleased them, but God ever watches us that we may be made holy.

Now no chastening, etc. It is never pleasant to endure the chastening,
but it afterwards benefits by the holier life it insures. In sorrow we
naturally cling closer to God.

[Hebrews 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 12:12</span></span>

Lift up the hands. See [Job 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003). The
thought is, shake off all weariness, all lameness, and push right on.

[Hebrews 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 12:14</span></span>

Follow peace with all. Live peaceful lives.

And holiness. Pure and sinless lives.

Without which no man, etc. Without a holy life no one shall be in
fellowship with God.

To see the Lord is to realize his presence with us. See [Mat
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008).

Looking diligently. Being careful that no one lags behind and falls by
the way so as not to reach the final reward.

Lest any root of bitterness. Any bitter opposition, or element of
disturbance causing members to sin.

Lest there be any fornicator. Of course such a sinner would not live the
life of holiness enjoined.

Or profane person. A worldly person who profanes holy privileges by
placing on them a worldly estimate.

Like Esau. See [Gen 25:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027). He
illustrates what is meant by a profane person. For a savory meal he
bartered away a birthright bestowed by God. So any professing Christian
who would sell his heavenly birthright for worldly advantages would be a
profane person.

When he would have inherited the blessing. See [Gen
27:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#031). The spiritual blessing that
belonged to the birthright was denied to Esau though he wept over the
disappointment.

No place of repentance. No way to correct the mistake and to secure the
blessing. It was too late for this, since he had forfeited his
birthright. The apostle holds up his case as a warning example.

[Hebrews 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 12:18</span></span>

For ye are not come unto the mount, etc. Ye should be diligent "for,"
etc. Mount Sinai and the inauguration of the law are described. It was a
mountain that could be touched, a mountain of earth. It burned on that
occasion with fire. See [Exo 19:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#012).

And the sound of a trumpet ([Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)). The trumpet blast preceded the
giving of the law.

The voice of words. The voice of God proclaiming the Ten Commandments.

They . . . entreated. Filled with terror at the awful manifestation they
entreated that God speak no more directly to them. ([Exo
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019).)

For they could not endure. The command and penalty of [Exo
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#012), added to their terror.

Moses said. Even Moses was filled with fearful awe ([Exo
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019)).

[Hebrews 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 12:22</span></span>

Ye are come unto Mount Zion. The law was given at Sinai; the Gospel was
to go forth from Mount Zion; that is, from Jerusalem. See [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). It is used as a type or symbol
of the kingdom of heaven.

The heavenly Jerusalem. This heavenly city is where our Lord dwells and
is our eternal home. In coming to Christ we have come into the covenant
which gives us the right to a place in that city.

An innumerable company of angels. The angels of heaven.

General assembly and church, etc. The universal church of Christ. The
first born son in Israel inherited the birthright, but all the saints
have the birthright and hence are called the first born. They are all
enrolled, not on earthly registers, but their names are written in
heaven.

To God the Judge of all, who will inflict judgment in behalf of the
persecuted church.

The spirits of just men made perfect. To the fellowship of all the
sainted dead now perfected above.

To Jesus. To fellowship with Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant as
Moses was of the Old.

To the blood of sprinkling. To Christ's atoning blood by which our
hearts are "sprinkled from an evil conscience."

That speaketh better things than that of Abel. Abel's blood cried for
vengeance; Christ's pleads for mercy.

[Hebrews 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 12:25</span></span>

See that ye refuse not. The whole Old Testament shows that those who
refused to listen to God's message delivered by men did not escape. How
can those escape then who refuse to listen to God's own Son?

Whose voice then shook the earth. At Sinai ([Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)).

But now he hath promised. See [Hag
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006), which declares the removal of the
heavens and earth at Christ's coming.

And this word, Yet once more. This means, says the apostle, that there
is only one more shaking after the time of Haggai. It is not a material,
but moral and spiritual event. It began when Christ came and will
continue until all that is temporal or erroneous be removed and only the
eternal remains. Among the things removed is the covenant of Sinai.

Wherefore we, etc. We Christians have received a kingdom which cannot be
shaken and which is eternal. Hence should serve God with reverence and
godly fear since we are called to so high an estate.

For our God is a consuming fire. Because, while God is very merciful and
loving, he will not overlook willful disobedience, but will destroy
those who despise his commandments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 13](heb013)

</div>
