<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](plm001)  [Next](heb001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.

That this Epistle is entitled to a place in the New Testament Scriptures
has been discussed but little in comparison with the question of its
authorship. It is quoted at large by Clement of Rome before the close of
the first century, by Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and
others in the second century, is found in the Versions of the second
century, is named in the Ancient Canons, and is affirmed to be a part of
the Holy Scriptures by the Council of Antioch (A. D. 269) and of Nice
(A. D. 325); as well as by the later councils.

On the other hand, both the ancient and modern church have been divided
concerning the writer to whom it is to be ascribed. Contrary to the
usual custom the writer's name is not given in the opening verses, nor
in the closing salutations. It differs somewhat in style from any other
portion of the New Testament. Some have thought it improbable that Paul,
the Apostle to the Gentiles, should have addressed an Epistle to the
Hebrews; for these, and perhaps other reasons, many devout critics have
held that it was written by Barnabas, or by Apollos, or by Luke, and
even Clement of Rome has been named as the author. In the ancient church
the East with one consent declared in favor of Paul, while the West
asserted that it belonged to some other writer, though in modern times
the Latin Church has decided the question by the weight of infallibility
in favor of the apostle to the Gentiles. Luther and Calvin both held
that it was not Pauline, and have been followed by many moderns.

The limits of this work will not allow details concerning this
discussion, and I will content myself with briefly stating reasons why I
think it is to be ascribed to Paul. (1) There is no proof whatever, of
any kind, that any one else was the author. There is only conjecture.
(2) Paul is named as the author in the second century by Christian
Fathers who were the disciples of men who had sat at the feet of the
apostles. (3) The greatest of the Ante-Nicene Fathers who make mention
of its authorship affirm that it was written by Paul. (4) It was written
in Paul's lifetime, for the temple was evidently still standing; it was
written by a friend of Timothy, written from Italy, and evidently by one
who was a prisoner. (5) The salutation, or benediction with which it
closes is found in the other thirteen epistles of Paul, and is found in
the New Testament epistles of no other writer. Paul alone invokes grace
upon those whom he addresses as his farewell words. (6) The second
Epistle of Peter, an Epistle evidently written to Hebrews, declares that
Paul had written an Epistle to them. "As our beloved brother Paul,
according to the wisdom given to him hath written unto you; as also in
all his Epistles." This refers to some particular letter, sent to the
same persons whom Peter was addressing, and hence there seems to be
little doubt that there existed, before Peter died, an Epistle to the
Hebrews written by Paul. (7) The argument is thoroughly Pauline. There
can be no doubt, even if the language is not Paul's, that he inspired
the thoughts. Hence, we are justified in concluding that the Epistle is
really one of Paul's, even if his thoughts are in part clothed in the
language of another writer.

It is addressed to HEBREWS; evidently Hebrew Christians; probably not so
much those of Jerusalem as the "Dispersion," the multitudes of Jewish
Christians in Gentile lands. It shows that those addressed were
persecuted, were in danger of being tempted to fall away, that they had
not yet shed their blood for Christ, and, in order to strengthen them,
the superiority of Christianity to Judaism is demonstrated by showing
the superlative excellence of Christ. He is (1) superior to the
prophets; (2) superior to the angels; (3) superior to Moses. (4) His
priesthood is superior to that of Aaron, being a priest after the order
of Melchizedek. (5) Then the superiority of the New Covenant to the Old
is shown, being a better covenant, based upon better promises. This is
shown in Chs. 8, 9, 10, and then follows in the remaining chapters an
exhortation to steadfastness, based upon faith and strengthened by
examples of the heroes of the faith.

It is evident from the closing words, whatever may have been the
writer's reasons for not incorporating his name in the Epistle, that he
was well known to those addressed. He asks their prayers, prays for
them, speaks of visiting them with Timothy, and closes with the usual
Pauline farewell benediction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 1](heb001)

</div>
