<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb010)  [Next](heb012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 11:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Faith Explained. The Faith of the Elders. Remarkable Examples
of Ancient Faith. All Seeking for a Better Country. The Victories of
Faith. The Sufferings Endured by Faith. Christians Exhorted to Follow
These Glorious Examples.

[Hebrews 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 11:1</span></span>

Faith is the substance. The old meaning of substance, as well as of
Hupostasis, the Greek word here used, is "stand under," that is to be a
foundation. Faith is the foundation on which all our hopes for the
future are built.

The evidence. Rather, the conviction or persuasion of things not seen.
Without faith we would be limited to the very narrow world comprehended
by the senses.

For by it the elders, etc. The ancient men of God, through faith, so
lived, that they have obtained a good name.

Through faith we understand, etc. The creation of the world is among
"the things not seen," and all our knowledge of it rests upon our faith
in the word of God. Indeed, our knowledge of all past history depends
upon faith.

[Hebrews 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 11:4</span></span>

Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain. See the
account of [Gen 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001). Abel's faith
was probably shown in offering just such a sacrifice as the Lord
demanded, while Cain made an offering according to his own ideas.

Obtained witness. In some way the Lord testified his approval of Abel's
sacrifice, and showed his disapproval of Cain's, perhaps by sending fire
to consume Abel's.

By it. By his faith. His faith speaks to all ages.

By faith Enoch was translated. See [Gen
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024); also Jude 14. His faithfulness
was rewarded by a translation to heaven without first becoming a victim
of death.

Had this testimony. The testimony is that he "walked with God," and God
took him, because he was pleased with him.

But without faith it is impossible, etc. Man cannot please God without
because in unbelief he cannot do what is pleasing to God. To please God
we must come to him in the appointed ways, but this cannot be done
without belief in his existence and trust in his blessings.

By faith Noah. See [Gen 6:13-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013). When
he was divinely warned of a coming deluge he believed it, simply upon
the word of God. Now observe how his faith acted. (1) He was moved by
fear; (2) he prepared the ark as God had directed. His faith moved him
to obedience.

Condemned the world. The example of his faith was a rebuke to all who
were not moved by it. The man who gives heed to God by his conduct
condemns those who refuse to heed him.

Became heir. It was by the obedience of faith ([Rom
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)) that he became an heir of the
blessings vouchsafed to those who are counted righteous through faith.
See [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).

[Hebrews 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 11:8</span></span>

By faith Abraham. See [Gen 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031); [Gen
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001). While in Ur of the Chaldees he
was commanded to go where he should be led. In obedience to this call he
obeyed through faith, a striking example of the action of faith.

By faith he sojourned in the land of promise. He was a stranger in the
land promised to him and his seed, dwelling as did Isaac and Jacob, in
tents, yet trusting the promise of God.

Heirs . . . of the same promise. See [Gen
26:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003); [Gen
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#004), [Gen
27:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#013).

For he looked for a city which hath foundations. Not only for a
permanent home for his seed in Canaan, but for a home above in the
eternal city, the New Jerusalem.

Builder and maker. Architect and maker. God not only projected the plans
of the eternal city but has executed them.

Faith also Sarah. See [Gen 17:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015);
[Gen 18:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#011); [Gen
21:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001). Far beyond the years of child
bearing, yet by faith she was give natural strength to bear the child of
promise. She was about ninety years old.

Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead. From an old
man, a hundred years old, whose reproductive powers were dead, a people.

As the stars of the sky in multitude. See [Deu
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#010). These figures are used to
express a vast multitude.

[Hebrews 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 11:13</span></span>

These all died in faith. All the patriarchs named. They died without the
fulfillment of the promises, either those of a temporal possession or of
an innumerable seed.

Having seen them afar off. They beheld them in the future by faith.

Confessed. By their whole lives that they were pilgrims. They had no
fixed home and were waiting for a country.

They that say such things. Who confess that they are pilgrims.

Seek a country. This confession shows that they are seeking a country
somewhere and have not yet found it.

If they had been mindful, etc. They could have returned to their old
home in Ur of the Chaldees, if they had chosen, but though homeless in a
strange land they had faith in a future home.

Desire a better country. They desired a country better than Chaldea,
better even than Canaan. They had a faith which looked for a heavenly
country.

[Hebrews 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 11:17</span></span>

Abraham, when he was tried. See [Gen
22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001).

Offered up his only begotten son. Abraham stands as the great Old
Testament example of faith, "the Father of the faithful," the man "whose
faith was counted for righteousness." Hence his faith was tried by the
sternest test of any Man of God on record, not that God might be certain
of his faith, but that all his spiritual children should profit by his
example. Note: (1) Isaac was the only child of his marriage; (2) he was
the child of promise and by grace; (3) he was the heir, not only of
Abraham but of all God's promises to Abraham. Yet Abraham was told to
offer him. It was God's command. What a trial of faith! Yet, he
believed, though he would not see how, that God would keep his promises,
and that in "Isaac his seed should be called," even though God raised
him from the dead. Hence in faith he obeyed, and his faith was
gloriously rewarded. The lesson for us is implicit obedience to God's
command and trust in his promises. Nothing less is a demonstration of
faith.

Received him in a figure. As one who in his mind had been sacrificed. It
was from the altar of sacrifice that he received him back.

[Hebrews 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 11:20</span></span>

By faith Isaac blessed, etc. See [Gen
27:26-40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#026); [Gen
28:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#002). In the blessing there are
prophecies of their future history.

By faith Jacob, when he was dying. See [Gen
48:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#008). In his blessing he foresaw
that both Ephraim and Manasseh would be tribes of Israel, and that the
younger would be the ancestor of the greater tribe.

Leaning upon the top of his staff ([Gen
47:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#031)). The Hebrew word as originally
written may mean either staff or bed, that on which one rests. In our
English version of Genesis "bed" has been preferred. The Septuagint,
followed here, says "staff." It means that the sick old man raised from
his couch and leaned his weight on his staff while conferring the
blessing.

By faith Joseph. See [Gen 50:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024). By
faith he looked forward to the children of Israel going up to Canaan for
a home, and charged that his body should be carried up. This charge was
faithfully fulfilled. See [Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032).

[Hebrews 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 11:23</span></span>

By faith Moses. See [Exo 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002); [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020). Through faith in God the parents
were led to disobey the king's cruel edict, and to hide the child.

A proper child. A promising child.

Moses . . . refused to be called, etc. He had faith in God's promises,
and hence forsook his honored position, for the sake of his people.

Choosing rather. There were honor, wealth and pleasure in the palace,
but affliction with the enslaved nation. He chose the latter by faith.

For a season. The pleasures of sin are transient.

Esteeming the reproach of Christ. Any reproach endured through faith in
the promises of which Christ was the center and sum, was called the
reproach of Christ. This reproach, though men might shrink from it, was
really of more value permanently than the treasures of Egypt, because he
looked forward to the recompense, the heavenly blessings.

By faith he forsook Egypt. The Exodus was all an achievement of faith.
It was faith that made Moses disdain the king's wrath.

He endured, as seeing him who is invisible. The unseen God was present
with him by faith and his support gave strength to endure all.

[Hebrews 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 11:28</span></span>

Through faith he kept the passover (Exo. 12:3-30). He kept it because
God commanded and he believed all God promised.

The sprinkling of blood. The blood of the lamb sprinkled on the door
posts. He not only believed that this would protect Israel's first born,
but his faith went beyond the type to the Lamb of God.

By faith they passed through the Red Sea. See [Exo
14:13-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013). In obedience to God's
command they marched into the sea and "were baptized unto Moses in the
cloud and in the sea" ([Co1 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)).

By faith the walls of Jericho fell. See [Jos
6:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008).

By faith the harlot Rahab. See Jos. 2:1-22.

[Hebrews 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">heb 11:32</span></span>

What shall we more say? All these cases are examples of heroic deeds and
holy lives of faith. And the Scriptures are full of them; of such
examples as Gideon ([Jdg 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011)); Barak
([Jdg 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001)); Samson ([Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)); Jephthae ([Jdg
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)); of David also ([Sa1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)); Samuel ([Sa1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020)); The prophets. Many of these
were illustrious examples of the power of faith.

Who through faith subdued kingdoms. Some of those named subdued
kingdoms, as Barak, Gideon, David.

Obtained promises. Promises were made to many of the worthies named.

Stopped the mouths of lions. The case of Daniel is the most remarkable.
See [Dan 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020).

Quenched the violence of fire. See the case of "the Hebrew children" in
[Dan 3:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019).

Escaped the edge of the sword. See [Sa1
18:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010).

Women received their dead raised to life again. The widow of Zarephath
([Kg1 17:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)) and the Shunammite
(2Ki. 4:18-37) are examples.

Others were tortured. This was especially true in the terrible
persecutions recorded in the Book of Maccabees.

A better resurrection. They preferred to suffer in hope of the
resurrection to eternal life.

Others had trial of, etc. This was true of many persecutions recorded in
Jewish history.

They were stoned. See [Kg1 21:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#010);
[Ch2 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#021).

Sawn asunder. The Talmud says that this was Isaiah's fate.

Of whom the world was not worthy. When it rejects the good it shows its
unworthiness.

They wandered in deserts. To hide from persecutors.

[Hebrews 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">heb 11:39</span></span>

And these all, having obtained a good report through faith. By the power
of faith they lived holy and heroic lives, but all died without having
seen the fulfillment of the promise of a Deliverer.

God having provided some better thing for us. The new and better
covenant, the gospel, the realization of the promise made to Abraham.

That they without us should not be made perfect. That they and we
together might be made complete in the city whose builder and maker is
God. The full fruition, the being made complete (perfect) belongs to the
heavenly state. All these ancient heroes, who died not having received
the promise, need the realization of the promise in Christ to make them
perfect; by that promise we also are saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 12](heb012)

</div>
