<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam002)  [Next](jam004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Aspiring to Teachership. The Power of the Tongue. Its
Untamable Nature. Its Contradictory Uses. Wisdom Shown in Its Proper
Control. The Wisdom from Above Described.

[James 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 3:1</span></span>

Be not many masters. Do not many of you seek to be teachers. The office
of public teaching in the church is meant.

Shall receive the greater condemnation. Those who profess to teach
others will be judged more strictly than those of humbler professions.
Of those who have much, much is required. See [Mat
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001). A lesson is to be given on the
tongue. He who teaches will be held strictly to account for the manner
in which he uses it.

For in many things. All are liable to stumble and make mistakes. These
can hardly be excused in the teacher.

Same is a perfect man. He who controls his tongue gives proof of his
ability to maintain entire self control.

[James 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 3:3</span></span>

We put bits. The word bridle ([Jam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)) suggests a figure. The bridle bit
controls the whole horse.

Behold also the ships. These are controlled by so small a thing as the
helm.

Governor. Helmsman. James abounds in the sea figures. See [Jam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006).

So the tongue. Though so small it can control the body like a bridle, or
the helm of a ship. It is a power.

Boasteth great things. Claims great powers.

How great a matter . . . fire. As a spark may burn a house, a little
thing like the tongue may stir up great trouble.

[James 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 3:6</span></span>

The tongue is a fire. It will kindle up anger. A word often causes a
war.

A world of iniquity. It can stir up a world of sinfulness. The tongue
moves man and he makes the world a world of sin.

It defileth the whole body. Leads all the body into sin.

Setteth on fire the course of nature. Literally, "wheel of nature." The
idea is probably "putteth nature in a blaze," referring to the wars and
commotions due to its influence.

Set on fire of hell. It is often inspired by hell itself. A bad tongue
is the organ of the devil.

Every kind of beasts. "Every nature of beasts," literally. Four orders
are named: beasts, or quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, in the Greek
"creeping things," and fishes, or "things in the sea." All of these have
been subjected and controlled.

But the tongue can no man tame. Man has never tamed this organ as a
whole. Some may have ruled their own, but the organ itself still does
its evil work in the world.

It is an unruly evil. Not only an evil, but unruly. Generally used.

Full of deadly poison. Often charged with malice, envy, anger, slander,
etc.

[James 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 3:9</span></span>

Therewith bless we God. Its opposite uses are shown. We use it to pray
and to bless God, and, sometimes, the same tongue will be used to curse
his creatures. James rebuked evils that he had observed.

Out of the same mouth. These utterly inconsistent things come out of the
same mouth.

Doth a fountain. In nature such incongruity is not shown. A fountain
does not give out two kinds of waters.

Can the fig tree. Neither does a tree bear two opposite kinds of fruits.
Nor should the mouth bear blessing and cursing, good and evil.

[James 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 3:13</span></span>

Who is a wise man? Discreet and well informed? It must be shown in
conversation, that is, in life, both words and deeds, meekness of
wisdom. True wisdom will not speak boastfully.

Glory not. If there is bitterness in the heart, let there be no boasting
of your goodness. That would be to lie against the truth.

This wisdom. Wisdom (not real wisdom but false) which gives rise to envy
and strife is not from heaven. It is earthly, of the passions, of the
devil, not of God.

For where, etc. Where these exist in the heart every evil work will
follow.

[James 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 3:17</span></span>

But the wisdom that is from above. The divine wisdom imparted by
communion with God is put in contrast with the false, sensual wisdom
named in [Jam 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#015). It is first pure.
The other is sensual; this is pure.

Then peaceable. The other is full of strife, this seeks for peace.

Gentle. Not too rigid and exacting.

Easy to be entreated. Not obstinate, but capable of persuasion.

Full of mercy. Not unforgiving and unkind.

Good fruits. The other shows evil works; heavenly wisdom is full of good
fruits.

Without partiality. Not a respecter of persons.

Without hypocrisy. Sincere.

The fruit of righteousness. This wisdom not only bears righteousness as
a fruit but sows this fruit as seed to produce peace.

Them that make peace. These sowers are peacemakers. See [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009). Sowing righteousness makes peace,
because wrong is the fruitful mother of strife.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 4](jam004)

</div>
