<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam003)  [Next](jam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Strifes from the War of Passions. Fornication with the World.
Seeking the Grace of God. Humbling Ourselves Before the Lord. Evil
Speaking of Brethren. The Uncertainties of this Life.

[James 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 4:1</span></span>

Whence come wars and fightings? Peace has been spoken at close of
chapter 3, but the world is full of strife. Whence is it? James shows it
is due to human passions.

Among you? James was so Jewish, though a Christian, that sometimes he
looked beyond the church to his fleshly brethren. He here seems to
address them like another Amos, or Jeremiah.

Even of your own lusts. They are due to insatiate desires.

Ye lust, and have not. This inordinate desire unsatisfied leads to
murder, or to hatred and envy, which are murder in embryo. Even then not
obtaining they fight and war in order to satisfy their greed. Still they
are not satisfied. They should have humbly gone to God with their
reasonable requests, but the lustful cannot truly pray.

Ye ask, and receive not. Some even have prayed for the things which
would satisfy their lusts, but God hears not such prayers.

[James 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 4:4</span></span>

Ye adulteresses. Adulterous spouses of Christ who commit fornication
with the world. It is spiritual adultery that is meant.

The friendship of the world. Since the prince of this world is opposed
to Christ and the spirit of the world is also opposed, one cannot love
the ways of the world and love God also. "Ye cannot serve God and
mammon" ([Mat 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)).

That the scripture saith in vain The reference is to Deut., chapter 32,
where God's love and jealousy of his people are described.

Long unto envying. Long for our love even to the envy of the worldly
objects which have secured it. The Revision suggests the idea, which
harmonizes with the thought in [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004). A freer translation will make it
plainer. "The spirit that he (God) hath placed in us desireth us
jealously," that is, desires we should not commit adultery with the
world, but be wholly devoted to God, as those espoused to God in Christ,
and even envies the world which has secured our love.

[James 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 4:6</span></span>

God giveth more grace. To enable us to overcome our love of the world.

Wherefore the scripture saith. Quoted from [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034). The passage is quoted to show
that the way to secure grace more abundantly is to be humble before the
Lord.

Submit yourselves therefore to God. To secure his grace abundantly.

Resist the devil, etc. He always flees before stout resistance. See the
Temptation of Christ. If not hurled back, he presses the attack.

Draw nigh to God. If we wish God very near to us we must seek to dwell
very near to him. Only sin keeps us afar off.

Cleanse your hands. Of evil doing.

Purify your hearts. Of evil thoughts.

Be afflicted, and mourn. Mourn over your sins and sincerely repent of
them.

Humble yourselves. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted" ([Mat
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012)).

[James 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 4:11</span></span>

Speak not evil one of another. The subject of the tongue is resumed. To
speak evil is to make harsh, censorious judgments.

Speaketh evil of the law. The "royal law" requires love of a brother,
and when this law is thus violated by a harsh judgment the law itself is
condemned. But when a man sets himself up as a judge of the law he is no
longer an humble and faithful doer of the law.

There is one lawgiver. The lawgiver is God, the Almighty. Shall man
judge him?

Judgest another? In disobedience to God who made the law which forbids
it.

[James 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 4:13</span></span>

Go to now, ye that say. Presumptuous judgments have just been rebuked.
Shall we presume on an uncertain future? The folly of laying plans as if
we could command life is exposed.

What is your life? Who knows that he will have a to-morrow, since life
is like a vanishing vapor?

Ye ought to say. The proper way is to plan everything subject to the
Lord's will.

Ye rejoice in your boastings. It was a boastful manner to use such a
language as that of [Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013) in
stating plans.

To him that knoweth to do good. The connection of thought is probably as
follows: "I have warned you that such boasting is wrong, and that the
right way is to speak submissively (as in [Jam
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015)). If you know how to do the right
and yet do it not the sin is the greater on account of your knowledge."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 5](jam005)

</div>
