<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jude Index](jde.md)  
  [Previous](jo3001)  [Next](jde001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jude Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

[Jude](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jde 0:0</span></span>

THE EPISTLE OF JUDE.

The author of this epistle introduces himself as "Jude the brother of
James." Among the apostles there was a "Judas (Jude) James," the word
son or brother being unexpressed, and some have concluded that the
"Judas, not Iscariot," of the twelve is the writer of this letter. It is
more likely, however, that he was the brother of the James of Jerusalem,
who became so prominent in the history of the Palestine church, and whom
Paul speaks of as a "pillar." In the last fifteen years before the
overthrow of Jerusalem he became the most influential personage among
the Jewish Christians, and it was only natural that Jude, if his
brother, should refer to that relationship in order to secure a more
favorable hearing. That James was "the Lord's brother" ([Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019).md), but among the brethren of the
Lord there was a Jude also, whom we have every reason to believe to be
the writer of this epistle. For a fuller discussion of the question, see
the Introduction to the Epistle of James. There reasons will be found
for the conclusion that James was not an apostle, and it would follow
also that Jude was not of the twelve. Since the authors of the second
and third gospels and of Acts were not apostles, it need not be thought
strange that two of the epistles were by other holy men.

Another question of some interest arises from a comparison of Jude with
Second Peter. The reader will find that Jude 1:3-18 is almost identical
with 2 Peter 1:5 and 2:1-18. One or the other writer certainly had
before him the work of the other. Critics are divided concerning which
was the earlier writer, and reasons can be given for assigning the
priority to each. It seems to me probable that the "Speaker's
Commentary" is right in deciding in favor of Peter, and that Jude was
written at a date not much later. It is probable that he found a part of
Peter's epistle expressed his ideas so well that he modified it somewhat
and inserted it in his letter. It is more likely that he would thus
honor an apostolic letter of the renowned Peter than that Peter would
borrow from him. On this hypothesis this epistle was written between A.
D. 65 and 70, or shortly before the siege of Jerusalem. We have no data
for determining where it is written, but there seems to be no doubt
that, like the epistles of Peter and of James, it was primarily
addressed to Jewish Christians. It contains a salutation with reasons
for writing (verse 4); then three examples of the punitive justice of
God; following this is a particular account of the wicked ways of
certain false teachers against which he would warn them; after this
comes a concluding portion in which disciples are warned and exhorted,
and the whole closes with one of the sublimest doxologies of the Bible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude Chapter 1](jde001.md)

</div>
