<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1000)  [Next](jo1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--The Word of Life. Eternal Life Manifested. God Is Light. Those
in Fellowship with Him Must Walk in the Light.

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That which was from the beginning. Compare [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md); see notes there. Compare also
[Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md). [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md) shows that the Word, manifested as
Christ, was from the beginning.

Which we have heard, . . . looked upon, . . . handled. In its incarnate
form in the person of Jesus Christ.

The Word of life. Christ, the revealed Word, when it became flesh and
dwelt among men; "in whom also was life" ([Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004).md).

The life was manifested. They had seen the Life manifested in the person
of Christ.

And bear witness. The office of the apostle, having seen and known the
Eternal Life as he lived on earth, was to bear witness of him to the
world.

That ye also may have fellowship. To declare what they had seen and
heard was simply to preach the gospel. This knowledge communicated to
others brought those who accepted it into a fellowship of knowledge and
hope. Those are in fellowship who are partakers of the same faith,
hopes, and privileges.

With us. All the saints entered into fellowship with the apostles, but
the apostles were in fellowship with the Father. This grand fellowship,
that of the saints with the Father and the Son, is simply a guarantee
that no good thing will be withheld from us; that "all things are ours."
There is a fellowship of peace, of concord, of eternal life and glory.

These things write we. This assurance of the divine fellowship is given
in order that they may rejoice with the fullness of joy in the glorious
hope.

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

This then is the message. The message heard from Christ, now declared,
is that God is light. The source whence all light, whether it be
physical, or moral or spiritual, comes; the Enlightener of the universe.
The term denotes luminous clearness, the free and benevolent source from
whence flow light, intelligence, purity and blessing, absolutely free
from alien intermixture, since in him there is no darkness at all. Light
represents truth, knowledge and holiness. Darkness represents ignorance,
error, falsehood and sin.

If we say . . . and walk in darkness. To claim a fellowship with him who
is Light and to walk in the darkness of error, of ignorance, and of
sinfulness are utterly inconsistent.

Do not the truth. He who obeys not the truth walks in darkness.

But if we walk in the light. We walk in the light by following Christ,
the Light of the world.

We have fellowship. All who are walking in the light have the common
life.

The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. Cleansed by
the blood of Christ, and thus made holy, we are fitted for the heavenly
communion.

[1 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 1:8</span></span>

If we say that we have no sin. To say that we have reached a sinless
state in which we no longer need the blood of Christ to cleanse us is a
deception. This language is in square opposition to the claims of the
"Perfectionists" of all ages.

If we confess our sins. Instead of affirming that we are sinless we
should confess our sins.

Faithful and just. If we confess our sins the Lord will be faithful to
his promise of mercy, and just in requiring us to have the atonement of
Christ, to forgive us our sins.

If we say that we have not sinned. God says we have sinned. He declares
"There is none righteous; no, not one." Hence, if we affirm that we are
sinless we make God a liar.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002.md)

</div>
