<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](pe2003)  [Next](jo1001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN.

This Epistle was written by John, the son of Zebedee, the beloved
Disciple, an Apostle of Jesus Christ. The outlines of his history and
character have been fully given in the Introduction to the Gospel of
John (People's New Testament, Vol. I.) to which I refer the reader.
Prominent in the Savior's earthly ministry, the active companion of
Peter in the founding of the church in Judea, he was soon overshadowed
in the Acts of the Apostles by the towering personalities of Peter and
Paul. He is only named four times in the Acts, and his name only occurs
once in the Epistles of Paul ([Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009).md) in a passage which probably names
the only occasion when he and Paul ever met face to face. The opinion of
the early church was that his residence was in Palestine until the time
approached for the overthrow of the Jewish state, and probably until he
had been released from the sacred charge of the mother of Jesus by her
death; that he then removed to Asia Minor to make his home at Ephesus
among the great body of Gentile churches which had been robbed of the
care of their founder, the great apostle to the Gentiles, by his
martyrdom, and that in Ephesus he wrote the Epistles which are ascribed
to him in the New Testament.

Like the Gospel by the same writer, the Epistle does not mention the
name of its author, and we are indebted for the knowledge of the
authorship to the uniform testimony of the early church, as well as to
the similarity of thought and expression of the Gospel and the Epistle.
I do not think the hypothesis of those destructive German critics who
have such a mania for novelties, that the writer of Ephesus was not the
Apostle John, but a Presbyter John of the second century, is worthy of
serious consideration. Such a figment is incredible in view of the fact
that the second century testifies that John the Apostle long lived at
Ephesus, and died there, leaving the legacy of his life and writings to
the churches. We have still extant the writings of those who affirm that
they had been trained by men of God who had been trained under the
direction of the aged apostle during his Ephesian residence. It may be
added that this epistle is repeatedly quoted in the writings of the
Fathers belonging to the second century, and is named, as well as the
other two Epistles of John, in the first Canon of the New Testament
writings, the Canon Muratori, which belongs to the last half of the
second century.

Its date is only a matter of conjecture. It is evident from the various
false doctrines which the writer evidently had in view that it belongs
to a later period than any other writings of the New Testament save
those of John himself. It was probably written when John remained as the
only survivor of the apostolic band, after his gospel, and when certain
heresies began to assume form. Why it should appear without either the
names of the author or of the churches to which it was addressed is
uncertain, but it does demonstrate that it is a genuine Epistle, and no
part of a forgery, as some German writers have held. A forged Epistle
would be ascribed to an apostolic writer in order to gain its
acceptance. The examples afforded by certain forged epistles of the
early centuries, the so called Epistle to the Laodiceans for instance,
settle this point. The peculiarities of the Epistle, which cannot be
discussed in our limited space, will be best seen in the notes on the
text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 1](jo1001.md)

</div>
