<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1004)  [Next](jo2000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--How We Show that We Love God. Overcoming the World. The Three
Witnesses. The Witness in Ourselves. Prayer. Praying for a Brother Who
Sins Not unto Death.

[1 John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 5:1</span></span>

Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ. This belief, accepted in
the heart, confessed with the mouth, and perfected by the obedience of
faith ([Rom 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005.md); [Jam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022).md) makes one a child of God.

By this we know, etc. But all born of God must love God's children. The
proof that we have this love is that we so love God as to obey his
commandments, one of which is to love our neighbor as ourselves.

This is the love of God. Its outward manifestation is in obedience. See
[Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md). We may test our love thus.

Whatsoever is born of God. All who are born again, and have the new
life, overcome the world, in the sense that they do not love it and obey
its dictates.

This is the victory. The source of victorious power. As faith gains in
strength the world loses its power.

Who is he that overcometh? Only the men of faith; those who believe upon
Jesus Christ.

[1 John 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 5:6</span></span>

This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ. The subject
of faith in Christ calls out a statement concerning some of the
constantly testifying witnesses of Christ. The water and the blood refer
primarily to the baptism that revealed him at the beginning of his
earthly ministry and the blood which he shed at its close. John came
baptizing in order that Christ should be made manifest ([Joh
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031).md). It was while in the waters of
the Jordan that Christ was manifested and anointed. On the cross flowed
the water and the blood ([Joh 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034).md).
Two rites, both monumental institutions, hence both of them witnesses,
testify of him. We are baptized into his death ([Rom
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001).md); the Lord's Supper points to
his shed blood.

Not by water only, but by water and blood. The revelation of Christ in
water at the baptism does not stand alone; Calvary came also with its
shedding of blood.

It is the Spirit that beareth witness. Witness is usually borne in
words. The Spirit which descended on the apostles on Pentecost bore
witness with mighty power that the crucified Jesus was Lord and Christ
([Act 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md); [Act
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031.md); [Act
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032).md).

There are three that bear record in heaven. This verse is not found in
the Revision or in any ancient MS. It is no doubt an interpolation.

There are three that bear witness. In notes on [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006.md) I have shown how these three bear
witness.

These three agree in one. They bear testimony to the same end.

If we receive the witness of men. We do receive human testimony. We have
human testimony of many and unimpeachable witnesses to the facts of the
life of Christ, but we have also the greater witness of God. We have the
Father's testimony on record, and we have it constantly repeated in his
transforming grace. Every one born again to a new life is a new
demonstration.

He that believeth on the Son. He hath the witness in his changed heart
and life.

He that believeth not God. He makes God a liar by rejecting the witness
God gives to the Son.

[1 John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 5:11</span></span>

This is the witness (Revision). God gives us eternal life through this
Son. We know that we have it because we know that we have a new life.

He that hath the Son hath life. We lay hold of the Son by faith in him
and thus come to life.

These things have I written. He writes that they may understand how they
may know that they have eternal life. Tests have been given. For
example, see [Jo1 5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md); [Jo1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013.md), etc.

That ye may believe. Put the fullest trust in the name of Christ.

[1 John 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 5:14</span></span>

And this is the confidence. We may be assured our prayers will be
granted, if we ask according to his will. There is this condition.

If we know that he hear us. Hear us with open ears. Then we may know
that we have what we ask. It will be granted.

If a man see his brother sin. Then a brother can be overtaken by sin.

Not unto death. There is a sin not unto death, and one unto death. The
sin described in [Heb 6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md) is
evidently unto death; that described in [Gal
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md) is one not unto death. In the
latter case the sinners can be restored, and we may pray for them with
the assurance that they will be. This implies both work and prayer.

All unrighteousness. All wrong doing is sin, but the condition of soul
that sets it against righteousness and against Christ as steel is a sin
unto death. Such a soul repels Christ the life.

[1 John 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 5:18</span></span>

Whosoever is born of God sinneth not. Does not live a life of sin. He
will not sin unto death, though he may be overtaken in a fault. See note
at end of chapter.

That wicked one toucheth him not. Cannot lay hands on him so as to hold
him.

We know that we are of God. The church is God's temple in which he
dwells, and around it the world of wickedness.

And we know that the Son of God is come. Not only by testimony from men
but by God's witness. We have life in Christ, and Christ dwells in us.

This is the true God and eternal life. In Christ the true God is
revealed to us and in him we have eternal life.

Keep yourselves from idols. Flee from idolatry, the besetting sin of
that age. So too we need to flee from the idols of our age. Whatever
takes our worship from God is an idol.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John Introduction](jo2000.md)

</div>
