<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh018)  [Next](joh020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 19:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Jesus Scourged. The Crown of Thorns. Pilate's Acquittal. The
New Charge of the Jews. No King but CÃ&brvbr;sar. Crucified at Golgotha.
The Garments Parted by Lot. The Women at the Cross. The Mother of Jesus
Committed to John. It Is Finished.

[John 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 19:1</span></span>

For notes on these verses, see [Mat
27:19-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019). Compare [Mar
15:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015); [Luk
23:20-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#020). John gives a few additional
features.

Behold the man! Jesus had been scourged, and then, bleeding and torn,
was crowned with thorns and a purple robe thrown around him, and led out
before the people. Pilate, it is probable, hoped to arouse pity.

Crucify him. The response was this savage cry. Pilate then declared,
Take ye him, etc. This is his formal acquittal of the charge of sedition
and rebellion that they had made. He had committed no crime against
Roman law. Hence, if punished, it must be by their law.

We have a law. Failing in their purpose, they now fall back on their
charge of blasphemy: "He made himself the Son of God."

Whence art thou? This statement arouses the fear of Pilate. He had never
seen such calm dignity and majesty before. Could this prisoner be
divine? When Jesus is silent, Pilate reminds him that he has power to
crucify or release.

Thou couldest have no power against me, etc. Jesus breaks the silence
and at once assumes the position of Pilate's judge. He declares that
Pilate could have no power over himself unless it were given him. Christ
submitted because it was the Father's will that he should drink the cup.
Poor, helpless Pilate was not so great a sinner as the Jews, who might
have known better, who were filled with devilish hate, who were now
forcing Pilate to the crime. The words of Christ are really words of
compassion.

If thou let this man go, thou art not CÃ&brvbr;sar's friend. This means
that he will be accused before CÃ&brvbr;sar's tribunal of winking at
treason. The CÃ&brvbr;sar then on the throne was Tiberius, dark,
suspicious, cruel in character. Such a charge from the representatives
of the Jewish nation at Rome would probably prove fatal to Pilate; would
certainly end his career as a public man. The risk was too great. He
would rather sacrifice an innocent man than to sacrifice himself. Hence
he at once surrenders.

It was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour. John
marks the exact time when this remarkable judgment was rendered. It was
about six o'clock in the morning, on Friday, the day of preparation for
the passover. Mark says that the crucifixion began at the third hour,
nine o'clock, as the Hebrews began to count at six. John wrote many
years later, after Jerusalem had fallen, among people who began to count
at midnight, as did all the Roman world, and he therefore used their
language and called six o'clock the sixth hour, as we do, rather than
the first hour as the Hebrews did. Christ and his apostles had eaten the
passover already. How then could it be that was the preparation day?
Amid conflicting views, I can only give what seems to me the best
solution: (1) It is certain that Christ ate a meal the evening before in
the Upper Room which was called a passover. (2) It is certain from [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028) that the Jews had not eaten the
passover at that time. (3) It seems clear to me that Christ, anxious to
eat this passover (see [Luk 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015)),
ate it in advance of the usual time, in order that he, the true Paschal
Lamb, "Our Passover" might be offered on the same day that the passover
was eaten. The priests hurried the trial and execution of Jesus so that
they might proceed to the preparation for the passover that evening. As
the Lord's supper was anticipatory of the suffering on the cross, so was
the Lord's last passover. The question has difficulties, but this view
has fewer than any other.

We have no king but CÃ&brvbr;sar. They had not now. They had rejected
the divine King, had chosen Barabbas instead, for life, and now make
choice of CÃ&brvbr;sar as their king instead of the Lord's Anointed. To
CÃ&brvbr;sar's tender mercies they committed themselves, and in about a
generation CÃ&brvbr;sar will trample them in the wine press of wrath.
The choice they had made sealed the fate of their city and nation.

[John 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 19:17</span></span>

See notes on Mat. 27:33-66. Compare Mark 15:22-47; [Luk
23:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033). I note some additional
features given by John.

His mother's sister The mother's sister is not here named. In [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056), the parallel passage names
Salome, the mother of James and John, as one of the four women; hence,
it is generally supposed that Salome was the sister of Mary and the aunt
of Jesus.

Woman, behold thy son! In his mortal agony, Jesus does not forget his
bereaved mother, but commits her to the care of John, her nephew, it is
supposed. His love shines forth in the sufferings on the cross.

[John 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 19:31</span></span>

Because it was the preparation. For the passover. See [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014).

That sabbath was a high day. A double Sabbath, both the weekly Sabbath
and a passover Sabbath. It was usual Roman custom to leave crucified
bodies on the cross, but out of deference to their wishes Pilate
consents that the legs of the victims should be broken in order to
hasten death, so that the bodies might be taken down and buried. The
legs were crushed with a hammer like a sledge and the shock would bring
speedy death.

[John 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 19:34</span></span>

Pierced his side. Finding him lifeless, the soldiers did not break his
legs, but to make sure of death thrust a spear into his side.

Came out blood and water. The water, with clots of blood, can be
accounted for only the previous rupture of the heart and the flow of
blood into the pericardium, or outer sack of the heart, where it would
separate very rapidly into water and clots of blood. Hence, it seems
certain that the immediate physical cause of the death of Christ was
rupture of the heart.

[John 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 19:36</span></span>

That the scripture should be fulfilled. See [Exo
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046); [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010).

[John 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 19:38</span></span>

For notes on the Burial, see [Mat
27:57-66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057). Compare [Mar
15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042); [Luk
23:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050).

There came also Nicodemus. This is the third mention of him. See [Joh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001) and [Joh
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050). Both he and Joseph were members
of the Sanhedrim. Only John mentions that he aided Joseph in the burial.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 20](joh020)

</div>
