<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh002)  [Next](joh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Ruler Seeking Jesus by Night. The Necessity of a New
Birth. The Birth of Water and of the Spirit. The Son of Man to Be Lifted
Up. The Love of God for Man. Condemnation for Unbelief. John at Ã†non.
John's Testimony.

[John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 3:1</span></span>

There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
Nicodemus is named three times by John, and not elsewhere; here; in [Joh
7:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050), where he protests against
condemning Jesus unheard; and in [Joh
19:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038), where he aids Joseph of
ArimathÃ&brvbr;a in the burial of Jesus. He was a Pharisee, a member of
the Sanhedrim (a ruler), and a rabbi ([Joh
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010)).

[John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 3:2</span></span>

The same came to Jesus by night. He probably chose the night in order to
escape observation. He did not dare encounter the hostility of the
priests, filled with rage over the cleansing of the temple, and yet he
wished to know more of one whom he believed to be sent from God.

Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God. Nicodemus
confesses, not only his belief, but that of his fellow Pharisees and
rulers. The miracles of Jesus convinced them, even if they would not
admit it, that he was a teacher sent from God. He came for information,
and Jesus recognized it in what follows.

[John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 3:3</span></span>

Verily, verily, I say unto thee. This form of expression was often upon
the lips of Jesus to give emphasis to an unusually solemn and weighty
declaration. See [Mat 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018). It occurs
twenty-four times in John.

Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. The term
translated "again" is rendered "anew" in the Revision, which is better.
It is the great doctrine, so fundamental in the Gospel, of Regeneration,
a new Birth, being made a new creature, the same doctrine spoken of in
[Joh 1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012). Nicodemus, like all
Jews, supposed that all who were born as children of Abraham would, as
Abraham's seed, be citizens of the kingdom, but Jesus shows him that no
one can be a new creature in Christ Jesus unless he is born anew. We are
born naturally into the kingdom of nature, to live the natural life; if
we enter the kingdom of heaven, the kingdom of grace, it must be by a
new birth. The doctrine that a man can bury his old sinful life, and
begin a new one with the freshness of youthful hope, is foreshadowed in
the Old Testament ([Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018); [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019); [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)), and taught in the New
Testament ([Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008); [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003); [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002); [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017); [Gal
6:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)).

[John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 3:4</span></span>

How can a man be born again when he is old? The question of Nicodemus
indicates his surprise, skepticism and misapprehension of what Jesus
meant.

[John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 3:5</span></span>

Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Jesus does not reply directly to the question of
Nicodemus, but proceeds to give a more explicit statement concerning the
new birth. One must be born of water and of the Spirit. Whatever this
may mean, it will be admitted by all (1) that no one is a member of the
kingdom of God until he is born again; (2) that the Savior declares the
impossibility of one entering who is not born of water and of the
Spirit. All agree that the birth of the Spirit refers to the inward, or
spiritual change that takes place, and all candid authorities agree that
born of water refers to baptism. So Alford, Wesley, Abbott, Whitby,
Olshausen, Tholuck, Prof. Wm. Milligan, the Episcopal Prayer Book, the
Westminister Confession, the M. E. Discipline, and M. E. Doctrinal
Tracts, and also the writers of the early Church all declare. Alford
says: "All attempts to get rid of this have sprung from doctrinal
prejudices." Abbott says: "We are to understand Christ as he expected
his auditor to understand him. John the Baptist baptized both Jew and
Gentile as a sign of purification by repentance from past sins.
Nicodemus would then have certainly understood by the expression, 'born
of water,' a reference to this rite of baptism."

[John 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 3:7</span></span>

Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The necessity
is implied in the word kingdom. No one born a citizen of England can
become a citizen of the United States without complying with our
naturalization laws. The kingdom of God has its naturalization laws, and
there is no other way of entrance than to be born of water and of the
Spirit. We may not understand all the mysteries of the new birth, any
more than we do those of the natural birth, but we can understand what
has to be done and what is necessary. Two things are needful: the spirit
must be renewed; we must be baptized.

[John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 3:8</span></span>

The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every
one that is born of the Spirit. Most commentators have held that this
means: "As the wind moves mysteriously, so does the Spirit, and it
breathes upon whom it will, effecting the inward change called the birth
of the Spirit arbitrarily." This view I believe due to a wrong
translation, sanctioned, not by Greek, but by current theology. Let it
be noted that: (1) Exactly the same Greek term is rendered "wind" and
"Spirit" in this verse. It is a violation of all law that the same word
should experience so radical a change of meaning in the same sentence.
(2) That the word (pneuma) is not translated "wind" elsewhere, although
it occurs scores of times in the New Testament, but is always rendered
"Spirit." (3) Another word in the Greek, anemos, is usually used to
represent "wind." (4) The erroneous idea creates a confusion of figures.
It makes Christ to say: "The wind bloweth where it listeth; so is (not
the Spirit, but) every one born of the Spirit." It affirms of him who is
born just what is affirmed of the wind, a thing the Savior never did.
These facts are sufficient to show that the rendering "wind" is wrong.
All we have to do is to translate pneuma here, as is done in the latter
part of the verse and elsewhere in the New Testament. The verse then
reads: "The Spirit (pneuma) breathes where it pleases and thou hearest
the voice thereof, but canst not tell whence it comes nor whither it
goes. So (by hearing its voice) is every one born of the Spirit"
(pneuma). The meaning is: The Spirit breathes where it wills and you
recognize its manifestation by its voice; by the words spoken by men of
God as the Holy Spirit gives them utterance. You cannot tell whence the
Spirit comes to whither it goes, but you can hear its voice when it does
come. So, by hearing the voice of the Spirit, is every one born of the
Spirit. He who receives by faith the communications of the Spirit is
born of the Spirit. The birth of the Spirit is not the same thing as the
gift of the Spirit. To those who are born of the Spirit is given.
"Because ye are sons, God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father" ([Gal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)). Hence, in harmony with the above
view, Peter says, "Being born again, not by corruptible seed, but
incorruptible, through the word of God, which liveth and abideth
forever."

[John 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 3:10</span></span>

Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things? The question
implies that Nicodemus was one of the doctors of the law. These made
very arrogant claims of superior knowledge.

[John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 3:11</span></span>

We speak that we do know . . . ye receive not our witness. "Ye" includes
Nicodemus and all Jews who failed to confess him; "we" includes himself
and those who should testify of him by the Spirit.

[John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 3:12</span></span>

If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not. He had spoken of
the things that belonged to the kingdom of God on earth, of the new
birth. If Nicodemus could not understand and believe this, how would he
receive testimony concerning the heavenly kingdom, God, and eternal
glory?

[John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 3:13</span></span>

And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down . . . the
Son of man which is in heaven. This implies: (1) That he existed before
he appeared on earth. (2) That heaven was his true abode. (3) That, on
earth, his spirit was in communication with heaven.

[John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 3:14</span></span>

As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son
of man be lifted up. The reference is to [Num
21:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004). As the bitten Israelites were
healed by looking upon the brazen serpent lifted on high, so the world
in sin is saved by looking to Jesus lifted up upon the cross.

[John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 3:16</span></span>

For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
There is no sweeter verse in the Bible. It declares: (1) That God is
love. (2) That he loved the world instead of hating it. (3) That he so
loved that he gave his Son. The Son did not come to appease the Father's
wrath, but the Father sent him because he loved so well. (4) That he
came to keep men from perishing.

[John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 3:18</span></span>

He that believeth on him is not condemned. "He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved." Faith in Christ is essential to salvation,
because it is the power that leads to obedience to him.

Is condemned already. "He that believeth not shall be damned." The
unbeliever condemns himself. He is lost and refuses to be saved by
Christ.

[John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 3:19</span></span>

This is the condemnation. That men refuse the light. Usually it is not
evidence, but an honest heart and a sincere desire for truth, that are
needed in order to faith. All kinds of evil doers hate the light.

[John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 3:21</span></span>

He that doeth truth. Truth has to be lived. He who lives it, lives an
honest life sincerely desiring light, will come to the light.

[John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 3:22</span></span>

Came into the land of Judea. Left Jerusalem and went into the country
districts.

Tarried . . . and baptized. The first intimation that Jesus administered
the baptismal rite. He did it through his disciples ([Joh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002)).

[John 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 3:23</span></span>

And John was baptizing in Ã†non near Salim. The site was first
identified by Lieut. Conder, of the British Palestine Exploration. He
found a village of Ainun near another named Salim, not far from the
Jordan, northeast of Samaria, with, as he says (Tent Work, p. 92), "the
two requisites for the scene of baptism of a large multitude;--an open
space and abundance of water." Prof. McGarvey, who visited it, says:
"Pools, well suited for baptizing are abundant."

Because there was much water there. This explains, not why John preached
at Ã†non, but why he baptized there. "Much water" was essential to
baptism in New Testament times.

[John 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 3:25</span></span>

There arose a question . . . about purifying. The Revision says "a Jew,"
probably a Pharisee who associated baptism with ceremonial purification.
From the fact that John's disciples mention Jesus, it is evident that
his name came up in the discussion.

[John 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 3:27</span></span>

Ye yourselves bear me witness. They complain of the fact that Jesus
baptized and was very popular at this time, but John refers to the
witness he had borne ([Joh 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020), [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)), and affirms that each is
fulfilling the work "given him of heaven."

He that hath the bride. The bride is the Church; the bridegroom is
Christ. John, "the friend of the bridegroom," already rejoices in the
prospect of the union of the Bridegroom and Bride.

[John 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 3:31</span></span>

He that cometh from above. Christ, who is, therefore, above and over
John.

[John 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 3:32</span></span>

No man receiveth his testimony. So few at that time that those who
received were as nothing in contrast with the others.

[John 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 3:36</span></span>

He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life. Eternal life and
eternal death turn upon trust in Christ. He who believes on the Son with
a heartfelt, obedient faith, a faith that trusts all and surrenders all
to the will of Christ, is born again and "hath eternal life." The faith
that saves is a faith that moves us to come to Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 4](joh004)

</div>
