<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh014)  [Next](joh016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 15:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Vine and the Branches. Bearing Fruit. Glorifying the
Father. The Greatest Love. The World's Hatred. The Cloak for Sin.

[John 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 15:1</span></span>

I am the true vine. The scene must be kept in mind. The Lord and his
disciples had just eaten the last supper. He had said, "Arise, let us go
hence" ([Joh 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)). They had risen,
but were still standing in the room. On the table, from whence they had
just risen, was the "fruit of the vine," and the Lord had said he would
never drink it again upon the earth. In the Old Testament, the Vine is
often used as the type of Israel, planted and tended by the Almighty as
the husbandman. See [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001); [Psa
80:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008); [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021). Israel, however, had proved a
wild and fruitless Vine. Instead of it, therefore, Christ had now been
planted by the Father as the True Vine.

[John 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 15:2</span></span>

Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away. As the
husbandman cuts off the unfruitful branches of the vine, so the Father
severs the unfruitful branches from his Son. Judas, an unfruitful branch
which did not have the life of the Vine, had just been severed and had
gone forth.

Every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it. The husbandman prunes
and dresses the branches in order that they may be more healthy and
fruitful. The Father cleanses, purifies, frees from sin, all who become
branches of the True Vine.

[John 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 15:3</span></span>

Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. The
spoken word is the instrument appointed by God for the cleansing of the
soul. The word tells us what to do in order that we may be cleansed from
sin.

[John 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 15:4</span></span>

Abide in me, and I in you. The idea is, Abide in me that I may abide in
you. Christ abiding in us is dependent on our abiding in him. We abide
in him by keeping his words, or having his "word abide in us" ([Joh
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007)), and all who "keep his sayings"
([Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)) will have Christ abide in
their souls.

No more can ye, except ye abide in me. We are dead, fruitless branches,
without the Christ-life. The whole history of the world demonstrates
that fruitfulness is only found in union with Christ.

[John 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 15:5</span></span>

I am the vine, ye are the branches. He has already declared ([Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)) that he is the True Vine, but he
had not before declared that every disciple is a branch of the Vine.
Observe that, not denominations, but church members, are the branches.
The disciple, without Christ, can do nothing. Paul declared, "I can do
all things through Christ who strengthens me."

[John 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 15:6</span></span>

If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered.
The lifeless, fruitless branches in the vineyard are lopped off and
carried out, and wither and are burned. So, too, any one who does not
abide in Christ, is severed from the Vine, and they (the angels at the
great day; not men, as in the Common Version. See Revision) cast them
into the fire and they are burned.

[John 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 15:7</span></span>

Ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. The condition of this
blessed promise is that we abide in the Vine, by having Christ's words
abide in us.

Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. The best comment
on this is the Savior's injunction, "Let your light shine before men,
that they, seeing your good works, shall glorify your Father who is in
heaven."

[John 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 15:10</span></span>

If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love. He abode in the
love of the Father by a life of perfect obedience. So we must abide in
his love.

[John 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 15:11</span></span>

These things have I spoken . . . that my joy may remain in you. Strange
words, that one about to be crucified should speak of his joy! His joy
was union with and presence of the Father. He had "anointed him with the
oil of gladness above his fellows." He desired his disciples to have
that joy, the constant consolation of the sense of the presence of
Christ.

[John 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 15:13</span></span>

Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. The highest human exhibition of love that earth has ever seen
was this. Christ was about to exhibit this highest type of human love by
dying for his friends. He did even more, as Paul shows us in [Rom
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006), he died for his enemies,
something that man had never done.

[John 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 15:15</span></span>

I call you not servants; . . . I have called you friends. Christ's
disciples serve him, but their service is not bondage, but that of love.
Hence, they are friends instead of servants.

[John 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 15:16</span></span>

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you. Each one
of the eleven apostles present had been chosen, called, by the Lord,
from among his disciples. They did not choose him, but he them, in order
that they might bring forth abundant fruit in the conversion of the
world.

[John 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 15:18</span></span>

If the world hate you. The world is the unregenerate portion of mankind.
It hated and slew the Lord. It has never loved his disciples. Satan is
its prince.

[John 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 15:20</span></span>

They will also persecute you. The servants must expect similar treatment
to that given the Master. The long roll of Christian martyrs shows how
this has been verified.

[John 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 15:21</span></span>

For my name's sake. That name, so sweet to the saved, is a hateful thing
to his enemies. Jewish persecutors bade Christians to teach no more in
the name; Gentile rulers bade them blaspheme the name or die.

[John 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 15:22</span></span>

If I had not come . . . they had not had sin. Certain conclusions
follow: (1) The degree of our sin is measured by our opportunities; (2)
increased opportunities bring a consciousness of sin; light in the room
enables us to see the dirt; (3) the sin of sins is the rejection of
Christ. Since he came there is no cloak, no covering, no excuse. Those
who refuse Christ die in their sins, because they will not part from
them.

[John 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 15:24</span></span>

If I had not done, etc. The proof of his divine mission was such that
they were left without excuse.

Hated both me and my Father. The Jews claimed to love God, but when God,
manifest in the flesh, appeared, they hated him. The hatred of Christ is
the hate of God.

[John 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 15:26</span></span>

When the Comforter is come. See the preceding chapter.

Shall testify concerning me. See [Joh
16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013).

[John 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 15:27</span></span>

Ye also shall bear witness. The apostles had been "with him from the
beginning," and knew all the facts. If he was true, they knew it; if he
stilled the waves and raised the dead, they knew it; if he rose from the
tomb, they knew it. They bore witness to him by word and left their
words to us. They bore witness by life, gave up all for him and died for
their testimony. Such testimony is the strongest human testimony ever
offered to any fact.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 16](joh016)

</div>
