<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF JOHN.

THE AUTHOR of the Fourth Gospel was John, the son of Zebedee and Salome,
the brother of James, in early life a Galilean fisherman, but afterwards
an apostle of Jesus Christ. In less than a hundred years after his death
Christian writers living in different quarters of the world, whose
writings are still extant, show us that this was the universal belief of
the church. Indeed, the testimony to the authorship is stronger than can
be furnished that Josephus wrote his Jewish history, that CÃ&brvbr;sar
wrote his Commentaries, or in behalf of any uninspired writing of
antiquity, and would never have been questioned had not a class of
rationalistic critics arisen who wished to set aside the lofty views of
the personality and mission of the Savior which are so prominent a
feature of the Fourth Gospel. We know from [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024.md), that it was written by an
eye-witness and by a beloved disciple There were only three disciples
who were admitted to the most intimate relations with Jesus--Peter,
James and John. As it was not written by either of the first two, John
must be the author. So the early church unanimously testifies.
IrenÃ&brvbr;us, who learned of one who had been intimate with John and
who wrote near the middle of the second century, affirms that he was the
author. It is credited to John in the canon of Muratori, the first
catalogue of the New Testament writings, written A. D. 175. It is also
spoken of by Theophilus of Antioch A. D. 175, and by Clement of
Alexandria, near the same time, and in the latter part of the second
century it was translated into the Syriac and Latin versions of the New
Testament. Besides these direct recognitions there are evident allusions
to it and quotations from it in a number of epistles and treatises of
Ignatius, Hermas, Polycarp, Papias, and others, which belong to the
first half of the second century. Indeed, it is quoted within twenty
years of John's death.

PLACE AND TIME. We do not know certainly when or where the Fourth Gospel
was written. IrenÃ&brvbr;us, who lived in the second century, and who
was the religious pupil of Polycarp, the martyr who was educated at the
feet of John, declares that it was written at Ephesus, after the other
three had been written. Its internal character indicates that it was
written outside of Judea, after the fall of the temple, and after
certain heresies began to be developed. John was still at Jerusalem A.
D. 50 (Gal. chapter 2); it is almost certain that he did not go to
Ephesus until after the death of Paul, about A. D. 67, and it is
probable that he did not leave the city of Jerusalem, permanently, until
the storm of destruction began to gather, which broke in A. D. 70. As
the testimony of the early church is unanimous that his later years were
passed at Ephesus and in that region, he probably went there about this
date. After this, and before his death, which took place near the close
of the century, the Gospel was written.

JOHN, the author, was brought up to his father's calling, and even
followed it after he was first pointed to Christ. While he was an
"unlearned man" ([Act 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013).md), in the
sense that he never attended the rabbinical schools, he had such an
education in Hebrew and in the Scriptures as all respectable Jewish
families were wont to give their children. In connection with every
synagogue was a school in which children were taught reading, writing,
and the rudiments of science. The children of Jewish \[322\] common
people were better educated than those of any other country in the
world. Jesus found John among the disciples of John the Baptist, who at
once pointed him and his companions to Christ. We next meet him at the
sea of Galilee, fishing, and there Jesus gave him a permanent call. From
this time onward he steadfastly followed the Master, and with James and
Peter, formed an inner circle nearer the Lord. These three, only,
witness the resurrection of Jairus' daughter, see the glory of the
transfiguration, and the agony of he garden. John and Peter follow
Christ, after his arrest, and the first goes openly into the house of
Caiaphas, to the trial before Pilate, and to the cross, till all was
over. When the news of the resurrection came he and Peter were the first
to reach the sepulchre. To him Jesus committed the care of his own
mother, while dying on the cross, and it is probable that he remained in
Judea to attend to this sacred charge while she lived. From about the
time of the overthrow of Jerusalem he changed his residence to Ephesus,
where he probably lived until he died, near the close of the first
century. The testimony of the early church would place his death after
A. D. 98. It was during this later period that he wrote his Gospel, his
Epistles, was exiled to Patmos, and there wrote his Revelation.

THE CHARACTER of John's Gospel, written after his fellow apostles had
gone to rest, differs in some respects from the others. It alone follows
the chronological order of events, gives an account of the JudÃ&brvbr;an
ministry of our Lord, shows that his ministry lasted for over three
years, gives the account of the resurrection of Lazarus and of the
wonderful discourse to the disciples the night that he was betrayed. It
omits much with which the church was already familiar through the other
Gospels, presents much that they had not recorded, and recognizes
certain false doctrines which had begun to be taught. It is the gospel
of the Incarnation, of Love, and the most Spiritual of the Gospels. It
alone unfolds fully the great doctrine of the Comforter. The great end,
however, that the writer had before him in all he wrote is given in his
own words: These are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through
his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 1](joh001.md)

</div>
