<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh000)  [Next](joh002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--The Word Made Flesh. The Witness of John. John's Disciples
Pointed to Christ. The Lord Calls His First Disciples. An Israelite
Indeed.

[John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 1:1</span></span>

In the beginning was the Word, etc. The first fourteen verses are
introductory. In order to set at rest all controversy the Divine nature
of Jesus, John glances, in the first three verses, back to the
beginning, recorded in Genesis, and affirms: (1) That he who was
afterwards manifest as the Christ existed before creation began; (2)
that he was present with God; (3) that he was divine; (4) that he was
the Word; (5) that by or through him were all things made that were made
([Joh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003).md). The first chapter of
Genesis helps us to understand its meaning. God said, "Let there be
light," "Let there be a firmament," "Let the earth bring forth," etc.,
and it was done. God exhibits his creative power through the Word, and
manifests his will through the Word. There are mysteries belonging to
the divine nature and to the relation between the Son and the Father
that we have to wait for eternity to solve. They are too deep for human
solution, but this is clear: that God creates and speaks to man through
the Word. As we clothe our thoughts in words, God reveals his will by
the Word, and when that Word is clothed in flesh, as the Teacher of men,
we recognize it as Jesus Christ.

[John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 1:4</span></span>

In him was life. He had life in himself, and hence is a fountain from
whence life flows to man. Death could not hold him, because in him is
life, and he became "the Resurrection and the Life" for us.

The life was the light of men. The life that Christ bestows enlightens
men. He is the Light of the World. His light chases away the darkness of
the earth, though, when John wrote, the darkness did not receive it.
Men, in darkness, had eyes and saw not. All history demonstrates that
Christ is the Light of the World; every redeemed soul recognizes the
fact.

[John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 1:6</span></span>

There was a man sent from God. The writer now speaks of a witness to the
Light, John, a man sent from God. He was called to his work from his
mother's womb.

The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light. John came,
not so much as a reformer, as a witness. His work, as declared by
Malachi, was to be a messenger to go before the Lord. In all his
preaching he testified of Christ. He pointed his own disciples to Jesus.

He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness. An early heretical
sect held that John the Baptist was the Messiah. The apostle is
explicit, in order to correct this error.

[John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 1:9</span></span>

That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world. The Revision reads, "There was the true light, even the light
which lighteth every man, coming into the world." Grammatically, both in
the Greek and the English, coming may belong to the light, or every man.
We believe that it should agree with light. That was the true or real
Light who, when he comes into the world, enlightens every man. Jesus
says ([Joh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046) .md), "I am come a light
into the world."

[John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 1:10</span></span>

The tenth verse declares: (1) That he was in the world, (2) the world
was made by him, (3) it did not recognize him. The next verse states (1)
that he came, personally, to his own. He took upon himself a fleshly
form and came to the race to which he was united by fleshly ties; (2)
his own received him not. The world is humanity in general, which knew
him not; his own is the Jewish nation, who received him not.

[John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 1:12</span></span>

But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God. The Revision reads, "Children of God," which is better. While the
nation rejected him, some received him. To such as receive him in every
age he gives power to become the children of God. The manner in which he
is received is given: Even to them that believe on his name. It is not
declared that they are made children by believing, but to the believer
he gives the "power to become" a child. When one believes in Christ, his
faith becomes a power to lead him to yield himself to God and to receive
the Word into his heart.

[John 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 1:13</span></span>

Who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh. The Jews
prided themselves on being Abraham's children, and trusted in their
blood for salvation. To be a son of God is not a fleshly birth at all,
but the spirit of the subject is born of God. In [Joh
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md), the Savior explains this birth
more particularly.

[John 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 1:14</span></span>

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. The Word assumed a
human form and became incarnate as the child of Mary.

We beheld his glory. His Divine glory. See [Luk
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#032.md); [Joh
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011.md).

[John 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 1:15</span></span>

John bare witness. At the time of Christ's baptism when the Spirit
descended. See [Joh 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md).

[John 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 1:16</span></span>

Of his fulness. Of grace and truth. See [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md). His grace and truth hath blessed
"us" (the saints) all.

Grace for grace. Grace (favor) has been added to grace; one blessing
piled upon another.

[John 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 1:17</span></span>

The law was given by Moses. It was not a system of grace, nor could it
make men perfect; in contrast with it the system of grace and truth (see
[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).md) was given by Jesus Christ.

[John 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 1:18</span></span>

No man hath seen God, with bodily eyes, but he was manifested as the
Word, and at last the "only begotten Son hath declared him." "He that
hath seen me," said Christ, "hath seen the Father. The Father is in me
and I in him."

[John 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 1:19</span></span>

This is the record of John. The writer now plunges at once into his
history. He passes by the childhood of the Lord, John's ministry, and
comes at once to the time when Jesus, thirty years old, is acknowledged
by the Father as the Son of God.

When the Jews sent priests and Levites. The Jewish rulers, the
Sanhedrim, the court or parliament of seventy-one members who ruled
Israel. The delegation sent to John was official. His preaching in the
wilderness of Jordan had stirred the whole land, and they were sent to
ascertain his character. Matthew, Mark, and Luke use the term Jews very
seldom, John often, a proof that he wrote far away from Palestine and
for Gentiles.

[John 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 1:20</span></span>

Some conjectured that John was the expected Christ; others that he was
Elijah who was first to come ([Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005).md); others that he was "that
prophet," the one predicted by Moses ([Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).md); but he declared that he was
none of these. When they insisted that he should declare who he was, he
quoted Isaiah, and said he was The voice of one crying in the
wilderness. See note on [Mat 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003.md). His
work was preparation for the Lord.

[John 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 1:24</span></span>

Were of the Pharisees. See notes on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md).

[John 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 1:25</span></span>

Why baptizest thou then? If he were Christ, or Elias, or "that prophet,"
they could understand why he should establish a new religious rite, but
if none of these, why should he do so? Their perplexity shows that the
baptismal rite was new to them. There is no proof that Jewish proselyte
baptism of Gentile converts existed at this period, save the assertion
of the Talmud, written two or three centuries after this. Josephus, who
wrote in the time of the apostles, is silent about it.

[John 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 1:26</span></span>

I baptize with water. See notes on [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md).

[John 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 1:28</span></span>

These things were done in Bethabara. The Revision says Bethany, a
village whose site is now unknown, on the east bank of the Jordan.
Bethabara means "the house of the ford."

[John 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 1:29</span></span>

The next day John seeth Jesus. Here Jesus first appears, in person, in
John's account, who omits all the details given by Matthew and Luke of
his earlier life. He was now thirty years old, and came from Galilee to
Jordan to be baptized of John. This interview was after the baptism
([Joh 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033).md), and probably after the
Temptation.

Behold the Lamb of God. Innocent like the lamb, to be offered as a lamb,
"led as a lamb to the slaughter" ([Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007).md). The lamb was commonly used as a
sin offering ([Lev 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#032).md), and when
John points to Jesus as the Lamb of God he can only mean that God had
provided him as a sacrificial offering.

The sin of the world. Not of Jews only, but of Gentiles. John points to
Jesus as the world's Savior.

[John 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 1:30</span></span>

This is he of whom I said. See [Joh
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027.md).

Was before. Existed before I was born.

[John 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 1:31</span></span>

I knew him not. Knew not that God had chosen him to be the Christ. He
knew, however, that he should be manifested in some way through his
baptism.

[John 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 1:32</span></span>

I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove. See [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md), and notes. It was revealed to
John that the Christ would thus be revealed. Indeed it was the anointing
of the Spirit that made Jesus the Anointed, the Christ.

[John 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 1:35</span></span>

Again the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples. In [Joh
1:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019.md), the account is given of the
visit of the priests and Levites, sent by the Sanhedrim to John. "The
next day" after this, John sees Jesus and points him out as the Lamb of
God, giving a discourse of which, in John 1:19-34, we have a synopsis.
On the "next day" after this, the third day after the deputation of the
Sanhedrim, and the second after the return of Jesus from the wilderness,
Jesus stood with two of his disciples. One of these two, we learn from
[Joh 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040.md), was Andrew; the other, we
have reason to believe, was John, the apostle.

[John 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 1:36</span></span>

Behold the Lamb of God! On the preceding day John had recognized Jesus
in a public discourse as "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of
the world." Now he personally points the disciples to him.

[John 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 1:38</span></span>

Rabbi. A term meaning teacher, or master.

Where dwellest thou? These disciples had followed at the bidding of
John. Their question implies a desire to be in the company of Jesus.

[John 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 1:39</span></span>

It was about the tenth hour. Counting from six o'clock, the first hour
among the Jews, the tenth hour would be four P. M.

[John 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 1:40</span></span>

One of the two . . . was Andrew. Afterwards an apostle. He has the honor
of being one of the first two disciples of Jesus.

Findeth his own brother Simon. Simon Peter. In true missionary spirit
Andrew at once and first sought his own brother.

We have found the Messias. The Christ promised by the prophets. Messiah
is the Hebrew word meaning the same as Christ.

[John 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 1:42</span></span>

Thou shalt be called Cephas. A Hebrew word meaning stone. Peter is the
Greek form.

[John 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 1:43</span></span>

Findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me. This is the first
recorded instance of the Savior calling a disciple to follow him.
Philip, it must be borne in mind, is not Philip, "one of the seven," but
"one of the Twelve," a citizen of Bethsaida of Galilee, and a
fellow-townsman of Andrew and Peter.

[John 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 1:45</span></span>

Philip findeth Nathanael. As we learn from [Joh
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002.md), Nathanael was a Galilean, his
home being at "Cana in Galilee." His name only occurs in these two
places. He is supposed to have been one of the Twelve, the same one
mentioned in the other Gospels as Bartholomew, which means "son of
Tolmai." The use of the name in [Joh
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002.md) favors this hypothesis.

We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did
write. There was only one to whom this could refer, "The prophet like
unto Moses," the Messiah; and when Philip names Jesus of Nazareth,
Nathanael is at once skeptical whether the Messiah could come out of
Nazareth, an insignificant and despised place.

[John 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 1:46</span></span>

Come and see. That is the best answer to the skeptic. Bring him to
Christ, let him consider him, and what he has done for mankind. The
strongest proof that Jesus is the Christ is Jesus himself.

[John 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 1:48</span></span>

Whence knowest thou me? Nathanael, who had never met Jesus before, was
surprised to hear himself spoken of as one known.

When thou wast under the fig tree. There was something about this answer
that filled Nathanael with astonishment. Under the shade and shelter of
the fig tree he had some rare experience that is not recorded, and that
he supposed unknown to man. That Jesus knew of it and read his soul
startled him and dissipated his unbelief.

[John 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 1:49</span></span>

Thou art the Son of God; the King of Israel. Philip had said, "Jesus,
the son of Joseph," as he supposed, but Nathanael, convinced, declared
him the Son of God. This is the first confession of the divinity of
Jesus.

[John 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 1:51</span></span>

Ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending. Jacob, old
Israel, in his dream at Bethel, saw the ladder that reached to heaven
with the angels upon it ([Gen 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012).md).
Christ is that ladder, the way from earth to heaven, the way heaven
sends messages to the world and the way we must go to reach it.
Nathanael would be permitted to see that Jesus was the Mediator, that
through him the Father speaks to man; that through him there is
intercommunication between earth and heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 2](joh002.md)

</div>
