<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh009)  [Next](joh011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 10:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Sheepfold. The Shepherd of the Sheep. The Hireling. The
Feast of Dedication. The Jews Seek to Stone Jesus. He Teaches Beyond
Jordan.

[John 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 10:1</span></span>

He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold. The sheepfold is a
figure of the church, the door into which is Christ. The sheepfolds of
the East are large enclosures, open to the sky, but walled around with
reeds or stones or brick in order to afford a protection against
robbers, wolves, and other beasts of prey. There is a large door at
which the shepherd enters with the sheep.

[John 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 10:2</span></span>

He that entereth in by the door. The one who comes in by the door is the
shepherd. The figure is very plain to those familiar with Eastern
sheepfolds. The door is for the shepherd and the sheep, while those who
get in otherwise are robbers who seek to prey upon the sheep.

[John 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 10:3</span></span>

To him the porter openeth. The gatekeeper whose business is to guard the
entrance. This servant was furnished with arms to fight off intruders,
but the shepherd he would let in. It is not certain that Christ intended
to make the porter a figure of any spiritual thing, but if so, he would
represent God, who has decided who shall enter through the door.

And the sheep hear his voice. This is true to the letter. The sheep in
the East are so tame and so trained that they follow their keeper with
the utmost docility. He leads them forth from the fold just where he
pleases. The Eastern shepherds lead their sheep, while in our country we
drive them.

He calleth his own sheep by name. This corresponds exactly with the
facts of Eastern shepherd life. They give names to sheep as we do to
horses, cows, and dogs. "Passing by a flock of sheep," says Mr. Hartley,
"I asked the shepherd to call one of his sheep. He instantly did so, and
it left its pasturage and its companions, and ran to the shepherd with a
promptitude and signs of pleasure that I never witnessed before."

[John 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 10:4</span></span>

The sheep follow him: for they know his voice. Also literally true in
the East as all travelers testify, but a stranger they will not follow,
because his voice is strange. So true is it that when a traveler has
changed dress with the shepherd for an experiment, they still have
followed the disguised shepherd's voice and refused to listen to the
voice of a stranger in the garb of their own shepherd.

[John 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 10:6</span></span>

This parable spake Jesus unto them. The Greek word rendered here
"parable" is not so rendered elsewhere. It is rather a simile.

[John 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 10:7</span></span>

I am the door of the sheep. [Joh
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md) speak of shepherds in general.
These shepherds enter into the fold and go out by the same door as the
sheep. Christ is that door; the Door of the sheep, the one door for all,
both sheep and shepherds. There is no other way in, for "there is no
other name, under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved."

[John 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 10:8</span></span>

All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers. Abbott holds that
the idea is, "All who came, not entering through the door, but claiming
to be before me, having the precedence, independent of me, are thieves
and robbers." This seems to harmonize with the context, and is probably
the Savior's meaning. He included the Jewish rabbis, the Greek
philosophers, the pretended prophets, and the "Infallible Pope." These
all refuse to bow to his authority.

But the sheep did not hear them. The true sheep.

[John 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 10:9</span></span>

By me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. Christ is at once the
door, the shepherd and the pasture. His pasture is the bread of life and
the water of life.

[John 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 10:10</span></span>

The thief cometh not, but to steal. All those who enter otherwise than
by the door wish to prey upon the flock.

[John 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 10:11</span></span>

I am the good shepherd. This title, applied to Jehovah in Psa 23, and in
[Eze 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012.md), Christ here applies to
himself. The mark of the good shepherd is that he giveth his life for
his sheep. In that unsettled country the shepherd had often to defend
his flock.

[John 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 10:12</span></span>

But he that is a hireling . . . leaveth the sheep, and fleeth. It is not
the bare fact of a man receiving pay that makes him a hireling. "The
laborer is worthy of his hire." He is a hireling who would not work were
it not for this hire, and who works where the hire is highest rather
than were he can do the most good.

[John 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 10:16</span></span>

And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold. Not Jews, of whom
his followers then were, but Gentiles who would soon be called to him.
These would hear his voice, enter through the door, into the same fold
as the Jewish Christians, so that there would be "one fold and one
shepherd." There is only one Church and one door into it, and one
Shepherd over it.

[John 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 10:18</span></span>

I lay it down of myself. His life. He gave himself for man of his free
will. He laid it down on the cross; he took it up when he rose from the
dead. Abbott says of the lesson in these eighteen verses, "I understand
this lesson to be a parable with a double application. First, Christ
compares the Pharisees to shepherds, himself to the door, and declares
that those only are true shepherds who enter through the door; that is,
through Christ and his authority. All others are thieves and robbers.
Then he changes the application and declares himself the good shepherd
whose praises David and Isaiah sung, and indicates the nature of the
service that he will render unto his sheep by giving for them his life."

[John 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 10:22</span></span>

It was . . . the feast of dedication. Two months after the last
incidents, which occurred at and shortly after the Feast of Tabernacles.
The Feast of Dedication occurred in December, was not divinely
appointed, but was instituted by Judas MaccabÃ&brvbr;us in B. C. 164, to
commemorate the purification of the temple after it had been defiled by
the Syrians. Jesus took the occasion to teach the people that came
together. There is no proof that he observed it.

[John 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 10:23</span></span>

Walked . . . in Solomon's porch. A long covered colonnade that was a
part of the temple.

[John 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 10:24</span></span>

The Jews . . . said. The ruling class. They came, not for information,
but to secure ground for accusation.

[John 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 10:25</span></span>

I told you, and ye believed not. See [Joh
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019.md); [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036.md), [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md), [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md) and [Joh
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#036.md).

[John 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 10:26</span></span>

Ye believe not, because ye are not my sheep. Not from lack of proof, but
from a lack within themselves. If, as his sheep, they would follow (hear
and obey), they would recognize him.

[John 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 10:28</span></span>

I give unto them eternal life. To his sheep. Eternal life means, not
eternal existence, but eternal bliss. God hath made the soul deathless,
but it may exist in banishment from heaven.

[John 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 10:29</span></span>

No man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. The sheep who hear
his voice and follow him ([Joh 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027).md).
This is the condition of their safety. If they comply with it God's
grace will save them from the adversary.

[John 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 10:30</span></span>

I and my Father are one. Are so united that the Father is pledged to
keep the sheep of the Son. These words the Jews held to be blasphemy,
and sought to stone him. Compare [Joh
8:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#052.md).

[John 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 10:33</span></span>

For blasphemy. Because he said he and the Father were one.

[John 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 10:34</span></span>

Is it not written in your law. In Psalm 82.

I said, Ye are gods? It was there addressed to judges. Christ's argument
is: If your law calls judges gods, why should I be held guilty of
blasphemy for saying that I am the Son of God?

Sanctified. Set apart.

[John 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 10:39</span></span>

Therefore they sought again to take him. A few moments before they would
have stoned him by mob violence ([Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).md), but when they had cooled
somewhat they sought to arrest him.

[John 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 10:40</span></span>

And went away again beyond Jordan. He had been nearly three months in
Jerusalem, a very stormy ministry. Twice efforts were made to mob him
([Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md); [Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).md); twice, to arrest him ([Joh
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032.md), [Joh
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#045.md); [Joh
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039).md). His time would not come yet
for three months, till the next passover, and he retired from the storm
for a season. In the other gospels there are recorded a number of the
incidents of his ministry beyond the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 11](joh011.md)

</div>
