<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh003)  [Next](joh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--At Jacob's Well. The Woman of Samaria. The Question of Scared
Places. God to Be Worshiped in Spirit. The Samaritans Hear the Lord.
Jesus Departs to Galilee. The Nobleman's Son Healed.

[John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 4:1</span></span>

When therefore the Lord knew, etc. These verses tell why Jesus ended his
ministry in Judea, for the present, and departed into Galilee. The
Pharisees were becoming jealous of his increasing influence and the time
had not come for an open conflict.

[John 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 4:4</span></span>

He must needs go through Samaria. Because it lay right between Judea and
Galilee.

[John 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 4:5</span></span>

Then cometh he to a city of Samaria. Samaria was the district, embracing
the ancient city of Samaria, which lay between Judea and Galilee. The
district of Samaria comprised the country formerly occupied by the tribe
of Ephraim and the half tribe of Manasseh. When the Ten Tribes were
carried to Babylon, the Assyrian king sent in other tribes to occupy the
country. These mingled with the Jews left in the country, partly adopted
the Jewish worship, but were contemptuously rejected by the Jews when
the latter returned from the Captivity. From this time the enmity
between the two races was almost bitter, and they had no dealings (see
[Joh 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)).

Sychar. This place was the ancient Shechem, so famous in the early
history. It was forty miles north of Jerusalem, and was situated between
Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, the Mounts of Blessing and Cursing ([Jos
8:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030)). Here Jacob built his first
altar ([Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)); here Joseph was
buried in the land given him by his father ([Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)); and here also the covenant of
Israel was renewed with amens to the blessings and curses, after Joshua
had conquered Canaan. It was afterwards called Neapolis, and at present
a village called Nablous exists with a population of two thousand, about
two hundred of whom are Samaritans and preserve their ancient worship.

Near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. In this
parcel Joseph was buried when Israel came up out of Egypt, his bones
having been carried with them in accordance with his dying wish. His
tomb is still shown and it can hardly be doubted that his bones really
rest in the place pointed out.

[John 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 4:6</span></span>

Now Jacob's well was there. It is still seen by the traveler, cut
through the solid rock, between eight and nine feet in diameter, and
about seventy-five feet deep, though partly filled with rubbish.

Jesus . . . wearied . . . sat thus on the well. The wells were usually
curbed around with stone and covered. On this curb the Savior sat
sheltered from the sun at noon, the sixth hour being twelve o'clock.

[John 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 4:7</span></span>

There cometh a woman of Samaria. A Samaritan woman of the city of
Sychar. Why she should come so far from the city for water is a matter
of conjecture.

[John 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 4:9</span></span>

How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me? She saw by his
dress, appearance, and the direction whence he came that he was of the
Jewish race. The antipathy between the Jews and Samaritans was so bitter
that they were never wont to ask any hospitable rite. The woman's reply
is not a refusal of the Lord's request, but an expression of
astonishment that a Jew should ask a favor of a Samaritan.

[John 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 4:10</span></span>

If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give
me to drink. The great gift of God is not water, not even peace of soul,
but Christ himself, God's "unspeakable gift," "God gave his only
begotten Son." Had she known, the Savior declares, Thou wouldest have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. Observe: (1)
That Christ asks a favor in order to confer a greater one. (2) The well
and the water suggest the thirst of the soul and the waters of life.

Living water. Water of life. The woman thought he meant running water.

[John 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 4:11</span></span>

Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, . . . whence then hast thou that
living water? She was deeply impressed by his manner and his words, but
she fails to rise above the material meaning of his words.

[John 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 4:12</span></span>

Art thou greater than our father Jacob? The question indicates still
further her dawning conviction of the greatness of the stranger. It was
from Joseph, the son of Jacob, that the Samaritans claimed descent.
Jesus spoke of giving living water; Jacob, their great ancestor, had
given this well.

[John 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 4:13</span></span>

Whoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again. Her own experience
would confirm his words. Nothing earthly satisfies long.

[John 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 4:14</span></span>

Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst. The water of which he speaks is a gift which he gives to
humanity. It is not given to him, but is his own gift. His language is
always that of the Son of God. He says, "I am the life;" "Come to me, ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest;" "I am the
bread of life;" "He that believeth on me shall never thirst."

[John 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 4:15</span></span>

Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not. The mysterious words of the
Jewish stranger she cannot yet understand, but she is deeply stirred,
and one thing seemed plain--if she could have this water she would
thirst no more.

[John 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 4:16</span></span>

Go, call thy husband, and come hither. The woman has asked for the
water; before she can receive it she must be fully conscious of her
sinfulness. Hence Jesus makes a demand that will recall her past life.

[John 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 4:17</span></span>

I have no husband. The words have their designed effect. She has a man,
but not a husband.

[John 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 4:18</span></span>

Thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy
husband. She had been married five times; the easy divorce laws of the
age, permitting a "divorce for any cause," would allow many changes
without the death of either party. Some of her husbands may have died; a
part were almost certainly divorced. Her sixth alliance did not have
even the apology of such a marriage.

[John 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 4:19</span></span>

Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Every word that Jesus had
uttered had excited her wonder more and more, and when he lifted the
curtain off her life, she was convinced at once of his superhuman
knowledge.

[John 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 4:20</span></span>

Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship. Partly to turn attention from
her sinful life, and partly to have him settle a great controversy, she
appeals to him to say where men ought to worship God. The Jews went up
to Jerusalem to the temple. The Samaritans built their temples on "this
mountain," Mt. Gerizim. Note that the woman worshiped there because "our
fathers" did. The "fathers" were wrong. Many now keep up infant
sprinkling and other corruptions because their "fathers" practiced them.

[John 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 4:21</span></span>

The hour cometh, when neither in this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem.
Now comes the announcement of one of the grandest truths revealed by
Christ, that the place is immaterial; that true, spiritual worship is
essential.

[John 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 4:22</span></span>

Salvation is of the Jews. In the controversy between the Jews and
Samaritans, the former were right on the great issue. The Samaritans
worshiped, but knew not what they worshiped, because they rejected the
prophets who would have directed them.

[John 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 4:23</span></span>

The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth. The time is at hand, says the Lord, when
a worship of forms, or at holy places, will not meet the demands of the
Father. He must be worshiped with the heart, in spirit and in truth.
Spiritual worship can be offered in any land, wherever the soul can
humble itself before God.

[John 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 4:24</span></span>

God is a Spirit. Rather, "God is Spirit." This declaration is
fundamental. Since he is Spirit, he must receive spiritual worship, and
is everywhere present.

[John 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 4:25</span></span>

I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ. Her heart had been
made lighter with the great hope of the world. The words of Jesus Christ
carried her thoughts to that hope. He had told her much; the Messiah
would tell her all things, and give light on every dark question. She
perhaps began to suspect that Jesus was the Messiah. The admission that
Jesus makes, I am he, is the first recorded.

[John 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 4:27</span></span>

Upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the
woman. His disciples had left him alone at the well, while they went to
the village of Sychar to buy food. They wondered that he should talk
with a woman, and especially with a Samaritan woman. It was considered
by the Jews indecorous to talk with a woman in public, and the rabbins
held that to talk with such an inferior creature was beneath the dignity
of a doctor of the law. This illustrates the state from which woman has
been lifted by the Gospel.

[John 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 4:29</span></span>

Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did. He told her
some things about her own life, and conscience had told her more. She
felt that all was known to him, and naturally exaggerates by saying, "He
told me all my life."

[John 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 4:32</span></span>

I have meat to eat that ye know not of. "Man shall not live by bread
alone." The Lord who could go forty days in the wilderness without food,
in the exaltation of the soul caused by his baptism and the descent of
the Holy Spirit, would forget the hunger of the body also, when he was
pouring out the water of life to a poor, thirsty soul.

[John 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 4:33</span></span>

Hath any man brought him aught to eat? They cannot think of spiritual
food, heavenly manna, bread of life. Yet, long before, the prophet had
spoken of this food and had said, "Ye that have no money, come, buy
bread, and eat."

[John 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 4:34</span></span>

My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.
"Meat" in the Scripture means, not only flesh, but any kind of food. The
Savior declares that to do the will of God is food to him. It is
enjoyment and strength. It does not weary, but refreshes.

[John 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 4:35</span></span>

Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh the harvest?
Harvest began about the middle of April in Palestine. The time when the
Savior spoke would then be about the middle of December. But the harvest
of souls was ripe already.

Lift up your eyes. No doubt he pointed to the Samaritans now flocking
out to see him ([Joh 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039)).

[John 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 4:36</span></span>

He that reapeth receiveth wages. The figure is kept up. The reaper in
the harvest fields receives wages, and so shall those who reap the
harvest of souls; not earthly pay in money, or fame, or position, but
the happiness of doing the noblest work, and beyond, the crown of life
shining with stars.

[John 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 4:37</span></span>

One soweth, and another reapeth. This was a common proverb, growing out
of constant human experience, true of worldly and spiritual things. How
often has the patient pastor sowed, and then the evangelist has reaped
in a meeting the results!

[John 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 4:38</span></span>

I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour. The verb "sent"
is past, and refers to some event before the present incident. The
disciples had baptized multitudes, "more disciples than John" ([Joh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)); so many that John's disciples
reported "all men come unto him" ([Joh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026)). They had baptized these ([Joh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002)), reaping the fruit of John's
labors.

[John 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 4:40</span></span>

So when the Samaritans were come. They insisted that he should tarry
with them. A strange invitation for a Samaritan village to give to a
Jew. It was also a strange thing for a Jewish teacher to accept the
invitation.

[John 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 4:41</span></span>

Many more believed because of his own word. They saw and heard for
themselves.

[John 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 4:42</span></span>

Know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world. To the
woman Jesus had said that he was the Christ. Now, by his teachings, many
months before Peter's confession, the Samaritans pronounce him the
Christ, the Savior, not of Jews only, or Jews and Samaritans, but of the
world.

[John 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 4:46</span></span>

And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick. The Greek word
translated "nobleman" is Basileukos, from Basileus, a king, and implies
one connected in some way with royalty. It may have been Chuza ([Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)), Herod's steward.

[John 4:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 4:47</span></span>

Besought him that he would . . . heal his son. Note that: (1) The
nobleman has already "faith as a grain of mustard seed" in Jesus; (2)
that faith moves him to seek the aid of Jesus; (3) to make sure of his
help he comes in person, instead of sending servants; (4) while he
thought he could heal his son, he did not comprehend that it could be
done unless Jesus came to where he was; (5) he thought it would be too
late if the son died before his coming. His faith way very imperfect.

[John 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 4:48</span></span>

Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. The nobleman, in
his sore distress, had some faith, caused only by the fame of the "signs
and wonders" wrought. His faith was still imperfect, far below the holy
trust of the Samaritans. He is the type of a class whose belief depended
on outward signs.

[John 4:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 4:50</span></span>

Go thy way; thy son liveth. These words were spoken like the Son of God.
There was no hesitation; no doubt. The manner of the Lord at once
carried conviction to the heart of the sorrowing father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 5](joh005)

</div>
