<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](mar016)  [Next](luk001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LUKE.

THE THIRD GOSPEL is assigned by the common voice of the primitive Church
to Luke, "the beloved physician" and companion of Paul. Of his earlier
history nothing is recorded. There is no proof that he ever saw the Lord
or that he became a believer until some time after his death. He was not
a Jew, his name is Greek, his style and modes of thought point to Greek
training, and it has been generally believed that he was one of "the
Grecians who turned to the Lord" in the great commercial city of Antioch
where the first Gentile church beyond Palestine was founded. From the
incidental references to himself in the Acts we learn that he was the
constant companion of the later ministry of the great apostle to the
Gentiles, and this is confirmed by the allusions to him in the Epistles.
From [Col 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014); [Plm
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024); [Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011), we learn that he was a Gentile,
a physician, that he remained with Paul in his imprisonment at
CÃ&brvbr;sarea and attended him to Rome, where he was his companion
during his long sufferings

THE GOSPEL of Luke differs from the other three in its sources of
information. Matthew wrote as an eye witness; Mark probably recalled the
recollections of Peter; John recalled his own personal memories of the
life and words of the Lord, but Luke draws from the authentic sources of
information then accessible, and he carefully presents the results in an
orderly narrative. There are reasons for believing that during the
period when Paul was a prisoner at CÃ&brvbr;sarea, Luke, under his
direction, set in order the facts of the Life of Christ in order to
furnish an account fitted for the use of Gentile converts, and Gentiles
who desired to learn of the Lord. "As Paul was the apostle, so in a
faint degree Gentile Luke was the evangelist, of the Gentiles. He traces
the genealogy up, not merely to Abraham, but Adam, the son of God. He
makes Christ's first teachings at Nazareth commemorate the extension of
God's mercy beyond the limits of Israel. [Luk
4:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016). He shows how the sinner is
forgiven upon condition of obedient faith. [Luk
7:36-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036). The publican is, in Paul's
favorite term, justified. Evidently their narrative of the Lord's supper
is the same tradition. [Luk 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034);
[Co1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005)."

Luke's two books, his Gospels and the Acts, are properly two successive
parts of one Christian history; and as the latter terminates at the
point where Paul has lived two years at Rome, in the year 64, so the
Gospel must have been written before that period, namely during the 27
years after Christ's death. For as Luke terminates his Acts abruptly
with the close of Paul's two years' imprisonment, without adding a
syllable of that apostle's later history, it is very certain that the
Acts was published at that time. Yet, we know from the preface to Acts
that the Gospel had been already written. Thus, it is evident, that it
was written 27 years after the crucifixion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 1](luk001)

</div>
