<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk009)  [Next](luk011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 10:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Harvest Ready but the Laborers Few. Seventy Preachers
Chosen. The Charge. The Warning to Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum.
The Return of the Seventy. The Lawyer's Question. Who Is My Neighbor?.
The Parable of the Good Samaritan. Martha and Mary.

[Luke 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 10:1</span></span>

After these things. All that we can be certain of as to the time when
the seventy were appointed is that it was after the events Luke has
already related. There are reasons for thinking that it was near the
close of our Lord's ministry. It is usually located in the country east
of the Jordan, when the Lord began his last journey to Jerusalem.

Appointed seventy others. He had already sent forth the apostles ([Luk
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001)), and he now sent forth seventy
preachers more. That he could find seventy fitted for this mission shows
that his teaching was making a deep impression on the Galileans.

Sent them two and two. That each one might have a helper, a counsellor
and a

sympathizer.

Into every city and place. As the time of his earthly ministry
shortened, it increased in earnestness and activity. The Lord in person
visited as many places as possible, and these messengers were sent
before to preach to the people and to prepare the way.

[Luke 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 10:2</span></span>

The harvest truly is great. See notes on [Mat
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037), where the same language is used,
not on the same, but a similar occasion.

[Luke 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 10:3</span></span>

Go your ways. The instructions to the seventy are in substance the same
as those given to the twelve in Matthew, chapter 10. See notes on there.
Matthew is fuller. Luke adds: Salute no man by the way. The Jewish
salutations were very formal, hypocritical, and consumed much time. It
is said that it often required from one to three hours to complete these
formal salutations. The disciples were not to consume thus their
precious time, nor did the Savior wish them to go through with foolish
and insincere forms.

Peace be to this house. The usual form of blessing when entering a house
as a guest.

Son of peace. One who is worthy of such a blessing and hospitality
receives the messengers of the Lord.

[Luke 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 10:13</span></span>

Woe unto thee, Chorazin! See notes on [Mat
11:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021). It is thought that this is a
repetition of the words used on a former occasion, in order to emphasize
the sin of rejecting the messengers of the Lord.

[Luke 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 10:16</span></span>

He that heareth you, heareth me. See notes on [Mat
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040), where we have the same solemn
and suggestive declaration.

[Luke 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 10:17</span></span>

The seventy returned with joy. How long after they were sent forth is
unknown.

Even the devils are subject unto us in thy name. In accordance with the
promise made to the twelve ([Mat
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)), and probably repeated to the
seventy. All was wrought by the power of Christ's name.

I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from heaven. Various interpretations
of this statement are given, but it is probable that Christ refers to
the original fall of Satan ([Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012); Jude 6). The victory of his
disciples over the demons is the harbinger of another fall, when Satan
and all his works shall be destroyed.

To tread upon serpents and scorpions. Evidently an allusion to the
promise that the seed of woman shall bruise the serpent's head ([Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)). It is a promise of victory over
the power of sin, of victory over all the power of the enemy. The
connection shows that it is symbolical.

Rejoice not in your own power. Judas had this power in Christ's name.

But rather rejoice. In the hope of salvation. The greatest of all
subjects of rejoicing is that we are the children of God.

[Luke 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 10:21</span></span>

I thank thee, Father. See [Mat
11:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), for notes. The same language
is probably uttered here a second time.

[Luke 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 10:23</span></span>

See notes on [Mat 13:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016). A similar
occasion calls for the same language here recorded.

[Luke 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 10:25</span></span>

The parable of the Good Samaritan, as well as that of the Prodigal Son
and Lazarus and Dives, are given only by Luke.

A certain lawyer. One versed in the Jewish law, a theologian, a scribe,
and possibly a rabbi.

Tempted him. Put him to trial.

What shall I do to inherit eternal life? He probably had noted that
Jesus was calling sinners to repentance, but he fancied that he belonged
to another class, and hence asks, What shall I do?

What is written? The Lord calls on the lawyer to state his own
understanding of the law.

Thou shalt love the Lord. The lawyer answered well and gave the sum of
the whole law. See [Deu 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) and [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018).

This do and thou shalt live. He who fulfills the great law of love is
born again. There is no inconsistency. We repent and live, believe and
live, obey and live, and love and live. For these are all co-related.
One cannot exist without the others. We cannot love God unless we
believe and repent. "He that loves me will keep my words" ([Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)).

Willing to justify himself. Evidently conscious that he did not keep the
law of love.

Who is my neighbour? The Lord answers by a parable.

[Luke 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 10:30</span></span>

A certain man. A Jew of Jerusalem.

Went down. It was a constant descent from Jerusalem to Jericho, over
3,000 feet in eighteen miles.

Fell among robbers. The road is a dark, desolate, mountain pass,
dangerous then, so beset by robbers still that no traveler dares go
through it without a guard.

Which stripped him. Not only of raiment, but of all he had; then left
him, stunned, bleeding, unconscious, nearly dead.

A certain priest. Jericho was a city of priests. A priest ought to be a
holy man. The law commanded mercy and help to a neighbor ([Exo
23:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004); [Deu
22:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)). The priest and Levite both
disregarded the law in passing the poor sufferer.

Likewise a Levite. A temple minister. He probably excused himself by the
example of his priest.

A certain Samaritan. The hereditary enemy of the Jews; despised and
hated by the latter. "The Jews and Samaritans have no dealings" ([Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)). If any man had excuse for
passing the wounded Jew by it was the Samaritan. But he, unlike the
priest and Levite, had compassion. His compassion leads to action, to
self-denial, and inconvenience. He dresses the man's wounds, sets him on
his own beast, carries him to the inn, and when he left, left money for
his care. For ancient inns, see note on [Luk
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007).

Two pence was two days' wages, and there was promise of more.

Which of these three . . . proved neighbour? The stranger became the
neighbor. So we are to be neighbors to all who need help. Christian love
must know no narrow bounds of race or sect. Genuine philanthropy is a
Christian spirit.

[Luke 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 10:38</span></span>

Entered into a certain village. Bethany, the home of Mary, Martha and
Lazarus. It is probable that this incident is not related in its order
of time. It may have occurred on the last journey.

[Luke 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 10:39</span></span>

Sat at the Lord's feet, and heard his word. Martha seems to have been
mistress of the house. Her thought was to entertain the Lord; Mary's to
hear his word; both commendable; the latter, best.

[Luke 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 10:40</span></span>

Dost thou not care? Her sister seemed to her negligent and selfish, when
her apparent neglect was do to the absorption in the truth.

[Luke 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 10:41</span></span>

Thou art anxious and troubled. Agitated over temporal matters while
there are others more important.

One thing is needful. Jesus cared nothing for bodily indulgence. The
important thing was the bread of life. That, Mary had chosen. Heed the
lesson that he who receives most of his word and spirit, is most
pleasing in his sight.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 11](luk011)

</div>
