<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk001)  [Next](luk003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Decree of Augustus CÃ&brvbr;sar. The Journey from Nazareth
to Bethlehem. The Babe in the Manger. The Shepherds and the Song of the
Angels. The Circumcision of the Child. The Child in the Temple. The
Prophecies of Simeon and Anna. The Child at Nazareth. Jesus with the
Doctors. My Father's Business.

[Luke 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 2:1</span></span>

Went out a decree from CÃ&brvbr;sar Augustus. Augustus CÃ&brvbr;sar, the
nephew and heir of Julius CÃ&brvbr;sar, the first of the Roman emperors,
was now the ruler of the civilized world. Though Judea was ruled by
Herod as king, he was dependent upon and the servant of Augustus
CÃ&brvbr;sar.

That all the world. The Roman empire which embraced all the world then
known to civilization; all southern and western Europe, western Asia and
northern Africa.

Should be enrolled. A census was to be taken as a preliminary to a poll
tax in the provinces.

[Luke 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 2:2</span></span>

This was the first enrolment made, etc. This statement has caused some
difficulty. Luke seems to affirm that the enrolment took place the year
Jesus was born, but while Cyrenius was governor of Syria. Now Cyrenius
was governor of Syria from A. D. 6 to A. D. 11. There are two ways of
settling the apparent difficulty: (1) Augustus CÃ&brvbr;sar, incensed at
Herod, ordered an enrolment for taxation of the Jews the year of the
birth of Jesus. It was carried out in all probability by Cyrenius. The
intercession of Herod's minister, Nicolas, averted the displeasure of
Augustus and the taxation did not take place until Cyrenius was governor
of Syria, after Archelaus, son of Herod, was deposed. These facts we
learn from Josephus, and they remove the apparent discrepancy. But (2)
A. W. Zumpt, of Berlin, followed by Alford and Schaff, make it highly
probable that Cyrenius was governor of Syria twice, the first time from
B. C. 4 to B. C. 1. I have not space for the argument which seems
conclusive. But in B. C. 4 Jesus was born. Ancient writers, Christians
as well as pagan opposers, state that Jesus was born while Cyrenius was
governor of Syria.

[Luke 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 2:3</span></span>

Every one to his own city. It was the Jewish custom to enroll by tribes
and families. Joseph was of the family of David, and would have to be
enrolled where that family had its landed inheritance.

[Luke 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 2:4</span></span>

Joseph also went from Galilee. How long he had been living in Galilee is
unknown.

To the city called Bethlehem. The city of David, and of David's family.

[Luke 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 2:5</span></span>

To enrol himself with Mary. Women had to be enrolled also and were
subject to the poll tax. Mary was of the line of David, and hence would
also have to go to Bethlehem.

[Luke 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 2:6</span></span>

And it came to pass. Mary and Joseph, when journeying to Bethlehem, were
probably ignorant of the fact that they were helping to fulfill the
prophecy that pointed to Bethlehem as the birthplace of Christ.

[Luke 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 2:7</span></span>

Her first-born son. This implies that Mary was subsequently the mother
of other children.

Swaddling clothes. A long, narrow cloth in which new-born children were
closely

wrapped.

In a manger. In the feeding trough of beasts of burden, probably
attached to the inn, where there was no room for them among the crowds
of strangers then in the city. When the Lord stooped from Divine glory
to take upon him humanity, he stooped to its most lowly estate. An
Oriental inn is thus described: "The khan is usually much on the model
of the Eastern house, but of much larger extent. Four rows of apartments
are so constructed as to enclose a large yard with a well in the center
where the cattle may be kept. The outer wall is usually of brick upon a
stone basement. The apartments are entered by the guests from the yard,
and are elevated two or three feet above the level of the yard. Below
and behind the row of the travelers' apartments was often the row or the
long room of stables, into which the floors of the apartments being a
little extended, formed a platform upon which the camels could eat."

[Luke 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 2:8</span></span>

There were shepherds. The fields around Bethlehem have been for four
thousand years the resort of shepherds. There David had cared for his
flocks.

Keeping watch. To guard their flocks from robbers and wild beasts, and
to keep them from straying.

[Luke 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 2:9</span></span>

The angel of the Lord. An angel announces the conception of Jesus; a
host of angels publish his birth; in his temptation an angel strengthens
him; in his agony an angel comforts him; at his resurrection an angel
rolls away the stone from the door of the sepulcher; at his ascension
the angels attend him up to heaven; and at his second coming to judge
the world he shall be "revealed from heaven with his mighty angels."

[Luke 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 2:10</span></span>

I bring you good tidings. The way to pardon and peace with God was about
to be thrown open to all mankind.

To all people. The knowledge of God was no longer to be confined to the
Jews, but to be offered to the whole Gentile world.

[Luke 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 2:11</span></span>

City of David. A term applied to the village of Bethlehem as the
birthplace of the greatest among Israel's kings; David's greater Son
begins his earthly career in his ancestor's home. Seven hundred years
before the prophet had predicted the Messiah's birth at Bethlehem ([Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002).md).

Christ the Lord. The Anointed Lord, for which the nation was so eagerly
longing.

[Luke 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 2:12</span></span>

A sign unto you. The sign was not itself a miraculous one, but the
prediction of it was so. The babe, the swaddle, and the manger were the
three tokens.

[Luke 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 2:13</span></span>

A multitude of the heavenly host; i. e., angels, who are represented as
a host surrounding the throne of God ([Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019.md); [Ch2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#018.md); [Psa
103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021.md); [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md); [Mat
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053.md); [Rev
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#014).md).

Praising God. Their praises are recorded in the next verse.

[Luke 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 2:14</span></span>

Glory to God. The life of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the earth was the
working out and development of the song of the angels. It was "Glory to
God" illustrated in his consecration and death. It was "peace" in all
the utterances of his lips; peace in his Gospel. It was "good will
toward man;" for every thought, word and act of that blessed life was
the translation of God's infinite love into forms visible to the mortal
eyes that saw him.

[Luke 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 2:16</span></span>

Came with haste. Mark the prompt obedience to the heavenly vision
displayed by the shepherds. We see in them no doubts, or questionings,
or hesitations.

[Luke 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 2:19</span></span>

Mary kept all these things. A mother forgets none of those things which
occur respecting her children.

[Luke 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 2:21</span></span>

When eight days were accomplished for circumcising of the child. See
note on [Luk 1:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#059.md). According to the
law Jesus was circumcised the eight day. Born under the law of Moses, he
kept it, in all things blameless, until "the handwriting of ordinances
was nailed to the cross." He was circumcised because it was then God's
law, to be obeyed until it was set aside. His example does not warrant
infant baptism, because he was afterwards baptized when a man, but does
show that the law of God is to be observed, whatever it may be. There is
no ground for the assertion that baptism came in the place of
circumcision. Note, (1) circumcised Jews were also baptized; (2) only
males were circumcised, while both sexes are baptized; (3) there is no
scriptural ground for the statement that one rite takes the place of
another.

His name was called Jesus. The name was given on the eighth day,
according to Jewish custom, which the angel had commanded.

[Luke 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 2:22</span></span>

The days of their purification. See [Lev
12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004.md). These "days" were a period of
thirty-three days after the circumcision of a male child. He was then to
be presented in the temple by the parents.

[Luke 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 2:23</span></span>

Every male . . . shall be called holy. That is, devoted to the Lord. See
[Exo 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012.md). All the first-born were to
be presented to the Lord and redeemed by an offering ([Num
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015).md).

[Luke 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 2:24</span></span>

To offer a sacrifice. The law ([Lev
12:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006).md) required a lamb for a burnt
offering and a pigeon or turtle-dove for a sin offering, but in the case
of the poor one of these birds might be substituted for the lamb, "and
the priest shall make atonement for her and she shall be clean" . The
fact that Joseph and Mary brought a pair of birds instead of a lamb
shows that they were very poor. The gifts of the wise men were after
this.

[Luke 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 2:25</span></span>

Simeon. The first prophet to declare that Christ had come.

Looking for the consolation of Israel. The promised Messiah.

The Holy Spirit was upon him. To give him supernatural knowledge. It was
revealed to him that he should see Christ.

[Luke 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 2:27</span></span>

Came in the Spirit into the temple. Directed by and filled with the
Spirit.

After the custom of the law. Offered the required sacrifices. The law
was strictly observed, because Jesus was "born under the law."

[Luke 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 2:28</span></span>

And said. The utterances of Elizabeth, Mary and Simeon are consecutive.
Each begins where the other ends. Mary sings her own born Messiah;
Zacharias celebrates the triumph of Israel, and Simeon announces the
hopes of the Gentiles. But, besides this holding forth the Messiah as a
Savior for Gentile as well as Jew, what is remarkable is, that he
announces in Jesus a suffering Messiah as well as a glorious.--Whedon.

[Luke 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 2:32</span></span>

A light to lighten the Gentiles. Scholars have said that in the work of
opening the gates of Christianity to the Gentiles, Stephen was the
forerunner of Paul. Might it not be said that Simeon was the forerunner
of Stephen, and the Gentile Luke the historian of both? Yet the true
doctrine on the subject is explicitly and repeatedly declared not only
here, but in the prophecies of the Old Testament. Compare [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md); [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md); [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md).

[Luke 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 2:33</span></span>

Marvelled. That Simeon should know the child.

[Luke 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 2:34</span></span>

Set for the falling and rising of many. Christ brought downfall to the
hopes of those who expected a temporal prince and a political
millennium, and ruin to those whose desire for the kingdom of God was
ambition for place and power in it, as the Pharisees. He brought rising
to those who were willing that God should overthrow their plans and
ambitions, and who accepted from him the grander gift of a universal
kingdom, prepared for all people. The rejection of him brought ruin to
the Jews; the acceptance of him brought life eternal.

[Luke 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 2:35</span></span>

A sword shall pierce through thine own soul. He announces that the
blessed mother should also be a sorrowing mother. Though she was exulted
in the thought that her son should sit on the throne of David, she
learns now that the calumny will make him its sign, and a sword shall
pierce her soul.

That the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. Christ brings to light
by bringing into activity the thoughts of the heart. The result of
preaching Christ is always to awaken opposition or love and obedience.

[Luke 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 2:36</span></span>

One Anna, a prophetess. An aged saint who spoke by inspiration.

Daughter of Phanuel. Evidently a man well known in that day.

Of the tribe of Asher. One of the twelve tribes occupying the strip of
sea-coast from Sidon to Carmel.

[Luke 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 2:37</span></span>

A widow even for fourscore and four years. She had passed seven years
with a husband when young and then remained a widow until, at this time,
she was eighty-four years old, devoting herself to a religious life.

Departed not from the temple. Probably assigned, on account of her
saintly character, a chamber in the temple.

[Luke 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 2:38</span></span>

Spake of him. Of the Babe, she speaking by inspiration, and declaring
that he was the promised child.

[Luke 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 2:39</span></span>

They returned into Galilee. Luke omits the stirring events that lie
between the visit to the temple and the return to Nazareth, possibly
because they are so fully given by Matthew. See Matthew, chapter 2.

Their own city Nazareth. The old home of Joseph and Mary, now to be the
home of Jesus until he was thirty years of age; a mountain village in
southern Galilee.

[Luke 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 2:40</span></span>

The child grew. He was a child, and a child that grew in heart, in
intellect, in size, in grace, in favor with God. Not a man in child's
years.

Filled with wisdom. The body advances in stature and the soul in wisdom.
The divine nature revealed its own wisdom in proportion to the measure
of the bodily growth.--Cyril. In "the mystery of godliness," "God
manifest in the flesh," one of the inscrutable things that was that the
Divine man should become a babe, not only in body, but in mind and
wisdom.

[Luke 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 2:41</span></span>

Went to Jerusalem. The law of Moses required that the adult males of the
Jewish nation should appear before the Lord, at the place of his altar,
three times every year--at the great festivals, Passover, Pentecost, and
Tabernacles. Though females were not required to attend, they often did
from religious devotion.

[Luke 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 2:42</span></span>

When he was twelve years old. At the age of twelve a boy was called by
the Jews "son of the law," and first incurred legal obligation.
Henceforth it would be his personal duty to keep the law.

[Luke 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 2:43</span></span>

Fulfilled the days. The seven of the passover week.

Jesus tarried behind. Luke neither tells us that Jesus remained behind
at Jerusalem intentionally, nor that Joseph and Mary lost sight of him
through want of necessary care. A circumstance must here have been
omitted, and we may safely suppose that Joseph and Mary joined their
fellow-travelers in the persuasion that Jesus, who knew of the time and
place of departure, was among the younger ones.

[Luke 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 2:44</span></span>

In the company. The caravans, in which the passover companies went, for
the purpose of protection against beasts and robbers, must have each
been large, composed of many parties, clans and kindreds. Jesus might
easily, therefore, have not been missed until the end of the first day.

[Luke 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 2:46</span></span>

In the temple. Probably in one of the porches of the court of the women,
where the schools of the rabbis were held, and the law regularly
expounded.

In the midst of the doctors. The learned rabbins. Some of the greatest
doctors of Jewish history lived about this period--Hillel, Rabbi Simeon
and Gamaliel.

Asking them questions. It was the custom in Jewish rabbinical schools
for scholars to ask questions.

[Luke 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 2:49</span></span>

How is it that ye sought me? Did ye not know that I must be in my
Father's house? That is, in the temple, where they did find him. They
ought to have come there at once. These words are the first in which he
reveals his consciousness of his supernatural birth.

[Luke 2:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 2:50</span></span>

Understood not. Did not comprehend all he meant in speaking of his
Father's house.

[Luke 2:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 2:51</span></span>

He went down with them. If his heart drew him to the temple, the voice
of duty called him back to Galilee, for the law required obedience to
parents.

[Luke 2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 2:52</span></span>

Jesus increased. Jesus grew up among a people seldom and only
contemptuously named by the ancient classics, and subjected at the time
to the yoke of a foreign oppressor; in a remote and conquered province
of the Roman empire; in the darkest district of Palestine; in a little
country town of proverbial insignificance; in poverty and manual labor;
in the obscurity of a carpenter's shop; far away from universities,
academies, libraries, and literary or polished society; without any
help, as far as we know, except the parental care, the daily wonders of
nature, the Old Testament Scriptures, the weekly Sabbath service of the
synagogue at Nazareth ([Luk 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016).md), the
annual festivities in the temple of Jerusalem ([Luk
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042).md), and the secret intercourse of
his soul with God, his heavenly Father.--Schaff.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 3](luk003.md)

</div>
