<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk022)  [Next](luk024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 23:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Jesus Brought Before Pilate. Acquitted by Pilate. On the
Clamor of Priests Sent to Herod. Silent Before Herod. Sent Again,
Arrayed as a King, to Pilate. Examined a Second Time and No Fault Found.
Barabbas Demanded Instead of Christ. Pilate Yields and Sends Jesus to Be
Crucified. The Weeping of the Daughters of Jerusalem. Between Thieves.
Mocked on the Cross. The Penitent Thief. The Death of Jesus. The Burial.

[Luke 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 23:1</span></span>

The Trial Before Pilate. Described in Mat. 27:11-35; Mark 15:1-23; John
18:28-19:16. See notes on Matthew and John.

Led him to Pilate. The Sanhedrim, after a private conference, ([Mat
27:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)), came in a body to accuse
Jesus of sedition.

Forbidding to give tribute to CÃ&brvbr;sar. This was utterly false ([Mat
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)).

That he is Christ a king. This was true, but not in the sense they made
the charge. He did not claim to be an earthly king.

I find no fault in him. This decision was given after an examination of
Jesus ([Joh 18:33-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033)). In this Jesus
explained to Pilate that his kingdom was not of this world.

He sent him to Herod. Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee. The Jews in
their clamor against Pilate's decision declared that Jesus was of
Galilee; so he thought to get out of his difficulty by turning Jesus
over to Herod, who was now in Jerusalem to attend the passover.

Herod . . . was exceeding glad. That he might gratify his curiosity to
see Jesus. This was the Herod who had murdered John the Baptist.

Herod . . . mocked him. Pilate was a better man than Herod. Though he
yielded weakly to the clamor, he was not a trifler.

Herod and Pilate became friends. Because of Pilate's courtesy in sending
Herod a prisoner that belonged to his province. Why they were enemies is
not stated.

Nor yet Herod. These words occur in another effort of Pilate to release
Jesus, and imply that Herod had sent word that he found no guilt in the
prisoner.

I will therefore chastise him. This was an effort to make a compromise.
To gratify and save the pride of the Sanhedrim he will chastise an
innocent man and then let him go.

Release unto us Barabbas. See notes on [Mat
27:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015), for the choice of Barabbas
rather than Christ.

[Luke 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 23:26</span></span>

The Crucifixion. Compare Mat. 27:32-56; Mark 15:21-41; [Joh
19:17-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017). See notes on Matthew.

A great multitude of people, and of women. This shows that, although
awed, Jesus had many sympathizers in Jerusalem.

Daughters of Jerusalem. These weeping women belonged to the city.

Weep for yourselves. In this hour of trial his heart is broken for the
woes coming upon them in the speedy destruction of Jerusalem.

If they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry? A proverb, meaning here, "If the rulers and the Romans crucify the
Messiah of the nation, the Hope of Israel, what shall they do to the
nation itself?" What they would do was seen in less than forty years.

Father, forgive them. This prayer for his murderers is reported only by
Luke. It was evidently uttered just after he was nailed to the cross.
What divine love in a prayer springing right out of the depth of his
physical suffering!

They know not what they do. Know not that they reject and slay their own
Messiah; know not that, in this act, they doom their city and nation to
destruction. "He made intercession for transgressors" ([Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)).

They parted his raiment. The executioners cast lots for it. See [Joh
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023).

One of the malefactors. Matthew and Mark represent the malefactors as
mocking him. It may be that only one spoke, apparently for both, or that
both spoke at first, and then one was silent.

Art not thou the Christ? That Jesus did not save himself and his
companions in suffering seemed to this malefactor to prove that this was
not the Christ.

Seeing thou art in the same condemnation. For sedition and rebellion;
the one probably of which Barabbas was leader. Christ was condemned as a
seditious person, but the malefactor knew that he had no part. He "had
done nothing amiss."

Lord, remember me. This prayer indicates faith in Jesus as the Christ, a
faith that overcomes the cross, and sees Jesus a victor over death, in
his kingdom. Such faith was mighty to save.

To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise. On the cross together, the
evil doer, who believed in the Crucified One, shall be with Christ in
paradise. He was no doubt a Jew, perhaps knew somewhat of Christ before,
and was saved by the power and word of Christ, before, and was saved by
the power and word of Christ, as he saved the woman that was a sinner
([Luk 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048)). So he still saves. If we
comply with the conditions of his word, as preached by the apostles in
the Gospel of the Risen Savior, we will be saved.

There was a darkness. See note on [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045).

Cried with a loud voice. He said: "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani." This
was followed by, "It is finished" (John), and the words here, Father
into thy hands, etc.

[Luke 23:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 23:47</span></span>

See notes on [Mat 27:54-56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054).

[Luke 23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 23:50</span></span>

On The Burial of Jesus, see notes on [Mat
27:57-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057). Compare [Mar
15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042) and [Joh
19:36-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036).

A counsellor. A member of the Sanhedrim.

Had not consented to their counsel. Neither Joseph nor Nicodemus could
have been present when Jesus was condemned, and perhaps were not
invited.

That day was the preparation. For the Passover, see [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014). This shows that the Jews had
not yet eaten their passover.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 24](luk024)

</div>
