<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat014)  [Next](mat016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 15:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Eating with Unwashen Hands. Keeping the Traditions of Men.
What Defileth a Man. The Blind Leaders of the Blind. In the Bounds of
Tyre and Sidon. The Appeal of the Woman of Canaan. Great Faith and Its
Results. Feeding the Four Thousand.

[Matthew 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 15:1</span></span>

Scribes and Pharisees . . . of Jerusalem. Representatives of these
bodies, sent, no doubt to counteract the influence of Christ. Compare
[Mar 7:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001.md). These were always bitter
opposers of Jesus.

[Matthew 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 15:2</span></span>

Why do thy disciples transgress? Not the law of Moses, but the tradition
of the elders, which had as much authority with the Pharisees as the
written law.

The tradition of the elders. Purported to be precepts never written in
the Scriptures, but handed down from the times of Moses and the elders
by oral means. These precepts were spoken of the "law upon the lip," and
have been embodied in the Talmud. They were additions to the written
word. See [Gal 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#014.md).

For they wash not their hands. The orthodox Jews insisted on washing the
hands before eating, not to remove the filth, but lest they might have
touched something ceremonially unclean. This commandment was purely
traditional, but so rigidly did they insist upon observing it that the
Rabbi Akiba, imprisoned by the Romans and with scarcely water to sustain
life, preferred to use all provided for his ceremonial ablutions, and to
die of thirst.

[Matthew 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 15:3</span></span>

Why do ye also transgress? The Lord does not deny their charge, but
strikes at the evil by showing that their human traditions led them to
break God's written law.

[Matthew 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 15:4</span></span>

For God said. [Exo 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017.md).

He that speaketh evil, etc. The Ten Commandments promised long life to
those who honored father and mother. Here the Lord quotes the punishment
of dishonoring them. On nothing did Moses insist more than respect for
parents.

[Matthew 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 15:5</span></span>

Ye say. Following tradition, you say one thing while God says in the law
just the opposite. The scribes taught that a Jew by calling his
possessions "Corban" (a gift to God, [Mar
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011).md) was absolved from the duty of
caring for his parents, even though he did not afterward devote his
property to sacred uses. Thus by an artifice the law with respect to
parents could be set aside. The Talmud furnishes a curious illustration
of this perversion of the command. The Mishna says: "He that curses his
father or his mother is not guilty, unless he curses them with an
express mention of the name of Jehovah."

[Matthew 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 15:6</span></span>

Ye have void the word of God by your tradition. Modern Pharisaism does
the same. Church tradition leads to dogmas that set aside God's
commands. The corruption of the simplicity of early Christianity is due
to following human tradition.

[Matthew 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 15:7</span></span>

Ye hypocrites. The word so rendered might mean one self-deceived as well
as a deceiver, but was always a rebuke.

Well did Isaiah prophesy of you. See [Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md).

[Matthew 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 15:8</span></span>

This people. The Jews. [Mat 15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008.md) are
the quotation from Isaiah.

Their heart is far from me. The essential of true worship is that the
heart be wholly given to God. Even the forms commanded by God are
worthless unless they are obeyed from the heart.

[Matthew 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 15:9</span></span>

In vain do they worship me. This worship is all idle, empty, and without
profit, because they teach as doctrines the commandments of men. This
rebuke to the Pharisees, who had added to the law of Moses many
traditional human precepts, applies equally to all modern religionists
who have modified or added to the Christianity of Christ and the
apostles. Whatever one cannot find in the New Testament is of such a
character; observance of saints' days, of Christmas, of Lent, the
removal of the cup in the Lord's Supper from the laity, infant
sprinkling, party creeds and party shibboleths, are all of men and not
of God. The devout worshiper should go right to the New Testament for
his religion, and reject every ordinance or precept that is not to be
found there.

[Matthew 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 15:10</span></span>

He called the multitude. In order to show them that the Pharisaical
expounders of the law did not understand its real sense.

Not that which goeth into a man defileth. The Mosaic law forbade Jews to
eat what was ceremonially unclean, in order to teach the need of moral
purity. The Rabbins added stringent precepts to prevent the slightest
contact with ceremonial uncleanness, but were careless about moral
purity. Christ shows that a pure heart is far more important than clean
food, in the ceremonial sense, in the stomach. Pharisees in all ages
have paid more attention to the letter than to the spirit, to the symbol
than to that which is signified.

That which cometh out of a man. The impure words that indicate an impure
heart. What one eats does not render him defiled before God, but what he
says. See [Mat 15:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#018.md).

[Matthew 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 15:12</span></span>

The Pharisees were offended. Found fault. They would insist that he set
aside the law, whereas it was tradition that he rejected.

[Matthew 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 15:13</span></span>

Every plant. A general truth, but here refers to the doctrines not of
God, like "the tradition of the elders."

[Matthew 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 15:14</span></span>

Let them alone. The Pharisees. His disciples were troubled by their
opposition.

They be blind leaders of the blind. They pretend to be spiritual guides
of the people, while spiritually blind themselves. The blind are unsafe
guides of the blind.

[Matthew 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 15:15</span></span>

Declare unto us the parable. The figure was used in [Mat
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011.md).

[Matthew 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 15:16</span></span>

Is cast out. What is eaten passes through the body and passes away. It
does not defile the soul.

[Matthew 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 15:18</span></span>

Out of the heart. The emotional nature; the mind. Evil deeds are
begotten of evil thoughts; evil words are the expression of these evil
thoughts. These indicate a sinful heart and make a man sinful, or
defiled.

[Matthew 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 15:21</span></span>

Jesus . . . departed into the coasts. Compare [Mar
7:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024.md).

Tyre and Sidon. Tyre and Sidon were the two principal cities of
Phoenicia, on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. Tyre was about twenty
miles south of Sidon, and about one hundred miles in a straight line
northwest of Jerusalem. In the days of David and Solomon, Tyre was the
leading seaport of the world. It was afterwards taken by the
Babylonians, the Persians, and Alexander, but up to the time of Christ
it remained a great commercial city. Since then its harbor has been
filled with sand, and there remains only a wretched shadow of its former
greatness. Both were Gentile cities in a Gentile country. This is the
only instance in the Lord's ministry when he went beyond the bounds of
Palestine.

[Matthew 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 15:22</span></span>

Behold, a woman of Canaan. The name Canaan was the oldest bestowed upon
the country, and all the heathen inhabitants were often called
Canaanites, whether of the same stock or not. Mark says ([Mar
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#026).md) that the woman was a Greek, a
Syro-Phoenician; i. e., a Gentile, and a Syro-Phoenician, because she
lived in the district of Syria called Phoenicia.

Have mercy on me. She has a boon to ask for her daughter, or rather
indeed for herself, for so entirely had she made her daughter's misery
her own.

My daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. More correctly, "a demon."
See note on [Mat 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028.md).

O Lord, thou son of David. It is remarkable that two of the brightest
examples of faith seen in the ministry of Christ were exhibited by
Gentiles, that of the centurion ([Mat
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008).md), and of this woman. The fact
that the latter addresses Jesus as "the son of David," shows that she
knew of the prophecies concerning the Christ and that he would be the
son of David.

[Matthew 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 15:23</span></span>

He answered her not a word. He neither repelled her, nor made a
favorable answer. There were reasons for hesitation, given in [Mat
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024.md), on which see the comment , but
there is no doubt that it was his purpose to have mercy. He delayed in
order to bring out a great lesson.

[Matthew 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 15:24</span></span>

I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. The Lord's
personal mission was to the Jews. Under the first commission his
apostles were directed to go only to the Jews ([Mat
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006).md). It would be impossible to
evangelize the Gentiles without setting aside the Jewish customs, the
law of Moses, and arousing the bitterest prejudice of the Jews. Hence it
was the divine plan that the Son should "keep the law blameless" during
his ministry. It was only when the Jews crucified him "that the
handwriting of ordinances was nailed to the cross," the "wall of
partition" between Jews and Gentiles broken down, and all prepared for
the Great Commission which bade his disciples "go into all the world and
preach the gospel to every creature."

[Matthew 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 15:25</span></span>

Then came she and worshipped him. Instead of being discouraged by the
words of Christ, she only became the more earnest.

[Matthew 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 15:26</span></span>

It is not meet to take the children's bread. She knew that, in comparing
the Jews to the children of God's family, and the heathen to the dogs
without, he simply used the customary language of a Jew. He would bring
out fully the greatness of her faith. The gospel was offered first to
the Jews and then to all.

[Matthew 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 15:27</span></span>

Truth, Lord. Observe that she acquiesces heartily in Christ's
declaration: it is not fit that the dogs be fed before the children.

Yet the dogs eat of the crumbs. The word for crumbs is a diminutive, and
means little crumbs.

[Matthew 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 15:28</span></span>

Woman, great is thy faith. We can see how greatness of faith is
manifested: (1) She came to Christ under difficulties. (2) She
persevered when her prayer seemed to be denied. (3) She still pleaded
when obstacles were presented. (4) She waited at the feet of the Lord
until he had mercy. Such faith always prevails.

Her daughter was made whole. Mark, who adds some features omitted by
Matthew, follows the woman home, where she found her daughter no longer
raving, or in convulsions, but lying quiet on the bed, healed in
consequence of her mother's faith and prayers.

[Matthew 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 15:29</span></span>

And Jesus departed from thence. How long Jesus staid in these parts is
unknown.

[Matthew 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 15:30</span></span>

There came to him great multitudes. Where he had retired for rest and
solitude to a mountain ([Mat 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029).md).

[Matthew 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 15:31</span></span>

Glorified the God of Israel. They were Jews, but living on the border,
somewhat under heathen ideas. The miracles of Christ led them to praise
and reverence Jehovah.

[Matthew 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 15:32</span></span>

I have compassion on the multitude. Because while seeking him in his
mountain solitude many of them had been for three days without regular
food.

[Matthew 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 15:33</span></span>

Whence should we have so many loaves? This was not said in ignorance of
the Lord's creative power, but probably to suggest the need of its
exercise. They could not have forgotten the events narrated in [Mat
14:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015.md).

[Matthew 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 15:35</span></span>

He commanded . . . to sit down on the ground. Not on the grass, as in
[Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019.md), for they were in a bare,
desolate, grassless region, such as the greater part of Judea is to-day.

[Matthew 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 15:38</span></span>

Four thousand. Instead of 5,000, as in the former miracle.

[Matthew 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 15:39</span></span>

Came into the coasts of Magdala. He took the boat to escape the
multitude. Magdala was on the western shore of the lake, three miles
north of Tiberias. The Revision says Magadan, supposed to have been a
village near Magdala. Mark says Dalmanutha. The meaning is that he came
into the vicinity of all three of these places, which were near each
other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 16](mat016.md)

</div>
