<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat009)  [Next](mat011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 10:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Twelve Apostles. The Charge. To Whom Sent. How to Go. What
to Preach. What to Do. How to Act If Received or Rejected. Persecution.
Prudence Required. Trials to Be Met. Need Have No Care for a Defense.
Fear Not Men, but God. The Father's Care. Not Peace, but a Sword. Loving
Christ More Than Father or Mother. No Kind Act Lost.

[Matthew 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 10:1</span></span>

He called unto him his twelve disciples. Compare [Mar
3:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013) and [Luk
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001). The twelve had already been
called, and had attended the Lord for some time. They were now
commissioned and sent forth as apostles. This must be connected directly
with the last three verses of the preceding chapter, which should belong
to chapter 10.

And he gave them power. To do the same kind of works of mercy which
Jesus had done, and thus to carry out his mission. Works of mercy and
love are inseparable from the true preaching of the gospel.

[Matthew 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 10:2</span></span>

Now the names of the twelve apostles are these. Of the twelve apostles
there are four lists, found in [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002), [Mar
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#016), [Luk
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#014), and [Act
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013). They differ in the following
particulars: Luke, in the book of Acts, does not insert the name of
Judas Iscariot, who was then dead; both in his Gospel and in Acts he
entitles the Simon, who, here and in Mark, is called the Canaanite,
Simon Zelotes; Matthew gives as the tenth disciple, Lebbeus; Mark calls
him Thaddeus; Luke and Acts, Judas of James, i. e., either son or
brother of James; and (4) Mark says that James and John were surnamed by
Christ, Boanerges, i. e., the sons of thunder. In other respects the
four lists are identical. There are three pairs of brothers among them.
Andrew and Peter, James and John, James the Less and Judas, or Thaddeus.
James and John I believe to have been cousins of our Lord. With the
exception of Judas Iscariot, all were Galileans; several of them were by
trade fishermen, a laborious and profitable calling; there was neither
priest nor scribe among them; all were from the ranks of the common
people.

[Matthew 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 10:5</span></span>

Go not into the way of the Gentiles. The Jews called all "Gentiles" who
were not Jews.

Samaritans. The inhabitants of Samaria, a district between Judea and
Galilee; descendants of a remnant of the Ten Tribes, mixed with Gentiles
colonized there. They accepted the five books of Moses, but worshipped
on Mount Gerizim, instead of at Jerusalem. They and the Jews had been
for ages bitter enemies.

The lost sheep of the house of Israel. The lost descendants of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. Compare this commission with the one given to the
apostles after the death and resurrection of the Lord ([Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)). In this commission the
apostles are forbidden to go to the Gentiles or the Samaritans, and are
confined to the house of Israel. In the other they are commanded to go
into "all the world," and to "preach the gospel to every creature;" to
go "first to Jerusalem, and to Judea, and to Samaria and to the
uttermost part of the earth." The first commission is Jewish; the second
is world-wide. Yet both are given by the same Lord; why this wide
difference? Because the new dispensation was not ushered in until after
the resurrection. The Jewish law, national, exclusive, a wall of
partition from Gentiles, was yet in force. Christ, "born under the law,"
and the apostles also were under it until it was removed. They could not
keep it and yet become missionaries to the Gentiles. But when Christ
died the old dispensation, the law, died with him. "The handwriting of
ordinances was nailed to the cross." The old covenant passed away when
the new came into force, sealed with the blood of Christ. After the
death and resurrection of Christ, the law ceased to be binding upon the
apostles. The distinctions of Jew and Gentile were destroyed. Hence,
under the new covenant, the world-wide covenant, there was a new
commission that would send the gospel to all the world. The old covenant
was with the seed of Abraham; the new covenant embraced all nations. See
[Heb 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013).

[Matthew 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 10:7</span></span>

Preach . . . The kingdom of heaven is at hand. John the Baptist, and
Christ also, had preached, "The kingdom is at hand." It had not yet been
inaugurated. So the apostles were still to preach. It was near, but not
in existence. There was no such charge in the second commission. Then
"all power in heaven and in earth was in the hands of Christ." He became
King after he suffered, and his kingdom was inaugurated on earth on the
day of Pentecost. When he was "lifted up" ([Joh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)), he became King.

[Matthew 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 10:8</span></span>

Heal the sick, etc. Not only in order to do a beneficent work, but to
demonstrate that they had the Lord's commission.

[Matthew 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 10:9</span></span>

Provide neither gold, etc. Because "the workman is worthy of his meat,"
and those to whom they preached should supply all their wants. Compare
[Ti1 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018) and [Co1
9:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). This has always been the law
of Christ.

Scrip. A wallet, or valise.

Nor shoes. They were allowed to wear sandals (Mark), such as the common
people wore. They should go with simply their ordinary wear. They were
required to dress as the people.

Nor staves. With the staff each one had, but without an extra supply. A
staff was always carried in walking over the rugged mountains of
Palestine.

[Matthew 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 10:11</span></span>

There abide. With some one noted for hospitality and worth. They were
not to board round from house to house.

[Matthew 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 10:12</span></span>

When you come into an house, salute it. Courteously salute the
household.

[Matthew 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 10:13</span></span>

Let your peace come upon it. The Oriental salutation is, "Peace be with
you." If the household were hospitable and friendly, let this blessing
rest upon them. If they proved unfriendly, leave them to their own
course and its result.

[Matthew 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 10:14</span></span>

Shake off the dust of your feet. This was done when there was a positive
rejection of the gospel. It was a symbolical act, signifying that all
responsibility for the stubborn household or city had ended. Compare
[Mar 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#011) and [Act
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051). Nor can the gospel be forced
upon an unwilling people in any age.

[Matthew 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 10:15</span></span>

Verily I say unto you. This formula always introduces a very emphatic
saying.

More tolerable for the land of Sodom, etc. The cities of the Jordan
valley destroyed for their sins in the time of Abraham (Gen. 19:1-28).
These cities did not have the opportunity, and hence, not the
responsibility, of those to which Christ or his apostles preached.

[Matthew 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 10:16</span></span>

As sheep in the midst of wolves. Defenseless by human means, among the
fierce and cruel; among bitter enemies.

Be wise as serpents. Prudent, discreet. Serpents are very cautious in
avoiding danger.

Harmless as doves. Guileless and innocent as doves. The dove, peaceful,
never preying on other birds, has always been a symbol of innocence.

[Matthew 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 10:17</span></span>

Beware of men. The wolves.

To councils. To the local courts to be tried for heresy and other
offenses.

In their synagogues. The Jewish assemblages corresponding to modern
churches.

They will scourge you. This punishment was inflicted on offenders in the
synagogues. See [Act 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#019) and [Act
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011). The Talmud states that
scourging was inflicted by the officers of the synagogue.

[Matthew 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 10:18</span></span>

Ye shall be brought before governors. Before the civil tribunals, like
criminals.

And kings. This was literally fulfilled in the case of James, the
brother of John ([Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)), and Paul
([Act 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)).

[Matthew 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 10:19</span></span>

Take no thought how or what ye shall speak. They are not told to take no
thought what they shall preach, but that the Holy Spirit will give them
utterance when they make their defense before civil magistrates.

Your Father. Not "Our Father." The Savior never says, "Our Father,"
except when he teaches the disciples to pray, but "My Father" and "Your
Father." God was his Father in a different sense from that in which he
is our Father.

[Matthew 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 10:21</span></span>

Brother shall deliver up the brother. The rest of the family shall turn
upon their own kindred who accept Christ, and become their bitter
enemies. This has been fulfilled thousands of times in every age.

[Matthew 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 10:22</span></span>

Ye shall be hated of all men. As they assailed and sought to destroy all
evil, and evil is wont to unite against them. Jews and pagans made a
common cause against early Christianity. The wicked and perverse hate it
still.

He that endureth to the end. Holds out faithful. Perseverance gives
proof of genuine faith, and is sure of reward.

[Matthew 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 10:23</span></span>

Flee ye into another. They were not to rashly expose their lives where
it would do no good, but go elsewhere and continue preaching. Life is a
sacred possession, and must not be flung away. It may be given up for
the sake of Christ.

Till the Son of man is come. A reference primarily, no doubt, to the
Lord coming into his kingdom. See [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028). He was thus to come in the life
time of some of the apostles. He did thus come in the establishment of
his kingdom in power on the day of Pentecost. He also came in judgment
on the Jews at the destruction of Jerusalem. This event ended Jewish
persecution. There is also the final coming to judge the world, but the
meaning here does not include that.

[Matthew 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 10:24</span></span>

The disciple is not above his master. The disciples must expect to be
treated like the master.

Call the master . . . Beelzebub. The prince of evil, Satan, is meant.

[Matthew 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 10:26</span></span>

Fear them not therefore. Because Christ shall triumph, and all shall be
brought to judgment, where every secret shall be made manifest.

[Matthew 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 10:27</span></span>

What I tell you in darkness. In privacy. The Lord had to teach them in
private before he could send them forth.

On the house tops. The flat roofs of eastern houses made a conspicuous
pulpit. The Lord directs them to speak in the most public manner. In
Syria proclamations are still often made from the house tops.

[Matthew 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 10:28</span></span>

Be not afraid. Of men, who can only destroy the body, but cannot harm
the soul.

But rather fear him, etc. Fear God, who can condemn the soul to
banishment. The command is to fear not the displeasure of man, but that
of God.

In hell. See note on [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). The
word in the Greek is Gehenna, not hades.

[Matthew 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 10:29</span></span>

Two sparrows. Among the smallest and least valuable birds, yet under the
Divine care. So cheap as to be offered in pairs for an insignificant
coin, but God notes the fall of one.

[Matthew 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 10:30</span></span>

The very hairs of your head are all numbered. An assurance of the most
special providence over all Christ's disciples. The next verse shows to
whom the blessed assurance applies.

[Matthew 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 10:32</span></span>

Whosoever will confess me before men. To confess Christ does not mean to
accept some particular creed, but to publicly acknowledge the Lord, and
to live before men as his servant. It implies, 1. A confession of faith
in him with the lips, such a confession as Peter made, [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016), and the eunuch, [Act
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037). Paul describes this confession
in [Rom 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010). 2. An acknowledgment of
Christ by obedience and by giving the life to his service. Confession is
a demonstration of faith, (1) by public acknowledgment, and (2) by an
obedient life. A verbal acknowledgment of Christ is not enough if the
life is a denial, for then it shows that the acknowledgment was a lie.
The two must correspond.

Him will I confess. Christ sitting on the throne of judgment promises to
acknowledge as his own faithful brother every one who has thus
acknowledged him before men.

[Matthew 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 10:33</span></span>

But whosoever shall deny me before men. The Jews denied him when they
rejected him as Messiah. All who refuse to receive him as their Lord
deny him still. The disciple who, through the cares of the world, turns
away from Christian life, denies him.

Him will I also deny. Those who receive him will be received; those who
reject him will be rejected; those who confess him will be confessed,
and those who deny him, denied.

[Matthew 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 10:34</span></span>

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth. Christ has to conquer a
peace by overcoming the evil that is in the way of peace. Hence, to
preach the gospel of purity and peace always arouses the opposition of
the evil doer. Evil has to be put down before peace can prevail. Hence,
while the great end that Christ proposes is peace, the immediate result
of his coming, and of the preaching of the gospel, was opposition and
bloodshed.

I come . . . but a sword. The only sword that Christ or his followers
use in the conflict is the Sword of the Spirit, but the persecutor has
in every age turned upon them the carnal sword. The sword is sent,
because persecutors use it upon the church.

[Matthew 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 10:35</span></span>

For I come to set a man at variance with his father. This was not the
Savior's object, but the effect. The conversion of individual members of
the family would cause variance. In nearly all quarrels, except those
about religion, the members of the same family stand together, but in
religious feuds the family circle is often broken and its parts arrayed
against each other.

[Matthew 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 10:36</span></span>

A man's foes shall be of his own household. This has been verified
thousands of times. Many a convert has been turned out of home and
banished by kindred, because he had confessed Christ.

[Matthew 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 10:37</span></span>

He that loveth father or mother more than me. The Lord does not require
us to love these less, but him more. Love for him must become the
dominant principle of life.

Is not worthy of me. Will not be accepted as worthy.

[Matthew 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 10:38</span></span>

He that taketh not his cross. Luke adds, daily; not once, but all the
time. The cross is the pain of the self-denial required. The cross is
the symbol of doing our duty, even at the cost of the most painful
death. Christ obeyed God, and carried out his work of the salvation of
men, though it required him to die upon the cross in order to do it. And
ever since, the cross has stood as the emblem, not of suffering, but of
suffering for the sake of Christ and his gospel.

And follow me. To follow Christ is to take him for our master, our
teacher, our example; to believe his doctrines, to uphold his cause, to
obey his precepts, and to do it though it leads to heaven by the way of
the cross.

[Matthew 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 10:39</span></span>

He that findeth his life shall lose it. Whoever counts his life of so
much value that he will preserve it by sacrificing his Christian
integrity, or will renounce his religion to save his life, will find in
the end that he has lost his soul forever for the sake of a few fleeting
years; while he who gives up all things, even life itself, will find an
abundant reward in the life eternal. All self-seeking is self-losing.
The Divine law is always to give in order to receive.

[Matthew 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 10:40</span></span>

He that receiveth you, receiveth me. They would go forth in Christ's
name, as his servants and ambassadors. They carried his message, and to
receive it and them was virtually receiving him.

[Matthew 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 10:41</span></span>

In the name of a prophet. That is, because he is a prophet. The apostles
themselves were prophets.

[Matthew 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 10:42</span></span>

Whosoever shall give to drink to these little ones. By the "little ones"
are probably meant Christ's disciples.

A cup of cold water only. The smallest act of kindness. If done "because
he was a disciple," or out of regard for Christ, he should never lose
his reward. Good deeds are never lost. Note the six things here spoken
of as belonging to discipleship of Christ: (1) Confessing, or
professing; (2) Fighting; (3) Bearing his standard (the cross); (4)
Suffering; (5) Following; (6) Giving up life. These are all the duties
of the soldier.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 11](mat011)

</div>
