<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat024)  [Next](mat026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 25:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Ten Virgins. The Foolish Who Took No Oil. The Bridegroom
Comes. The Doors Shut on the Foolish Virgins. Watch Therefore. The
Parable of the Talents. The Manner of Using. The Reckoning When the Lord
Comes. The Day of Judgment Portrayed. The Gathering of the Nations. The
Great Separation. The Blessedness of Those on the Right Hand. The Awful
Fate of Those on the Left. The Ground of the Separation. The Everlasting
Punishment and Life Eternal.

[Matthew 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 25:1</span></span>

The kingdom of heaven shall be likened. The third question asked by the
disciples, [Mat 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003), was about the
end of the world. This whole chapter is an answer. The future tense is
used. In most of the parables of the kingdom the present is used,
because they describe its earthly features. This, however, portrays the
closing events, the judgment, the closing of the heavenly gates.

Unto ten virgins. No significance attaches to the number, nor to the
fact that they are virgins. The bridesmaids of a maiden at marriage are
maidens.

Who took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom. The whole
imagery of the parable is drawn from Eastern marriage customs. The
betrothal, which took place some time before the marriage, was a kind of
solemn marriage contract, but preliminary to its final consummation.
When the time for the celebration of the marriage came, the bridegroom
came to the house of the bride and brought her by night to his own
house. The virgin bridesmaids awaited his coming and attended the bride
to the marriage feast.

[Matthew 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 25:2</span></span>

And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. The quality that made
the difference between them was prudent forethought on the part of the
wise. Compare [Mat 7:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021).

[Matthew 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 25:3</span></span>

They that were foolish took their lamps and took no oil with them. The
Jewish lamp was a shallow vessel filled with oil, on which the wick
floated. These virgins had oil in their lamps when they started, but had
no oil to replenish them. They started out, apparently, all right, but
did not hold out.

[Matthew 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 25:4</span></span>

But the wise took oil in their vessels. In this their wisdom was
displayed. They not only "let their light shine," but at the same time
kept the grace renewed that was essential to the continuance of their
light.

[Matthew 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 25:5</span></span>

While the bridegroom tarried. This suggests that the heavenly Bridegroom
will not return as soon as the church expects him. We have a hint of the
same kind in [Mat 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048).

They all slumbered and slept. Literally, "nodded and fell asleep." The
thought is that the Bridegroom came at an unexpected moment.

[Matthew 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 25:6</span></span>

And at midnight there was a cry made. Midnight is the hour of slumber
and silence when an outcry is always startling and unexpected. The
implication is that the cry of the coming of the Bridegroom, the trump
of the archangel, will be sudden and unexpected. Compare [Mat
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027) and [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023).

[Matthew 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 25:7</span></span>

All . . . arose, and trimmed their lamps. The object of trimming would
be to secure a brighter light. It would involve the trimming of the wick
and replenishing the oil if needed. When the cry does arise there will
be a wonderful lamp-trimming.

[Matthew 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 25:8</span></span>

Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out. The Revision says, more
correctly, "Our lamps are going out," They had kept up a flickering
light to this time. Their apparent piety, though it satisfied them
before, was not sufficient now. Shams disappear in the presence of death
or judgment.

[Matthew 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 25:9</span></span>

Lest there be not enough for us and you. The wise virgins had sufficient
for themselves, but none to spare, hence could be of no help. No one has
a fund of surplus piety that he can turn over to someone else.

Go ye, . . . buy for yourselves. The advice is the best possible. Every
one had to procure for himself the needful grace and piety.

[Matthew 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 25:10</span></span>

And while they went going to buy, the bridegroom came. They were now
seeking to obtain the oil in the only legitimate way, and all would have
been well if they had attended to it at the proper time, but it was now
too late. There is no encouragement to death-bed repentance.

The door was shut. The door of the marriage feast chamber. The door of
the kingdom stands open now, in life, to every mortal, but it will not
always be so. The day of opportunity for everything passes.

[Matthew 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 25:11</span></span>

Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.
As Augustine says: "They came looking for mercy when it was time for
judgment." [Luk 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025) also teaches
that the doors finally will be shut. The shutting of the doors teaches
that the day of salvation may pass by.

[Matthew 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 25:12</span></span>

I know you not. This means, I do not recognize you as persons entitled
to enter. The claims that they might have had once had been forfeited.

[Matthew 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 25:13</span></span>

Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour, etc. The
whole parable is an illustration of this solemn admonition.

APPLICATION.--The Bridegroom is the Son of man; the time of the marriage
is the coming to judgment; the tarrying is the long and unknown period
between his ascension and his return; the virgins represent the waiting
church; the wise virgins represent those church members who are always
ready and whose lights are shining; the oil in their vessels is the
means by which their light is supplied; the foolish virgins are church
members who have become cold and lifeless; the midnight cry is the
summons of death, or the trump of judgment; the cry for oil is death-bed
repentance, or an attempt at preparation in the face of judgment; the
shut door is a declaration that such repentance is too late to be of
avail; the great lesson is to be always in a state of readiness.

[Matthew 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 25:14</span></span>

For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country.
Compare [Mar 13:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#034); Luke 19:11-27.
Christ's departure from the earth to heaven is referred to.

Called his own servants. The church members or disciples.

Delivered unto them his goods. This applies to the trust of the entire
interests of the kingdom of our Savior to his servants on the earth.

[Matthew 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 25:15</span></span>

Unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one. The
talent was not a coin, but a weight, and was especially applied to the
weighing of the precious metals. The Hebrew talent is variously
estimated to be equivalent to a weight of silver ranging from <span
class="small">1,500 to <span class="small">2,500.</span></span>

To every man according to his own several ability. The sums entrusted to
the servants were graded by their capacity. The trust of the Lord to
each servant is measured according to his mental ability, wealth,
position, or influence.

[Matthew 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 25:16</span></span>

Then he that had received five . . . traded . . . and made them other
five. Whoever diligently uses the powers and means of grace the Lord has
given is such a servant. The result is gain to himself.

[Matthew 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 25:18</span></span>

He that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his
lord's money. Before the days of banks of deposit, and still in
countries where they are not established, it is a common thing to hide
treasure in the earth. The servant's only care was to hold on to what he
had.

[Matthew 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 25:19</span></span>

After a long time the lord of those servants cometh. There is certainly
a hint here that a long period would pass before the Lord's return.

And reckoneth with them. When our race meets the Lord, every mortal,
saint, and sinner, good and bad, will be called on for a reckoning.
Every one's opportunities, as well as the character of his life and
works, will be considered.

[Matthew 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 25:20</span></span>

He that had received five talents, etc. He had doubled what he had
received, and in acknowledgment that all was due to his lord who had
given all and whose he was, he brought all to lay at his feet.

[Matthew 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 25:21</span></span>

I will make thee ruler over many things. (1) Observe here that it is
God's talents that have made the ten talents. The fruitfulness of our
work depends on what God has given us. (2) In God's government,
promotion depends on fidelity. This is in a measure true, here and how;
fulfillment of duty in a lower and lesser station is rewarded by the
providence which bids us to go up higher. (3) Present duties are trials
of character; God gives the talents that he may test and see who is
worthy of a trust. (4) The trusts given here below, by our use of which
we are to show ourselves capable of receiving the crown above, Jesus
calls a few things. This is in contrast with the trusts we will enjoy in
the heavenly kingdom.

[Matthew 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 25:22</span></span>

He also that had received two talents, etc. His fidelity and reward are
indicated, acknowledged and rewarded in exactly the same terms as in the
case of the first servant. The final reward depends on faithfulness, not
greatness.

[Matthew 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 25:24</span></span>

I knew thee that thou art a hard man. The charge against the lord is
insulting. The term hard, and the charge in the next clause, "of reaping
where thou hast not sown," affirm that the lord was harsh, unfeeling,
grasping, and unscrupulous about his methods of acquisition. It states
the position of many of our fellow-men. Many refuse to employ their
talents in Christ's service because they think it a hard, exacting
service, making unreasonable demands of self-denial, self-control and
self-sacrifice.

[Matthew 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 25:26</span></span>

Thou wicked and slothful servant. The wickedness of the servant is
demonstrated, not only his unfaithfulness, but by his false and
slanderous excuses.

[Matthew 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 25:27</span></span>

Thou oughtest to have put my money to the exchangers. To the bankers. If
the lord was so exacting as he supposed, he ought at least to have put
his money to use with the money brokers that it might have earned
something.

Usury. Interest. The Jews were forbidden to take it from their brethren,
but were allowed to take it from aliens.

[Matthew 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 25:28</span></span>

Take therefore the talent from him. He had shown himself unworthy of the
trust. He had enjoyed opportunity to serve the lord, but had utterly
neglected it; therefore the opportunity was taken away. The application
is easy.

Give it to him which hath ten. Because he has shown himself worthy of
great trusts.

[Matthew 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 25:29</span></span>

To every one that hath shall be given. Every attainment of honor,
wealth, knowledge, or spiritual grace helps to render further attainment
more easy and more assured; while it is spiritually as well as
materially true that "the destruction of the poor is their poverty"
([Pro 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#015)).

Shall be taken away even that which he hath. For every hath there is a
richer hath; and in every hath not a deeper, poorer hath not.

[Matthew 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 25:30</span></span>

Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness. A state of
banishment from the presence of the Lord. Have you a trust from the
Lord? Are you useful to him according to your ability?

[Matthew 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 25:31</span></span>

When the Son of man shall come in his glory. Compare [Th1
4:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014); [Rev
20:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011). The glorious coming at the
end of the world is meant. See [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030).

The throne of his glory. See [Rev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011), for an account of the great
white throne upon which sat the divine Judge from whose face heaven and
earth fled away. An earthly judge was wont, in pronouncing judgment, to
take his place on the "judgment seat," a kind of judicial throne ([Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013)).

[Matthew 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 25:32</span></span>

Before him shall be gathered all nations. It will be the day of the
final account of all the world.

He shall separate them. Now for the first time the separation takes
place. The two classes have been mingled on the earth; every nation,
country, town and city has had its wicked as well as righteous; nay,
even into the church the bad have crept, but now they are separated
forever.

[Matthew 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 25:33</span></span>

He shall set the sheep at his right hand. The sheep, who represent the
righteous, are placed at the right hand, the place of honor. See [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002).

[Matthew 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 25:34</span></span>

Then shall the King say to them on his right hand. The King is Christ.
This is the only time, save in parabolic language, that he applies the
title to himself, though he speaks of his kingdom and declares he came
into the world to be a king. At judgment his kingly majesty will be
acknowledged by all the universe.

Come, ye blessed of my Father. Observe that his invitation on earth to
mortals is to come: "Come ye to the waters and drink;" "Let him that is
athirst come and partake of the waters of life freely." To all who have
heeded his earthly invitation he gives a heavenly invitation.

Inherit the kingdom prepared for you. The blessed are now to enter on an
inheritance. On earth they were heirs and joint-heirs with Christ.

[Matthew 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 25:35</span></span>

For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. The reason why those on the
right hand are given the kingdom is now shown. They had ministered unto
the Savior. The deeds of loving kindness that the truly benevolent do
his needy disciples are named as having been done to Christ. It should
be noted (1) that the duties named are such duties as every one can
perform. Chrysostom says: "He said not I was sick and ye healed me; or
in prison and ye set me free; but ye visited me and came unto me." (2) A
real, personal service of Christ is implied, one involving some
sacrifice of ease, time and property.

[Matthew 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 25:37</span></span>

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee,
etc. The saints in all ages, in lands unknown when Christ was on earth,
saints who had never seen him when he was in the flesh, he commends for
feeding, visiting and entertaining him whom they had never seen in
person. What more natural than for them to exclaim: "When saw we thee?
When did we entertain thee?" etc.

[Matthew 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 25:40</span></span>

Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me. The righteous understood well that they had
often, in the name and from the love of Christ, ministered to his
brethren, the poor and suffering saints, but they had never understood
that their Lord accepted this as a personal service to himself. It
should be distinctly noted, (1) that the saved are the righteous, or
those whose sins have been washed away by Christ; (2) they are those who
have lived and acted in the name of Christ, or have been obedient to his
will; (3) they have been full of the love of Christ and have faithfully
ministered to the distressed, especially to those of the household of
faith. The love of Christ implies love of the brethren, and of all
mankind.

[Matthew 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 25:41</span></span>

Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire. Those that have sought
the Lord on earth shall be with him forever ([Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)). Those who have turned away from
him shall be turned away from him forever. The punishment is everlasting
banishment from his presence ([Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)).

Ye cursed. Under the Jewish law, anything irretrievably condemned and
devoted to death was called "accursed" ([Deu
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017)). The same term applied to the
wicked is a sentence of eternal death.

Into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Fire is
probably used, as in many other places in the Scripture, as symbol of
the bitter punishment of the wicked. Note, (1) it is everlasting; (2)
prepared, not for man, but for the devil and his angels. Those who
choose his service will have his portion.

[Matthew 25:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 25:42</span></span>

For I was an hungered, etc. The reasons of this awful fate are given.
The judgment of the wicked is pronounced, not for what they have done,
but what they neglected to do.

[Matthew 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 25:44</span></span>

Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee? etc.
These, too, inquire if this is possible. If they had seen him in his
splendor they certainly would have denied him nothing.

[Matthew 25:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 25:45</span></span>

Then shall he answer them. The answer is exactly the same as that given
to the righteous, save that it introduces not.

[Matthew 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 25:46</span></span>

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous
into life eternal. We shall not enter into the discussions that have
arisen over this controverted passage. These things are certain: (1) A
separation between the righteous and the wicked takes place at judgment.
(2) The righteous inherit the kingdom; the wicked "depart into
everlasting fire." (3) The state of the righteous is "life eternal;" the
state of the wicked is "everlasting punishment." (4) The duration of
these two states is the same, exactly the same Greek word being used in
each case (aionios). Then if the state of punishment has an end, so has
the life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 26](mat026)

</div>
