<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat026)  [Next](mat028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 27:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Christ Delivered to Pilate. Judas Hangs Himself. Jesus Before
Pilate. Barabbas and Christ. Pilate's Wife's Intercession. Pilate
Acquits Jesus, but Yields to the Clamor. Jesus Scourged, Mocked, Taken
to Golgotha, Crucified. Mocked on the Cross. Reviled by the Thieves. It
Is Finished. The Veil of the Temple Rent. The Centurion's Confession.
Pilate Yields the Body of Jesus to Joseph. Buried in the New Tomb. The
Tomb Sealed and Guarded.

[Matthew 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 27:1</span></span>

When the morning was come. Jesus had already been condemned, but another
meeting of the Sanhedrim after daylight was necessary to give its legal
effect, as condemnations to death could not be made in the night. That
was the object of this meeting. For a fuller account of it, see [Luk
22:66-71](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#066). For account of Christ before
Pilate and the crucifixion, compare Mark 15:1-47; Luke 23:1-56; John
18:1-38.

[Matthew 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 27:2</span></span>

Delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor. The first mention of the
Roman procurator by that name. He was both military and civil commander,
usually dwelt at CÃ&brvbr;sarea, but came up to Jerusalem at the
passover feasts to preserve order. The Sanhedrim could not put Jesus to
death, as the Roman rulers demanded that all cases of capital punishment
be referred to them.

[Matthew 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 27:3</span></span>

Then Judas . . . saw that he was condemned. The annals of men record no
sadder history than that of Judas, impelled by avarice and resentment to
betray his Master for money, and only to awake to the nature of his
awful crime when it was too late. The language here suggests that Judas
had hoped that the betrayed Jesus would deliver himself from his
enemies.

Repented himself. Not, in the Greek, the word used for "repent" in [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038), and elsewhere, but one that
means, rather, remorse. The first means "to change the mind or purpose;"
the other "to carry a burden of sorrow over the past." One promises a
change in the future; the other is born of despair; Peter repented;
Judas regretted.

[Matthew 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 27:4</span></span>

I have sinned in that I have betrayed innocent blood. The Jewish law
demanded that if new testimony was offered after condemnation the case
should again be heard. Perhaps Judas thought his testimony to the
innocence of Christ might, under the circumstances, be heard.

What is that to us? No words could more emphatically declare the utter
disregard of the Jewish rulers to justice. They concerned themselves not
in the slightest concerning the innocence or guilt of Christ; they cared
only to procure his death.

[Matthew 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 27:5</span></span>

Cast down the pieces of silver in the temple. Where he had this
interview with the Sanhedrim.

Went and hanged himself. So have done, since, thousands of criminals
when the blackness of their crime had revealed itself to them. How often
a man after the committal of a murder shoots himself!

[Matthew 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 27:6</span></span>

It is not lawful to put it in the treasury. These men were not too
scrupulous to send the innocent to death, to shed the blood of the
innocent, but were too scrupulous to put blood money into the treasury.
They could pay blood money, but could not take it back.

[Matthew 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 27:7</span></span>

Bought the potter's field. A field that had been used for the purpose of
making pottery until it was worthless for other purposes and could be
bought cheap. Potters' fields are still found in the Kedron Valley south
of the city.

To bury strangers in. A burial place for the poor. The Jews usually
provided their own tombs. Peter, in [Act
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018), says that Judas fell down
headlong and his bowels gushed out. The common explanation is that he
hung himself on a tree overlooking the valley of Hinnom, that the rope
gave way, and that he fell headlong upon the rocks below, a distance of
forty to sixty feet.

[Matthew 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 27:9</span></span>

Then was fulfilled. The prophecy is found in [Zac
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012). Albert Barnes shows that a
change of a single letter in the original would transform Zechariah into
Jeremiah, and it is supposed that some early copyist made the mistake.
Another explanation is that Jeremiah, in the Jewish arrangement of the
prophets, stood first, and that his name was given to the whole book of
prophecy.

[Matthew 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 27:11</span></span>

Now Jesus stood before the governor. In the judgment hall ([Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)), which the Sanhedrim did not
enter for fear of defilement. It was probably about seven A.M. that they
presented themselves to Pilate, hoping that he would order their
condemned prisoner to death without inquiry, but on his demand for
charges they accuse Jesus of seeking to make himself King of the Jews.
This charge causes Pilate to ask: Art thou the King of the Jews? They
had condemned Jesus for blasphemy, but now make a political charge, and
Pilate's question is whether Jesus is claiming a temporal kingdom.

Thou sayest. Jesus was King, not of the Jews only, but men, and he
admits the charge. He was King, however, in a spiritual sense, as he
explained to Pilate ([Joh 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)).

[Matthew 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 27:12</span></span>

He answered nothing. He made no defence, just as he had done when before
Caiaphas.

[Matthew 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 27:13</span></span>

He gave no answer. To their charges of seeking to establish a worldly
kingdom and of stirring up sedition he returned not a word. His
impressive silence moved Pilate deeply.

[Matthew 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 27:15</span></span>

At that feast. The passover. How the custom of releasing a prisoner at
the passover arose is unknown, but such customs are common under
arbitrary rule.

[Matthew 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 27:16</span></span>

A notable prisoner. A leader in an insurrection in which he had
committed murder (Mark and Luke).

Barabbas. The word means "son of a father." Some have made him a type of
the guilty human race which is released from punishment by the
substitution of the innocent Christ.

[Matthew 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 27:17</span></span>

When therefore they were gathered. After the first examination, Pilate,
finding that Jesus was from Galilee, sent him to Herod, tetrarch of
Galilee, then in Jerusalem, to be tried by him as belonging to his
jurisdiction. Herod, however, after trying to induce him to work a
miracle and mocking him, sent him back ([Luk
23:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006)). Now they had gathered after
his return.

Barabbas, or Christ? Pilate, desirous of releasing an innocent man,
afraid to oppose the Sanhedrim, adopted this expedient in the hope that
the increasing multitude of people would demand Christ rather than a
blood-stained robber.

[Matthew 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 27:19</span></span>

While he was sitting on the judgment seat. Probably while the people
were deciding for which one to ask. The judgment seat was a kind of
lofty official throne, placed on the pavement ([Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013)).

His wife sent to him. On this sad day the voice of a Gentile woman was
the only one that interceded for Christ. That she should speak of Jesus
as a "righteous man," shows that she knew much of him and that he had
already made a wide and deep impression.

A dream. It may have been entirely natural. She was probably already
deeply interested in Jesus and knew that he was to be seized in the
night. Her waking thoughts would be reflected in her sleep.

[Matthew 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 27:20</span></span>

Persuaded the multitudes. To call for the release of Barabbas, instead
of Christ. It is likely that few of the Galileans, so favorable to him,
yet knew of his arrest. "The multitudes" were such as the authorities
would summon at this early hour.

[Matthew 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 27:21</span></span>

They said, Barabbas. Pilate's artifice had failed. The Jewish nation had
not only rejected its Messiah, but chosen a robber instead.

[Matthew 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 27:22</span></span>

Let him be crucified. This is the decision of the Jewish people. He
shall suffer the fate which was due the crime of Barabbas who had been
released in his stead.

[Matthew 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 27:23</span></span>

What evil hath he done? Pilate's struggle between his desire to be just
and to please a body demanding a crime at his hands is pitiable. He
repeats the question three times and offers to appease their rage by
chastising the innocent ([Luk 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022)).
He had, however, lost his power when he began to parley with a mob.
They, utterly unreasonable, only demand the move vehemently that Jesus
be crucified.

[Matthew 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 27:24</span></span>

When Pilate saw that . . . a tumult was arising. It was a dangerous time
for a tumult, with more than a million Jews in Jerusalem, and probably
not a thousand Roman soldiers in the castle. If one occurred, it would
be reported to Rome, and he could hardly make a plausible defence to the
emperor. He therefore yielded, and gave his sanction to confessed wrong,
rather than endanger himself.

Washed his hands. A symbolic act, meaning that the responsibility of the
sin was upon the Jewish authorities and people instead of himself.

[Matthew 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 27:25</span></span>

His blood be on us. That is, let us have the responsibility and suffer
the punishment. A fearful legacy, and awfully inherited. The history of
the Jews from that day on has been the darkest recorded in human annals.

[Matthew 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 27:26</span></span>

Jesus he scourged. Scourging usually preceded crucifixion. It was an
awful punishment, inflicted by brutal soldiers, and continued until the
victim was fainting under the torture.

[Matthew 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 27:27</span></span>

Then the soldiers . . . took Jesus into the palace. After the scourging
which was inflicted in the court ([Mar
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016)). Josephus says that Pilate
stayed, while in Jerusalem, in Herod's palace, on the northern brow of
Zion, near the Jaffa gate.

The whole band. The cohort (from 400 to 600 men) on duty at the palace.
They gathered to mock the doomed prisoner.

[Matthew 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 27:28</span></span>

They stripped him. His clothing, stripped off at the scourging, had been
replaced, but was now removed to wrap him in a mock royal mantle.
Scarlet or purple were the royal colors.

[Matthew 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 27:29</span></span>

A crown of thorns. Both in mockery and for torture.

And a reed in his right hand. For a sceptre. Having thus arrayed him, in
royal robe, crown of thorns, and mock sceptre, they kneel before him and
deride him.

[Matthew 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 27:30</span></span>

They spat on him. In order to show still greater contempt. Brutal as
these heathen soldiers were, they were no more so than the Jewish
Sanhedrim had been.

[Matthew 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 27:31</span></span>

When they had mocked him. Pilate presented the bleeding prisoner once
more to the people, evidently to secure their pity, and made one more
effort to release him, but in vain ([Joh
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005)). Then Jesus was led away to the
cross.

[Matthew 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 27:32</span></span>

As they came out. Of the city. Jesus was crucified "without the gate"
([Heb 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012)). A company of soldiers,
led by a centurion, had charge.

A man of Cyrene. Simon by name, the father of two well-known Christians
([Mar 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021)). Cyrene was in North
Africa, and was the home of many Jews.

That he might bear the cross. At first Jesus bore his own cross, but
exhausted by scourging, sank under the weight ([Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)). [Luk
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026) seems to show that Simon only
bore the "after" part of the cross, the lighter end, which had been
dragging on the ground.

[Matthew 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 27:33</span></span>

When they were come unto a place called Golgotha. A Hebrew word, meaning
a skull. From its Latin equivalent, calvaria, comes our English word
Calvary, which occurs in the English New Testament only in [Luk
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033), where it should be translated
"a skull" The name was due, either to a rounded rock like a skull, or to
the fact that it was a place of execution and that skulls were lying
there. The locality is not certainly known.

[Matthew 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 27:34</span></span>

They gave him wine to drink mingled with gall. A stupefying drink,
intended to lessen suffering.

He would not drink. The "tasting" implied a recognition of the kindly
purpose of the act, but a recognition only. In the refusal to do more
than taste, we trace the resolute purpose to drink the cup which his
Father had given him to the last drop.

[Matthew 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 27:35</span></span>

They crucified him. This was the most dreadful, terrible and shameful
death known to antiquity. The Jews never crucified Jews, nor the Romans,
Romans. That the Jews should demand of the Romans to inflict it on Jesus
shows the intensity of their hate.

And parted his garments. From [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023) we learn that there were four
soldiers at the cross, and the garments were the perquisite of the
soldiers. The outer garments were divided into four parts, one to each,
but the coat, rather the "tunic," an inner garment, was seamless, woven
in one piece, probably of wool. As it would have been spoiled by
dividing it, the soldiers decided to cast lots for it, thus fulfilling
another prophecy ([Psa 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)).

[Matthew 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 27:36</span></span>

And sitting down they watched him there. It was their duty to remain by
the cross until the execution was ended by death.

[Matthew 27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 27:37</span></span>

This is Jesus the King of the Jews. It was the Roman custom to place on
the cross over the criminal's head, a titulus, or placard, stating the
crime for which he suffered. Luke ([Luk
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038)) says that the title was written
in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, the chief languages then spoken, and all
spectators would be able to read it.

[Matthew 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 27:38</span></span>

Then were there two robbers crucified with him. In all probability,
partners in the crime of Barabbas. The mountain robbers, or banditti,
were always ready to take part in such desperate risings against the
Roman power.

[Matthew 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 27:39</span></span>

They that passed by reviled him. The people going in and out of the
city, on the thoroughfare near the place of crucifixion.

Wagging their heads. Derisively and insultingly. Compare [Kg2
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021); [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004); [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025).

[Matthew 27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 27:40</span></span>

Thou that destroyest the temple. It is very remarkable that now, while
this was receiving its real fulfillment, it should be made more public
and more impressive by the insulting proclamation of his enemies. Hence
the importance attached to it after the resurrection ([Joh
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)).

[Matthew 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 27:41</span></span>

He saved others. This may be ironical, but if Christ had saved himself
he could not have saved others.

If he be the King of Israel. The language is that of taunt, and refers
to the inscription upon the cross.

[Matthew 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 27:43</span></span>

He said, I am the Son of God. It was because he said this that the
Sanhedrim condemned him to death. In that he hung, seemingly helpless,
on the cross, the chief priests, the very persons who voted his death,
considered it demonstrated that he was not the Son of God.

[Matthew 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 27:44</span></span>

The robbers also cast upon him the same reproach. Luke only ([Luk
23:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039)) tells of the penitence of
one. Doubtless, both at first reviled him, but one was converted in
three hours that they hung side by side.

[Matthew 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 27:45</span></span>

From the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land. Darkness from
twelve until three o'clock. "Over all the land" means, not the whole
earth, but Judea. Early Christian writers speak of this, and appeal to
heathen testimony in support of the fact. The period of outward
darkness, no doubt, coincided with that of Christ's mental agony and
sense of desertion. The darkness was not total, but probably a deep
gloom, such as every one remembers to have experienced in his life-time.

[Matthew 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 27:46</span></span>

About the ninth hour. Three o'clock, after the Lord had been six hours
on the cross. The cry that follows is from the 22d Psalm.

Why hast thou forsaken me? These words can only express the idea that he
was treading the wine-press alone. As he hung on the cross, "made sin
for us," he was left to struggle without a sense of his Father's
presence. Still, the cry, My God, my God! shows that he still clung to
the Father as his own.

[Matthew 27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 27:47</span></span>

Some . . . said, He calleth of Elias. The resemblance between the word
"Eli" and the name Elijah is very close in the original. There is an
allusion to the belief that Elijah would come before the Messiah.

[Matthew 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 27:48</span></span>

One ran and filled a sponge. This was occasioned by our Lord's cry, "I
thirst" ([Joh 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)), the fifth word
from the cross.

Full of vinegar. This was the sour wine used by the soldiers; not mixed
with myrrh, as in the case of the stupefying draught Jesus had refused
before crucifixion.

[Matthew 27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 27:49</span></span>

Let be, let us see, etc. This was spoken in the way of interruption of
him who was furnishing the draught of vinegar. According to Mark, he
replied, and asked to be let alone.

[Matthew 27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 27:50</span></span>

When he had cried again with a loud voice. "It is finished" ([Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)), the sixth word from the cross.
The three evangelists all dwell upon the loudness of the cry, as if it
had been the triumphant note of the conqueror. The last words from the
cross were those recorded in [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046), "Father, into thy hands," etc.
The first "word" is the prayer for his enemies ([Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)).

Yielded up his spirit. He voluntarily gave up his life for his sheep,
and took it back again ([Joh 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)).

[Matthew 27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 27:51</span></span>

The veil of the temple was rent. The curtain before the Holy of Holies
separating it from the Holy Place.It took place about the time of the
evening sacrifice and showed by symbol that the real atonement, of which
the yearly atonement was only a type, had been offered and that the true
High Priest had entered into the true Holy of Holies.

And the earth did quake. A common event at Jerusalem, but now
significant of the sympathy of nature with the great tragedy.

[Matthew 27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 27:52</span></span>

The tombs were opened. The convulsions of the earth would naturally roll
the stones from the doors of the sepulchers.

The saints . . . were raised. Who is not stated, or whether their bodies
returned to the grave again. Their rising was a testimony that the death
of Christ is life to the saints.

[Matthew 27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 27:54</span></span>

The centurion. The Roman officer in charge of the execution.

Truly this was the Son of God. Rather, "a son of a god." He was a
heathen soldier, believing in many gods, and the scenes of the cross had
convinced him that Jesus was more than man.

[Matthew 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 27:55</span></span>

Many women. The devoted women were still faithful, when the disciples
had fled. Of the apostles we only know that John was near.

Mary Magdalene. Mentioned first here, also in [Luk
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002), before the resurrection. She had
been healed by the Lord.

Mary the mother of James and Joses. She was the wife of Clopas or
AlphÃ&brvbr;us ([Joh 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)).

The mother of the sons of Zebedee. Salome. John ([Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)) mentions "his (Jesus') mother's
sister," but does not name Salome, his own mother. Hence it is inferred
that Salome was the sister of Mary, the mother of Jesus. Mary, the
mother of Jesus, was also at the cross ([Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)).

[Matthew 27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">mat 27:57</span></span>

There came a rich man. On the burial, compare [Mar
15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042); [Luk
23:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050); [Joh
19:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

Of ArimathÃ&brvbr;a. Its location is unknown. Joseph was a member of the
Sanhedrim, who had not consented to the murder of Jesus ([Luk
23:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050); [Mar
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043)).

Jesus' disciple. But "secretly for fear of the Jews" ([Joh
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)). The death of Christ made him
braver.

[Matthew 27:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 27:58</span></span>

Asked for the body of Jesus. Usually, the Romans suffered the crucified
to remain unburied, but Joseph, to prevent this, or any abuse of the
sacred body, begged it of Pilate. The latter consented readily, probably
anxious for respect for the body of him whom he vainly sought to save
from death.

[Matthew 27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">mat 27:59</span></span>

Joseph took the body. Carefully down from the cross.

Wrapped it in a clean linen cloth. A winding sheet. Another Sanhedrist,
Nicodemus, aided him ([Joh 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)), and
they enclosed spices in the winding sheet.

[Matthew 27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">mat 27:60</span></span>

Laid it in his own new tomb. A rock-hewn sepulcher, cut horizontally
into the cliff.

Rolled a great stone to the door. The usual method of closing the
rock-hewn tombs. Thus Christ "was buried, according to the Scriptures"
in a rich man's tomb, was "with the rich in his death" ([Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)).

[Matthew 27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">mat 27:61</span></span>

The other Mary. The mother of James and Joses. These women saw where he
was laid and returned there after the Sabbath with spices.

[Matthew 27:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mat 27:62</span></span>

The morrow. The Sabbath.

After the day of preparation. "That is, the day before the sabbath"
([Mar 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)).

[Matthew 27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">mat 27:63</span></span>

Sir, we remember. These dignitaries had not forgotten the predictions of
Christ that he would rise on the third day, even if his own disciples
had.

[Matthew 27:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mat 27:64</span></span>

Until the third day. That is, until Sunday morning. Friday would be the
first day.

[Matthew 27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mat 27:65</span></span>

Ye have a guard. That is, ye can have a guard. He granted them a guard
of Roman soldiers.

[Matthew 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mat 27:66</span></span>

Sealing the stone. A cord was stretched across the stone door and sealed
at each end with wax. The seal would have to be broken to remove the
stone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 28](mat028)

</div>
