<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat010)  [Next](mat012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 11:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--John Sends from Prison to Christ. Christ's Answer. The
Character of John the Baptist. None Greater Before Him. The Least in the
Kingdom. The Criticisms of John and Christ. The Woes of Chorazin,
Bethsaida, and Capernaum. Wisdom Hid from the Wise, but Given unto
Babes. The Sweet Invitation.

[Matthew 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 11:2</span></span>

When John had heard in the prison. Compare Mark 6:14-29 and [Luk
7:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#019). John had now been a year in
prison, to which he had been sent by Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of
Galilee, because he had rebuked his adulterous marriage with his brother
Philip's wife ([Mat 14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)). Josephus
says that MachÃ&brvbr;rus, a strong fortress built by Herod the Great,
the father of Antipas, about ten miles east of the Dead Sea, was the
prison.

He sent his disciples. To make the inquiry found in the next verse. The
course of Jesus was so different from what John himself, in common with
other Jews, expected of the Messiah, that after lying in a dungeon for a
year, he began to be uncertain. If Jesus was the Christ, why did he not
proclaim himself the Messiah King, destroy the power of the Romans and
of Herod, and release John himself from prison? So he reasoned.

[Matthew 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 11:3</span></span>

Art thou he that should come? John the Baptist had predicted the coming
One ([Mat 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)). Perhaps John,
impatient of the long delay, hoped to incite Jesus to proclaim his
Messiahship.

[Matthew 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 11:4</span></span>

Jesus answered and said. Luke states that at that same hour he cured
many of their infirmities. After permitting the messengers to see his
work, he pointed to it as his answer.

Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and see. To John's
question Jesus gives no direct reply. There is something severe in the
whole of our Lord's demeanor and language, as if reproving this shaking
of John's higher faith in God.

[Matthew 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 11:5</span></span>

Dead are raised. In Luke, the raising of the widow's son at Nain
immediately precedes this message; and in this Gospel we have seen the
ruler's daughter raised.

The poor have the gospel preached to them. It adds to the force of this
testimony that the poor had always been overlooked by Pharisees and the
Jewish doctors. The ancient philosophers and theologians had no gospel
for those who could not pay for it. The climax is preaching the gospel
to the poor. Jesus answers John by pointing to his works. They were a
more convincing answer than words. What he has done for mankind is still
a most convincing demonstration.

[Matthew 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 11:6</span></span>

Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. This is suggested
by John's seeming to have stumbled, not fallen, because Christ had not
publicly declared his mission. The Lord does not upbraid, but gives in
this way a tender rebuke, implying that he knew what to do with
reference to his kingdom.

[Matthew 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 11:7</span></span>

What went yet out into the wilderness to see? An allusion to John's
ministry in the wilderness, which had been attended by most of Christ's
disciples.

A reed shaken with the wind. The reed of Egypt and Palestine is a very
tall cane, growing twelve feet high, and is easily bent by the wind.
John was not like the reed. He could not be bent by every breath of
applause or displeasure.

[Matthew 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 11:8</span></span>

A man clothed in soft raiment? Were you attracted into the wilderness of
Judea to see an effeminate courtier? Had he been a pliant courtier he
would have flattered Herod, and would not have been thrown into prison
for his rebuke of sin in high places.

[Matthew 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 11:9</span></span>

More than a prophet. He was more than a prophet, because he was a
reformer, forerunner and way-preparer, as well as prophet. No other
prophet ever had so honored an office.

[Matthew 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 11:10</span></span>

This is he, of whom it is written. Of whom Malachi and Isaiah
prophesied. See note on [Mat 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003).

[Matthew 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 11:11</span></span>

Among them that are born of women. Among all of the human race that were
before John the Baptist. The world thinks that kings, generals, and
statesmen are the greatest of men. But God measures differently. Time,
too, measures differently. Herod, now, would hardly be known at all if
he had not imprisoned John the Baptist.

He that is least in the kingdom of heaven. This shows, (1) That John was
not in the kingdom of God. (2) That, as none greater than John has been
born of women, no one had yet entered the kingdom. (3) That, therefore,
it had not yet been set up, but as John himself, Jesus, and the Twelve
under the first commission, preached, was "at hand." (4) All in the
kingdom, even the humblest, have a superior station to John, because
they have superior privileges.

[Matthew 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 11:12</span></span>

From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of God suffereth
violence. The idea is, that from the time when John began preaching, men
of violence were trying to force their way into the kingdom. It is
compared to a walled city that men try to storm and enter. They tried a
little later to make Jesus a king by force.

[Matthew 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 11:13</span></span>

The prophets and the law prophesied until John. For the meaning we must
turn to [Luk 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016), where the same
words occur with the addition, "since that time the kingdom of God is
preached." Then first began the announcement that John was the
way-preparer, the forerunner of the King, that the kingdom was at hand,
that the old dispensation was about to close.

[Matthew 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 11:14</span></span>

This is Elias, who was to come. Malachi predicted that Elijah would come
to prepare the way for the Lord. Christ explains that this was fulfilled
in John. He was not the literal, but a spiritual Elijah. See [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005).

[Matthew 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 11:15</span></span>

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. A formula used by Christ to
give emphasis to an utterance of especial importance.

[Matthew 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 11:16</span></span>

Whereunto shall I liken this generation? Compare [Luk
7:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#031). The Jewish nation is meant.
The Lord shows that they were as capricious as children.

Children sitting in the markets. All ancient towns had an open market
place, which was the great place of resort.

[Matthew 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 11:17</span></span>

We piped unto you. One set of children is represented as having invited
another set to play, first in a mock wedding, then in a mock funeral,
but the dissatisfied children were pleased with neither, and would
neither dance nor lament.

[Matthew 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 11:18</span></span>

John came neither eating nor drinking. At feasts. He lived abstemiously
and austerely.

He hath a demon. They accused him of being under the influence of evil
spirits; of being a crank, or fanatic.

[Matthew 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 11:19</span></span>

The Son of man came eating. Like other men. He was at the wedding feast
of Cana ([Joh 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)); at Matthew's
feast, ([Mat 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)), etc.

A wine-bibber. There was nothing singular about his social habits. Like
all the people, he drank the light, harmless wine of Palestine, either
free from, or with a very slight percentage of, alcohol. Our modern
wines are very different.

A friend of publicans and sinners. See note on [Mat
9:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012).

Wisdom is justified of her children. Those who are wise will approve
both the course of John and his Lord.

[Matthew 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 11:20</span></span>

Then he began to upbraid the cities, etc. Compare [Luk
10:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#012). The cities in the vicinity
of the Sea of Galilee had, thus far, heard and seen the most of the Lord
and had the least excuse for rejecting him. In all the reproofs of Jesus
there is sadness in the severity. The very denunciations seem to mourn.

Wherein most of his mighty works were done. We know of a number of
miracles which had been wrought in these cities, the healing of the
centurion's servant, of the son of the nobleman, of the diseased woman,
of two blind men, and the raising of the daughter of Jairus. The
Scriptures assure us that these were only a very small part of the
mighty works he did. See [Mat 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035).

Because they repented not. The great end proposed by the gospel is
repentance and a new life.

[Matthew 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 11:21</span></span>

Woe unto thee, Chorazin. Chorazin has long been extinct, and its site is
not certainly known. It is named only here and in [Luk
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013). Situated about two miles from
the ruins of Tell-Hum, thought to be Capernaum, there are ruins now
called Kerazeh, including a synagogue, columns and walls of buildings,
supposed to mark the site of Chorazin.

Woe unto thee, Bethsaida. The word means "House of fish," and the name
would imply that it was a fishing town, and it was the home of the
fishermen, Peter, Andrew and Philip ([Joh
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044)). Its locality is in dispute. It
was probably situated on both sides of the Jordan, where it emptied into
the Sea of Galilee. The ruins of a city lie there, mostly on the east
side of the river.

For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon. These were rich
Phoenician trading cities on the east shore of the Mediterranean. Tyre
was long the chief commercial city of the world; it still exists as a
wretched town.

In sackcloth and ashes. The symbols of mourning and repentance. See [Jon
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005), on the repentance of Nineveh.
Sackcloth was a kind of coarse cloth, woven of camel's hair.

[Matthew 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 11:22</span></span>

It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment.
These solemn words teach: 1. That there will be a day of judgment for
all, cities, nations and men. 2. That men will be judged according to
their opportunities; that those who have had and neglected opportunities
will be held most guilty. 3. That there will be different degrees of
future punishment, according to guilt and opportunities; that those
whose opportunities have been greatest will receive the greater
punishment, if these are neglected. Every man will be judged and
punished according to his opportunities and works. The idea of a hell of
the same severity for all the unsaved is nowhere taught by Christ.

[Matthew 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 11:23</span></span>

And thou, Capernaum. Capernaum was at that time a city of 30,000
inhabitants. Its site also is disputed. Most locate it on the lake
shore, at the ruins called Tell-Hum, but others locate it about three
miles north of the ruins of Tell-Hum. It enjoyed signal advantages as
being the Galilean home of Christ, who taught in its streets, houses and
synagogue, and worked many miracles there.

Art exalted unto heaven. By the privilege of having Christ as an
inhabitant.

Shalt be brought down to hell. Not hell, but hades, the unseen.
Capernaum shall disappear from human view. Within less than forty years
Capernaum was destroyed by the Romans, and for many centuries has not
had an existence.

And remained until this day. Note the inference: 1. Sodom was destroyed
for its sins. 2. Had it not been sinful it would have "remained." 3.
Therefore it is sins that destroy cities and nations. Jerusalem,
Babylon, Sodom, Capernaum, and other extinct ancient cities have
perished on account of their sins. 4. Modern cities which scoff at God
and revel in iniquity will "be brought down to hades" also. Permanent
temporal prosperity depends on righteousness.

[Matthew 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 11:24</span></span>

More tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment. Because it had poor
opportunities. Sodom had fallen two thousand years before Christ, and
had been extinct ever since, yet the Lord speaks of a future day of
judgment for both Sodom and Capernaum. Therefore, 1. There is a judgment
after death. 2. Temporal punishment for wickedness does not satisfy
eternal justice. The Sodomites were held to a future judgment. 3. The
inhabitants of Sodom had not been annihilated, but were alive, waiting
for the judgment.

[Matthew 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 11:25</span></span>

At that time. Immediately after this judgment upon the impenitent cities
was denounced.

O Father, Lord of heaven and earth. Christ addresses God as his Father,
not as his Lord. The obedience he yields is that of a Son, not of a
subject. Four more times, in deep emotion, Christ thus addresses the
Father ([Joh 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041); [Joh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028); [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001); [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)).

That thou didst hide these things from the wise and prudent. From the
worldly wise Pharisees and Jews. God had hid these things from this
latter class through the natural operation of their own corrupted hearts
and perverted minds.

Babes. The simple and believing.

[Matthew 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 11:26</span></span>

Even so, Father, for so it seemed good, etc. "Even so" is better
rendered "Yea."

[Matthew 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 11:27</span></span>

All things have been delivered unto me of my Father. The Lord speaks, in
part, in anticipation. It was the divine purpose, in sending the Son, to
deliver "all things," the gospel, salvation, judgment, the rule of
heaven and earth, to him.

No one knoweth the Father but the Son. He only is in the secret of the
Divine counsels.

And he to whom the Son willeth to reveal him. Christ is the revelation
of God to man. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." Those who
"know" Christ by humble obedience and docility learn to know the Father
also.

[Matthew 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 11:28</span></span>

Come unto me. This is one of the sweetest passages in the New Testament.
It shows the willingness of the Lord. The kings and earth and the great
are usually difficult of access, while Jesus is not only willing, but
invites us, to come to him. Note how gracious is the invitation! 1 It is
the Lord who speaks. 2. He invites to come to him. 3. The invitation is
to those who labor and are heavy laden. 4. He promises, to all these
weary ones who come, rest. The offer is not that of a man, but of the
Divine Savior. Millions in all ages since can bear witness that the
promise is sure.

Labor and are heavy laden. Feel heavily the burdens of life, of sin and
sorrow.

Rest. Peace of soul.

[Matthew 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 11:29</span></span>

Take my yoke upon you and learn of me. He has first asked us to come,
and made a gracious promise. He next shows us how to come. We are to
come by taking his yoke upon us. Taking on the yoke is a symbol of
submission. The two steps by which we come, and secure the promise of
"rest unto our souls" are then 1. Submission to Christ. 2. Becoming his
disciples.

[Matthew 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 11:30</span></span>

For my yoke is easy. The yoke that sin imposes is heavy, and bearing it
brings no rest. So, too, the yoke of false or corrupted religion is
burdensome; but Christ's yoke is easy. It is not hard to bear it because
it is borne in love. His burden, even if it be the cross, is light,
because he helps us to bear it. Note: That one rejecting Christ in the
midst of light is worse than a heathen. Christ graciously invites all to
come to him. He is the rest of the soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 12](mat012)

</div>
