<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat023)  [Next](mat025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 24:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Temple to Be Utterly Destroyed. The Questions Asked on the
Mount of Olives. Wars and Rumors of Wars Predicted. False Prophets and
Christs. The Sign for Flight from Jerusalem. The Great Tribulation. How
the Son of Man Shall Come. The Sun Darkened. The Coming of the Son of
Man. This Generation. The Time of Christ's Coming Unknown. Injunction to
Be Always in Readiness.

[Matthew 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 24:1</span></span>

And Jesus went out the temple. Immediately after the discourse in which
he pronounced the woes upon the scribes and Pharisees, upon the temple
and Jerusalem. This remarkable chapter is not one upon which
commentators are agreed, and the conclusions that I have reached on the
points of difference will not be found identical with those of any other
writer. I believe, however, that they will be found harmonious with the
Scripture. Compare Mark and Luke.

His disciples . . . shew him the buildings of the temple. He had just
foreshadowed its destruction. With this in mind they point out its
splendor, especially the amazing stones used in its construction.
Compare Mark and Luke. The temple had been rebuilt in great splendor by
Herod, and was not fully completed until about thirty years after the
Savior's crucifixion.

[Matthew 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 24:2</span></span>

Not one stone upon another, etc. Other great temples are in ruins, but
their ruins indicate their former splendor. The Parthenon, the
Acropolis, the temples of Karnak, Luxor, and Baalbec are examples; but
to find even the foundations of the Jewish temple it is necessary to dig
beneath the modern city. It has entirely disappeared from the face of
the earth, and a Mahometan mosque stands on the spot where it stood.

[Matthew 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 24:3</span></span>

As he sat on the mount of Olives. Passing out of the city, over the
valley of Jehoshaphat, he and his disciples climbed the mount and sat
down on its crest overlooking the city and temple bathed in the sunset.

Tell us. The disciples, still thinking of what the Lord had said, ask
three questions: (1) When shall these things be? That is, the overthrow
of the temple. (2) What shall be the sign of the coming? And (3) of the
end of the world? They supposed these events would be simultaneous--a
mistake. To understand what follows we must keep in mind that he has
three questions to answer, nor are the answers blended.

[Matthew 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 24:4</span></span>

Take heed that no man deceive you. By pretending to be Christ. As they
yet believed that Christ would surely return to reign at Jerusalem, this
admonition was needed.

Come in my name. As the Messiah. We learn from Josephus that enthusiasts
did come about the time of the end of Jerusalem, claiming to be sent of
God. Bar-cocheba, "the son of the star," appeared in A. D. 120. From
time to time other deceivers have appeared.

[Matthew 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 24:6</span></span>

Ye shall hear of wars. The Jewish war began in A. D. 66, and ended five
years after. During this period all the Roman empire was filled with
commotion. Nero, the emperor, was overthrown by Galba; six months after,
Galba was overthrown by Otho; a few months after, Otho was overthrown by
Vitelius; a little later, he was overthrown by Vespasian. All of these
but the last, who ascended the throne shortly before Jerusalem was
destroyed, died violent deaths.

Famines. The natural result of civil wars. Tacitus, the Roman historian,
says of this period: "It was full of calamities, horrible with battles,
rent with seditions, savage in peace itself."

[Matthew 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 24:8</span></span>

Shall deliver you up to tribulation. To persecution. Soon literally
fulfilled in the Jewish persecutions. The awful persecution of Nero also
soon followed.

Ye shall be hated. Tacitus, describing Nero's persecution begun in A. D.
64, says "the Christians were haters of mankind."

[Matthew 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 24:10</span></span>

Then shall many be offended. Shall stumble and fall, rather than suffer
for Christ. The half-hearted always do.

[Matthew 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 24:11</span></span>

Many false prophets. False teachers. Compare [Gal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007.md); [Jo1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012.md), [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md); [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md); [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md). See also Josephus, Book VI. 5,
sec. 3.

[Matthew 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 24:12</span></span>

Because iniquity shall abound, etc. Immorality eats out the heart of
religion.

[Matthew 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 24:13</span></span>

He that endures to the end, etc. The Christian Jews who endured to the
end were saved by flight to Pella, beyond the Jordan, at the signal
pointed out by the Lord. The principle is generally applicable.

[Matthew 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 24:14</span></span>

This gospel of the kingdom, etc. The gospel was preached throughout the
Roman empire, "the world" of the New Testament, before A. D. 70.

Then the end shall come. Of the Jewish state.

[Matthew 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 24:15</span></span>

When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation. This is the sign
when Christians should flee from Jerusalem. See [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md); [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031.md); [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011.md). Luke says, "When ye shall see
Jerusalem compassed with armies" ([Luk
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020).md). This was, therefore, Christ's
explanation of the abomination of desolation. The Roman army, heathen,
with heathen images and standards, ready to sacrifice to idols on the
temple altar, working the desolation of Jerusalem and the temple, is
what is meant.

In the holy place. Mark says, "Where it ought not;" around "the holy
city."

Let them in Judea flee. For refuge.

Let him on the housetop. The flat roofs were sleeping places. All must
be done without a moment's delay.

Woe to them with child. Because not fit for flight and the hardships
that must be endured.

Not in the winter. Because the streams were then impassable torrents
from the heavy rains and the weather cold and wet, hard on homeless
people.

Nor on the sabbath. Because then the gates of the city were closed,
preventing departure. History tells us that the army of Cestius Gallus
enclosed Jerusalem in A. D. 67, then deterred by its strength, retired
to CÃ&brvbr;sarea. This was the signal for which the church waited, and
it then fled beyond the Jordan.

[Matthew 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 24:21</span></span>

Great tribulation. The account given by Josephus, the Jewish historian
who witnessed and recorded the war, is almost an echo of the predictions
of Christ. Women ate their own children from starvation; the Jews within
the city fought each other as well as the Roman army; on August 10, A.
D. 70, the city was stormed and there was a universal massacre; 1,100,00
persons perished, and 100,000 survivors were sold into slavery.

[Matthew 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 24:22</span></span>

No flesh would be saved. If such awful work should continue, it would
exterminate the human race.

For the elect's sake. On their account, because there is salt to save
the earth, and end shall be put to the awful work of death. The elect
are the believers in Christ ([Rom
11:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005).md).

[Matthew 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 24:23</span></span>

Then. During this period of tribulation, give no heed to false prophets,
false Christs, or to those who say Christ is here or there.

[Matthew 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 24:27</span></span>

For as the lightning. There will be no doubt about Christ's coming when
he does come, no discussion, no need that any one shall tell it. It will
be manifest as the flash of lightning across the sky. There can be no
mistake. Such language shows how much those err who claim that his
coming was at the destruction of Jerusalem.

[Matthew 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 24:28</span></span>

The carcase is, there will be the eagles. The term "carcase" well
represents the utterly corrupted Jewish state; the "eagles" is a fit
symbol of the Roman army, every legion of which bore the eagle as its
standard.

[Matthew 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 24:29</span></span>

Immediately after the tribulation of those days. The first question,
When shall these things be? has now been answered. Here begins the
answer to the second, concerning the coming of the Lord. For other
passages on the second coming, see [Th1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019.md); [Th1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013.md); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015.md); [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md); [Th2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001.md), [Th2
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008.md); [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md); [Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md); [Pe2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md); [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012.md); [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028.md). "Immediately" after the
destruction of Jerusalem (the tribulation) the series of events begins
that leads to the coming of Christ.

The sun shall be darkened. I take what follows to be symbolical, as is
usual for prophecy, rather than literal. Christ is "the Sun of
Righteousness." After the destruction of Jerusalem, the causes began to
work that led to the great apostasy of the church and produced "the Dark
Ages" of the church.

The moon shall not give her light. The moon shines by reflected light of
the sun and if it is darkened so will be the moon. So, too, the church
shines by the light of Christ. When Christ's light was darkened by
taking the Bible from the people the church give forth little light
during the long night of the Middle Ages.

The stars shall fall. Stars represent great teachers of the church,
apostles and evangelists. See [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020.md). When the apostles were dethroned
by the Romish apostasy, "the stars fell from heaven," figuratively.
Other stars, great church lights who apostatized, fell from heaven in
another sense.

[Matthew 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 24:30</span></span>

Then. After the long period of apostasy.

Shall appear the sign of the Son of man. Some sign of his coming that
every one will recognize when it is manifested.

All the tribes of the earth mourn. Because of their sins.

They shall see the Son of man coming. It will be visible to every eye
and will be in splendor.

[Matthew 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 24:31</span></span>

With a great sound of a trumpet. Compare [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md).

Shall gather his elect. Before the judgment on the world. The believers
will be in all countries, mingled with the population of earth, and then
shall be separated.

Four winds. The four quarters of the earth.

[Matthew 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 24:32</span></span>

Learn a parable from the fig tree. The putting forth of the leaves is
the sign that summer is near. It puts forth leaves usually in April. So
"all these things" show when the Lord is at hand.

[Matthew 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 24:34</span></span>

This generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled. Some
hold that "all these things," in [Mat
24:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033.md), refer only to what was said
of the fall of Jerusalem, ending with [Mat
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028.md). Others have contended that the
phrase includes the second coming, but refers directly to the end of
Jerusalem, which was a type of the end of the world. I believe, rather,
that "all these things" embraces all thus far predicted, and that "this
generation" means the Jewish race, instead of only those then living.
The Greek word so rendered is used in the sense of race in the Greek
classics, and as examples of such use in the New Testament, Alford
points to [Mat 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045.md), and [Luk
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008.md), as examples of such use in the
New Testament. Christ has described the awful end of the Jewish state;
after such a destruction and scattering of the remnant to the ends of
the earth, all the examples of history would declare that the Jewish
race would become extinct. Christ, however, declares that, contrary to
all probability, it shall not pass away until he comes. They still
exist, 1850 years after the prediction, distinct, but without a country.

[Matthew 24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 24:36</span></span>

Of that day and hour knoweth no one. How foolish then to be figuring out
the time of the Lord's coming.

[Matthew 24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 24:37</span></span>

As were the days of Noah. As the deluge surprised the world, so will the
Lord's coming.

Two women shall be grinding at the mill. The hand-mills still used in
the East. The grinding is done by women, usually two, as the work is
hard for one. It will be the time of separation of the evil from the
good.

[Matthew 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 24:42</span></span>

Watch therefore. Because the coming will be unexpected. Mark adds,
"pray."

[Matthew 24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 24:43</span></span>

If the master of the house. The lesson of the illustration is a constant
state of preparation. Elsewhere in the New Testament Christ's coming is
compared to that of a thief in the night ([Th1
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001.md); [Rev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003.md); [Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015).md).

[Matthew 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 24:44</span></span>

Be ye also ready. The duty enjoined is not to watch for Christ, but to
watch ourselves to see that we are ready.

[Matthew 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 24:45</span></span>

Who then is a faithful and wise servant? In [Luk
12:42-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042.md), is given a similar parable
in answer to a question of Peter. There the Lord speaks of "the faithful
and wise steward;" here he describes a steward, but speaks of him as a
servant.

Ruler. Preachers, elders, deacons, Sunday-school superintendents,
teachers.

Household. All under their religious charge.

[Matthew 24:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 24:46</span></span>

Blessed is that servant, whom his lord . . . shall find so doing. The
blessedness applies equally to those who are faithful unto death and
those who are so found at the Lord's coming. This blessedness is in the
reward the Lord will give.

\`He shall make him ruler over all his goods. The parables of the
talents and the pounds show that those who have been faithful to the
trusts given them here shall receive additional trusts in the Savior's
eternal kingdom.

[Matthew 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 24:48</span></span>

My lord delayeth his coming. The worst enemy of Christ is the professed
servant of the Lord who practices are evil, and who supposes he can
evade punishment for his crimes.

[Matthew 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 24:49</span></span>

And shall begin to smite his fellow-servants. There is no sin more
common among those who are clothed with authority than oppression. There
have been no worse oppressors than priests.

And to eat and drink with the drunken. What first disgusted Luther with
the faith in which he had been reared was the profligacy of the priests
and monks. It has often been the case that the Vatican was the very
hot-bed of scandal.

[Matthew 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 24:50</span></span>

The lord of that servant shall come. He will certainly come, and come
when the servant is unprepared for him. The majority of the wicked who
die in their sins have expected to be better prepared for the end of
life.

[Matthew 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 24:51</span></span>

And shall cut him asunder. An ancient method of punishment which was
practiced among the Israelites. See [Sa1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033.md), and [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031.md). The idea here is that very
severe punishment shall be inflicted upon him, while weeping and
gnashing of teeth would indicate a life of intense suffering. Indeed
both these expressions must be regarded as metaphors, indicating nothing
more clearly than a terrible and certain punishment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 25](mat025.md)

</div>
