<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat013)  [Next](mat015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 14:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Herod's Opinion of Christ. The Death of John the Baptist.
Jesus Crosses the Sea. The Vast Multitude That Follows. The Miracle of
the Five Loaves and Two Fishes. The Multitude Wishing to Make Jesus a
King Is Dismissed. The Disciples Sent Upon the Sea While Jesus Retires
to Pray. The Storm on the Sea. Christ on the Waters. The Failure of
Peter's Faith.

[Matthew 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 14:1</span></span>

Herod the tetrarch. Compare Mark 6:14-29 and [Luk
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007). Herod Antipas, one of the sons
of "Herod the King." See notes on [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001), for information on the Herods.
Called the tetrarch, or ruler of a fourth part, because he inherited
one-fourth of the kingdom of his father.

Heard of the fame of Jesus. Absent much of the time from Galilee in
campaigns against Aretas, king of Arabia, he probably did not hear much
until his return home.

[Matthew 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 14:2</span></span>

This is John the Baptist. Herod claimed to be a Sadducee, and hence held
that there was no life whatever after death, but under the terrors of a
guilty conscience his creed undergoes a change. Hence his first thought
when he hears of the deeds of Jesus is that the murdered John has risen
from the dead.

Therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. During his life
John wrought no miracles ([Joh 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#041)).
Herod supposed that his resurrection had clothed him with new power.
This opinion was shared by others ([Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014); [Mar
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#028)).

[Matthew 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 14:3</span></span>

For Herod had laid hold on John. This arrest of John the Baptist had
taken place a year previous, shortly before our Lord's second visit to
Galilee ([Mat 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012); [Mar
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014)), the events of which are given
by John, chapter 4. The prison was the castle of MachÃ&brvbr;rus. See
note on [Mat 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002) .

Herodias' sake. Antipas had been, while at Rome, the guest of his
brother Herod Philip. Here he became entangled by the snares of
Herodias, his brother Philip's wife; and he repaid the hospitality he
had received by carrying her off. He had himself long been married to
the daughter of Aretas, king of Arabia. This Herodias was the
granddaughter of "Herod the King," and, hence, the niece of both her
lawful husband and of Herod Antipas, who now had her.

[Matthew 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 14:4</span></span>

It is not lawful for thee to have her. The marriage was unlawful for
these three reasons: (1) The former husband of Herodias (Philip) was
still living. (2) The former wife of Antipas was still living. (3)
Besides, the Jewish law did not permit a man to marry his niece.

[Matthew 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 14:5</span></span>

He feared the multitude. Mark says he feared John also. He no doubt
feared John's influence with the multitude.

[Matthew 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 14:6</span></span>

When Herod's birthday was kept. In imitation of the Roman emperors, the
Herodian princes kept their birthdays with feasting and revelry and
magnificent banquets. We learn from Mark that he made a supper, or
banquet feast.

The daughter of Herodias. Her name, according to Josephus, was Salome, a
daughter by Philip, Herod's brother. She was afterwards married to her
uncle Philip, the tetrarch of Iturea ([Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001)).

Danced. It was not customary for the ladies of high rank to dance beyond
the limit of the harem. The Oriental dance of a libertine character. But
her wicked mother induced her own daughter thus to degrade herself in
order to accomplish her revengeful purpose.

[Matthew 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 14:7</span></span>

He promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask. Herod
confirms his promise by an oath. It was a common custom to reward a
dancer or actor, on a great occasion like this, who pleased, and to ask
what they wished. Herod knew that Salome danced because she had a
request to make.

[Matthew 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 14:8</span></span>

Give me John the Baptist's head in a charger. Mark tells us that she
went to consult her mother before she made her request. That vile woman
was prepared with an answer. Indeed, she had manipulated the whole
affair so as to secure Herod's consent to the murder of John.

In a charger. An old English word for a large dish, so called from the
load it sustained.

[Matthew 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 14:9</span></span>

The king was sorry. The Greek word thus translated is very strong, and
denotes a very great grief, and sorrow.

For the oath's sake, and them which sat with him. It was not so much his
regard for the oath which he had taken, but his shrinking from the taunt
of the guests, if they should see him draw back from his plighted word.

[Matthew 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 14:10</span></span>

He sent and beheaded John in the prison. The executioner did his work in
the dark dungeon; the wicked Herodias had triumphed.

[Matthew 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 14:11</span></span>

She brought it to her mother. The first Elijah had his Jezebel, who
sought his life; the second Elijah had his Jezebel, the not less inhuman
Herodias, who obtained his life.

[Matthew 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 14:12</span></span>

His disciples. John's.

[Matthew 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 14:13</span></span>

When Jesus heard of it. When he heard of the fate of John the Baptist
and of Herod's conjectures concerning himself. It was a busy time. The
twelve had just returned from a highly successful ministry and his own
popularity was at its greatest height. The crowds, anxious to see,
converse with him, or to be healed, pressed on him so as to give no
leisure for reflection, or even to eat ([Mar
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031)). It was but natural that he
should wish a quiet season on receiving the tidings of the death of one
related to him like John.

Into a desert place. Not a sandy, barren spot, but one uninhabited and
lonely. They crossed the Sea of Galilee ([Joh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)), and proceeded in the direction
of Bethsaida-Julias, as its northeastern corner ([Luk
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010)), just above the entrance of the
Jordan into it. To the south of it was the green and narrow plain of
El-Batihah, "with abundant grass, and abundant space for the multitude
to have sat down."

They followed him on foot out of the cities. The multitudes, seeing the
course of the boat that bore the Savior and the twelve from Capernaum,
rushed along the shore in order to reach its landing place in advance.
The country west of the Sea of Galilee was, at that period, according to
Josephus, wonderfully populous. Capernaum alone had 30,000 inhabitants,
and there were twelve other cities upon or near its shores.

[Matthew 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 14:14</span></span>

And Jesus went forth and saw a great multitude. When he disembarked from
the boat, the multitude was waiting. That it was great is shown by the
fact that the men numbered 5,000, apart from the women and children.

Was moved with compassion. He seems, from [Joh
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#003), to have retired to the mountain
for a short time, but then, filled with compassion, returned to the
multitude. This is the only miracle of which there is an account in each
of the four gospels. The parallel accounts are in [Mar
6:30-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030), [Luk
9:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010), and [Joh
6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001).

[Matthew 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 14:15</span></span>

When it was evening. It was the "first evening" which began at the
decline of day about three o'clock in the afternoon. The second evening,
according to Jewish customs, began at sunset. The day had already been
spent in teaching and healing.

This is a desert place. And hence there would be no hamlets dotting it,
in which the multitudes could get provisions for themselves. There are
no farm houses in Palestine. The whole population lives in towns or
villages, and often the farmers go many miles to their fields.

[Matthew 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 14:16</span></span>

Give ye them to eat. We learn from the parallel accounts that the
disciples did not understand how this could be done, though they
cheerfully obeyed.

[Matthew 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 14:17</span></span>

We have here but five loaves and two fishes. It was Andrew ([Joh
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#008)) who spoke. The loaves here were
of barley meal made into small, thin cakes, baked hard on the side of
the oven, so as to be broken.

[Matthew 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 14:19</span></span>

He commanded the multitude to sit down. We learn from Mark that they sat
down in companies.

On the grass. John says, "there was much grass there." It was in the
spring season, in Nisan, "the month of flowers," and the slopes were
rich with the spring grass.

Looking up to heaven. In prayer we should use such outward gestures as
may most fitly serve to express the inward disposition and holy
affections of our heart and soul.

He blessed. He either gave thanks or asked the Father's blessing on the
food.

[Matthew 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 14:20</span></span>

Twelve baskets full. Baskets were taken by the Jews on journeying, to
carry their provisions, etc., that they might not have to depend on
Gentiles, and so incur the risk of ceremonial pollution.

[Matthew 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 14:21</span></span>

Five thousand men. Thus there was one loaf to every thousand men. Christ
is the bread if life, satisfying the hunger of the soul for love,
forgiveness, immortality, usefulness, progress, knowledge. He gives that
bread to his disciples and bids them to distribute it to the multitude.
Such is its blessed and divine nature that the more they distribute to
hungry, famishing souls, the more they have remaining for themselves.

[Matthew 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 14:22</span></span>

Straightway. Immediately; after satisfying to the full the wants of the
multitude. Compare [Mar 6:45-56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045), and
[Joh 6:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015).

He constrained his disciples. They were loath to go without their
Master. Yet he wished to be alone. He had come to the "desert place" for
retirement; the multitude followed, and sought after the miracle to
proclaim him King. His disciples probably sympathized. Hence he sent
them, too, away, and stayed to pray and reflect alone.

To go to the other side. John says, toward Capernaum.

[Matthew 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 14:23</span></span>

When he had sent the multitudes away. They were in an excited condition;
hence, great prudence, perhaps an exercise of some constraining power,
was necessary.

Into a mountain apart to pray. The refuge of Christ in every great
crisis was lonely prayer.

[Matthew 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 14:24</span></span>

In the midst of the sea. About twenty-five or thirty furlongs, or three
and a half miles from the shore ([Joh
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019)), about the middle of the lake.

For the wind was contrary. The wind came rushing down from the
mountains, and in attempting to make land at Bethsaida, where the Lord
had directed, it was in their faces. Sudden gusts are common on the Sea
of Galilee. Thompson says he encountered one of such fury that no rowers
could row a boat across the lake. There had now arisen one of those
sudden and violent squalls to which all inland waters, surrounded by
lofty hills intersected with deep gorges, are liable.

[Matthew 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 14:25</span></span>

In the fourth watch. The Jews, who used to divide the night into three
watches, latterly adopted the Roman division into four watches, as here;
so that, at the rate of three hours to each, the fourth watch, reckoning
from six P.M., would be three o'clock in the morning.

Jesus went to them. The Lord saw their trouble from his mountain-top,
and through the darkness of the night, for his heart was all with them;
yet would he not go to their relief till his own time came.

[Matthew 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 14:26</span></span>

A spirit. An apparition, an unreal appearance of a real person. The word
is not that unusually rendered "spirit." He would appear to them at
first like a dark, moving speck upon the waters, then as a human figure;
but in the dark, tempestuous sky, and not dreaming that it could be
their Lord, they take it for a spirit ([Luk
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#037)).

Cried out. In fright.

[Matthew 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 14:27</span></span>

It is I; be not afraid. How often has he to speak this word of
encouragement, even to his own! almost always when they are brought
suddenly, or in an unusual way, face to face with him. See [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001); [Gen
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#017); [Jdg
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#023); [Mat
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#005); [Luk
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#010).

It is I. Literally, I am. The same language used by Jesus in Jerusalem
([Joh 8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)), for which the Pharisees
would have stoned him, and in the Old Testament to designate Jehovah
([Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)). Here I should prefer to
give it this meaning: Christ says not merely, "It is I, your Friend and
Master;" he says, at least implies, it is the "I AM," who is coming to
you, the Almighty One who rules wind and waves, who made them, and whom
they obey.

[Matthew 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 14:28</span></span>

Bid me come unto thee. Peter is led by no praiseworthy motives, but
rather by vain glory.

[Matthew 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 14:29</span></span>

And he said, Come. I suppose the Lord bade Peter to come in order to
teach him a lesson.

[Matthew 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 14:30</span></span>

When he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid. He stepped into the
water, but the roaring winds and rushing billows were too much for his
faith.

[Matthew 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 14:31</span></span>

Jesus . . . caught him . . . said, O thou of little faith! Peter's act
did not exemplify his faith, but his doubts. True faith never attempts
wonders merely for the sake of doing them. It is a fact that ought to be
noted that the Gospels narrate the failures in miraculous power on the
part of the apostles as well as their success. No book of myths would do
this. At the same time it is always made plain why they failed.

[Matthew 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 14:32</span></span>

The wind ceased. They were safe, for the Lord was with them. Under his
arms there is always safety.

[Matthew 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 14:33</span></span>

They that were in the ship came and worshipped him. Not only did they
approach him with an outward unforbidden gesture of worship, "but they
avowed him, for the first time collectively, to be the Son of God."

[Matthew 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 14:34</span></span>

They came into the land of Gennesaret. A small district four miles long
and two or three wide, on the west side of the Sea of Galilee, to which
it gave one of its names. Josephus describes it as the garden of the
whole land, and possessing a fertility and loveliness almost
unparalleled.

[Matthew 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 14:35</span></span>

They brought those that were diseased. His fame was so well known in
that region that his coming at once caused a commotion. In a country
where there are no skilled physicians and little known of sanitary laws,
there is great need of a Healer. Geikie, who traveled through this same
region with a medical friend, says that crowds would gather with their
sick as soon as they knew there was a physician. Hence the importance of
medical missions.

[Matthew 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 14:36</span></span>

The hem of his garment. The numbers that pressed upon him seemed almost
too large for him to be able to heal them singly by laying his hands
upon them, therefore many begged that they might be allowed to touch if
it were but the border of his garment. Soon after followed the
ever-memorable discourse, so strikingly in accordance with the present
passover season, in the synagogue of Capernaum, respecting the "Bread of
Life" (John 6:22-65).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 15](mat015)

</div>
