<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat000)  [Next](mat002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--The Genealogy of Jesus Christ. Three Series of Fourteen
Generations. The Betrothal of Mary and Joseph. The Immaculate
Conception. The Purpose of Joseph. The Lord's Message in a Dream. The
Name Jesus. The Prophecy of the Virgin. Immanuel. The Birth of Jesus.

[Matthew 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 1:1</span></span>

The book of the generation. Literally, "the book of birth," or
genealogy. This title applies, not to the whole Gospel, but to the
tables of descent in the first seventeen verses. The title was possibly
copied from some Hebrew document compiled from the genealogical tables.

Jesus Christ. Jesus, the personal name, which means "Savior;" Christ,
the official title, which means "Anointed." He is our Anointed Prophet,
Priest, and King.

The son of David. The descendant. The prophets had declared that the
Messiah should be of David's seed.

The son of Abraham. The Lord had promised Abraham ([Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md); [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018).md) that in his seed all the world
should be blessed. David and Abraham were the two greatest ancestors of
Jesus, and are named because it had been predicted that he would be
their descendant.

[Matthew 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 1:2</span></span>

Abraham begat Isaac. Matthew begins with Abraham to trace the line down.
He was writing for Jews, and Jewish history begins with Abraham. Luke
(Luke 3:23-38), writing for Gentiles, goes back to Adam. For the
differences between Matthew and Luke, see [Mat
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016.md).

[Matthew 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 1:3</span></span>

Tamar. Three women are named in this list: Tamar, Rahab, and Ruth. These
were all Gentile women, and are named for this reason, and for their
remarkable history. There were stains upon the character of Tamar (Gen.
38:11-30) and of Rahab ([Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001).md), but
Ruth is one of the sweetest women of the Bible.

[Matthew 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 1:6</span></span>

David the king. The greatest of line from Abraham to Christ, so exalted
that one of the titles of the Messiah was "the Son of David."

Of Uriah. The mother of Solomon is referred to, not by name, but as the
wife of Uriah. Uriah was a Hittite, a Gentile, and his wife may have
been also. She was certainly a partner of David in the greatest guilt of
his life.

[Matthew 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 1:8</span></span>

Joram. Between Joram and Uzziah three names are intentionally omitted.
They are found in [Ch1 3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#011.md). They
were probably omitted to equalize the threefold division of generations
from Abraham to Joseph. Such omissions of unimportant links are common
in the Old Testament.

[Matthew 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 1:11</span></span>

The carrying away to Babylon. The great seventy years' captivity in
Babylon, following the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Matthew 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 1:12</span></span>

Zerubbabel. The descendant of the ancient kings who led the Jews back
from the Captivity ([Ezr 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002).md).

[Matthew 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 1:16</span></span>

Jacob begat Joseph. The descendant of a long line of kings was a poor
carpenter of Nazareth. As the husband of Mary he was the legal father of
Jesus, and Matthew gives his line of descent. A comparison of the table
given by Luke will show that it differs in part from that of Matthew.
Between David and Joseph the lists are widely different. Several views,
all possible, have been presented, but the most probable explanation is
that Matthew gives the line of Joseph, the legal line, and that Luke
gives the line of Mary, the mother of our Lord. As the Jews regarded
only male descent, unless Joseph, the supposed father, was a descendant
of David they would not have recognized the genealogy as a fulfillment
of the prophecies that Christ should be the Son of David; while Luke,
himself a Gentile and writing for Gentiles, was more particular to give
the line that shows that Jesus is really the Son of David. If Mary was
the daughter of Heli, especially if an heiress, Joseph, by marriage,
would become the "son of Heli." That there is no contradiction between
the two tables is shown by the fact that the Jews who best understood
their genealogies never charged it. These tables were preserved with
great care, for various reasons, until Christ was born, but it is
asserted that Herod destroyed them. If this is incorrect, they did not
survive the destruction of Jerusalem.

[Matthew 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 1:17</span></span>

Are fourteen generations. There are exactly fourteen generations from
Abraham to David, and two other series are made to correspond.

From David to, etc. David's name is counted again to make the number
fourteen. The third series begins with Jeconiah and ends with Christ.

[Matthew 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 1:18</span></span>

The birth of Jesus Christ. The word rendered here "birth" is the same in
Greek that is translated "genealogy" in [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md).

Mary having been betrothed. Not married, but engaged. Betrothal was,
from the times of the patriarchs, a formal ceremony ([Gen
24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053).md), and was regarded a binding
obligation. It generally lasted a whole year before marriage. After
betrothal unfaithfulness was regarded adultery.

Before they came together. Before marriage.

She was found. The angel ([Luk 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026).md)
predicted her conception, and when the prediction was verified she
probably did not hesitate to reveal it. Her heart would be filled with
joyous pride instead of shame.

Holy Ghost. Correctly, Holy Spirit. The Divine power. Christ is the only
example of such a birth in all history. His birth, like his life and his
resurrection, is a miracle.

[Matthew 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 1:19</span></span>

Joseph her husband. Betrothal, according to the law ([Deu
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024).md), made him her husband before
marriage.

A righteous man. Just and humane. To put her away publicly was to expose
her to the penalty of death. Probably she had made her defense to him,
but her story was so wonderful that he was in doubt.

Privily. Give her a bill of divorce. See [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001.md).

[Matthew 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 1:20</span></span>

While he thought. Reflected, still in doubt, perplexed.

An angel. Gabriel appeared to Mary ([Luk
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026).md); the name of the angel is not
here given. Angels are messengers; an angel of the Lord is the Lord's
messenger. These messengers are usually superhuman, but not always.

In a dream. Often messages were conveyed by impressions made in sleep.
Three times revelations were thus made to Joseph.

Thou son of David. It was fitting that he should now be reminded that he
belonged to the family from whence the Messiah was to come.

Fear not. His betrothed was pure.

[Matthew 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 1:21</span></span>

Thou shalt call his name Jesus. That is, Savior. The Hebrew form is
Joshua; the full meaning is Jehovah's salvation.

Shall save his people. Not the Jewish nation, as Joseph probably
supposed, but all who accept and follow him.

From their sins. Not a temporal salvation, but from the curse of sin,
condemnation and banishment from God's favor and heaven.

[Matthew 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 1:22</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled. Matthew neglects no opportunity to show the
Jews that their prophets described Christ. The prophecy will be found in
[Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md).

[Matthew 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 1:23</span></span>

Behold, a virgin. Rather the virgin, as in the Revision. Isaiah had in
view a particular virgin, the mother of the true Immanuel. Like many
other prophecies, it had a double, a typical and a true, fulfillment.
The first was in the reign of Ahaz, concerning a temporal deliverance,
but the higher reference is to the spiritual Deliverer of the world. The
first is the type, the second is the great event that inspired the
message.

Immanuel. This means "God with us," an appropriate title for Jesus among
men.

[Matthew 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 1:24</span></span>

And Joseph . . . did. He obeyed at once, a fitting example for all men.
When the Lord's will is spoken there should be no delay in obedience.

[Matthew 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 1:25</span></span>

Knew her not. A Hebrew form for conjugal intercourse. The language of
the verse does not imply the perpetual virginity of Mary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 2](mat002.md)

</div>
