<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat011)  [Next](mat013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 12:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Jesus Accused of Sabbath Breaking. The Son of Man Lord of the
Sabbath. Healing the Withered Hand. The Pharisees Take Counsel to
Destroy Jesus. The Tenderness of Christ. A Dumb and Blind Demoniac
Healed. Accused of Help from the Devil to Cast Out Demons. A Divided
Kingdom. Blasphemy Against the Holy Spirit. Shall Give Account for Idle
Words. The Sign of Jonah. The Queen of the South. His Mother and
Brethren. Who Are My Mother and Brethren?

[Matthew 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 12:1</span></span>

At that time. Compare [Mar 2:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#023) and
[Luk 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001). About the time when grain
begins to ripen in Judea, that is, not far from the first of May.

Walked through the corn fields. Wheat or barley, for which the general
word, "corn," was used. When maize was discovered by the Europeans in
America they called it "Indian corn," because it was a food grain like
wheat, rye and barley. We now apply to it exclusively the designation of
"corn." The paths, the only roads, led and still lead through the grain
fields in Palestine.

Began to pluck. Permitted by Moses ([Deu
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#025)).

[Matthew 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 12:2</span></span>

But the Pharisees saw it. See note on [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). Some of the sect were in
attendance on the watch for a ground of accusation.

Not lawful on the sabbath. They did not object to taking the ears of
corn, but to gathering, rubbing out the grains of wheat in the hand, and
eating them on the sabbath. To understand their position, it must be
noticed that after the Law had said that the Jews were "to do no manner
of work" on the Sabbath, the "Tradition of the Elders" had laid down
thirty-nine principal prohibitions, which were ascribed to the authority
of the Great Synagogue, and which were called abhoth, "fathers," or
chief rules. From these were deduced a vast multitude of toldoth,
"descendants," or derivative rules. Now, "reaping" and "threshing" on
the Sabbath day were forbidden by abhoth; and by the toldoth it was
asserted that plucking corn-ears was a kind of reaping, and rubbing them
a kind of threshing. The vitality of these artificial notions among the
Jews is extraordinary. Abarbanel relates that when, in 1492, the Jews
were expelled from Spain, and were forbidden to enter the city of Fez
lest they should cause a famine, they lived on grass; yet even in this
state "religiously avoided the violation of their Sabbath by plucking
the grass with their hands." To avoid this they took the much more
laborious method of groveling on their knees, and cropping it with their
teeth. We give one more example of their Sabbath requirements. "If on
the Sabbath a Jew put out a lamp from fear of the Gentiles, or robbers,
or on account of an evil spirit, he was guiltless; if to save oil, he
was guilty."--Milman's Jews, Vol. 2, p. 480.

[Matthew 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 12:3</span></span>

Have ye not read. The Lord answers them by citing the case of David,
who, under necessity, took, ate, and gave to his followers the shew
bread which it was lawful for priests only to eat. Necessity rose higher
than ceremonial. See [Sa1 21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001).

[Matthew 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 12:4</span></span>

Entered into the house of God. The tabernacle at Nob The temple had not
been built.

The shew bread. Twelve loaves placed upon a table in the holy place as a
symbol of the communion of the twelve tribes with God, and a type of the
Bread of Life to be given to the whole world. They were kept a week,
renewed, and the old loaves eaten by the priests. If David could take
these under necessity, so could Christ's disciples pluck corn under
necessity.

[Matthew 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 12:5</span></span>

The priests . . . profane the sabbath. The Sabbath was the busiest day
of the week for the priests in the temple service. In this they rightly
broke the ordinary Sabbath law, because the temple service set aside the
law. Compare [Joh 7:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022).

[Matthew 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 12:6</span></span>

But I say unto you, that in this place is one greater than the temple.
The thought is: If priests in the service of the temple can break the
letter of the law and be blameless, how much more can the disciples of
him who is the Lord of the temple do so in his service and by his
authority?

[Matthew 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 12:7</span></span>

But if ye had known what this meaneth. They ought to have known, for
they professed to be interpreters of the law.

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. The argument is, that mercy toward
these hungering disciples was more acceptable to God than sacrifices at
the altar; though sacrifice was the crown of the Jewish rites. The
quotation is from [Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006), and is
also quoted in [Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013). It shows
that all our forms, rites and ceremonies are worthless before God unless
we have kind and merciful hearts.

[Matthew 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 12:8</span></span>

For the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath day. Because the Sabbath is
made for humanity, the Lord of humanity is the Lord of the Sabbath.
Observe, is the Lord of the Sabbath. He does not, then, abolish it, but
has the right to make any change in it, in the interest of mankind, that
seems to him wise. Neither Moses, nor any other mortal, ever claimed to
be Lord of the Sabbath. This is a declaration of Divinity.

[Matthew 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 12:9</span></span>

He went into their synagogue. Evidently he, his disciples and these
Pharisees, were on the way to it when the conversation took place. It
was probably at Capernaum.

[Matthew 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 12:10</span></span>

A man which had his hand withered. That is, dried up from a deficient
absorption of the nutriment. Luke says his "right hand." The disease
here indicated results in a loss both in size and in power of the arm;
for it there is no remedy known to man. Compare [Mar
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001) and [Luk
6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006).

And they asked him. Luke says it was the scribes and Pharisees.

Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath? In the opinion of the Pharisees, to
kindle or extinguish a fire on the Sabbath was a great desecration of
the day, nor was even sickness allowed to violate rabbinical rules. It
was forbidden to give an emetic on the Sabbath, to set a broken bone, or
put back a dislocated joint. Of course, they had added all this to the
law of Moses.

That they might accuse him. Not in the conversation merely, but before
the local judge, the officers of the synagogue, or the council.

[Matthew 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 12:11</span></span>

And he said, What man . . . shall have one sheep? etc. Such an act of
mercy to a beast was allowed and usual then.

[Matthew 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 12:12</span></span>

How much then is a man better than a sheep? If sheep can be lifted out
of its suffering on the Sabbath, why not much more a man?

Wherefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath days. If the Sabbath
day would preclude one from doing good, then it would be an evil.

[Matthew 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 12:13</span></span>

Stretch forth thine hand. As the cure is wrought only by a word, the
Pharisees have no ground of accusation.

[Matthew 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 12:14</span></span>

Then the Pharisees . . . held a council . . . destroy him. Their real
motive was hatred of the Lord, while their pretext was that he had
broken the Sabbath. While professing to be very religious, they were
really the servants of the evil one.

[Matthew 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 12:15</span></span>

Jesus withdrew from thence. Left Capernaum for the time. He avoided
needless danger until his earthly ministry was accomplished, and the
bitter opposition of the Pharisees admonished him to temporarily
withdraw.

[Matthew 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 12:16</span></span>

Charged not to make him known. Those healed. To noise about his cures
now would intensify the hate of his enemies.

[Matthew 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 12:17</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled. Thus it was fulfilled.

Esaias the prophet. [Isa 42:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001).

[Matthew 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 12:18</span></span>

Behold my servant. Christ took the form of a servant.

I will put my spirit upon him. Compare [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

He shall shew justice to the Gentiles. Announce himself as judge of the
Gentiles. Compare [Mar 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#008).

[Matthew 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 12:19</span></span>

He shall not strive nor cry. He shall be modest, retiring, and not a
brazen, noisy declaimer.

[Matthew 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 12:20</span></span>

A bruised reed shall he not break. The reed, a hollow cylinder, if
bruised has its strength destroyed. It thus becomes the symbol of the
bruised spirit. The tender Savior will not break, but heal.

Smoking flax. The wick of the lamp that had ceased to burn clearly. The
violent would put it out and fling it away. The Lord does not use such
violence with those disciples who give forth some light, even if it is
imperfect.

Till he send forth judgment. Till he shall sit in power and triumph on
the throne of judgment.

[Matthew 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 12:21</span></span>

In his name. In him as the Messiah.

Shall the Gentiles trust. He shall be the "Christ of the world," and not
of the Jews alone. Compare [Joh 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#042).
The prophets clearly and many times declare that the Messiah shall be,
not a Jewish, but a world's Savior. The Jews strangely overlooked this.

[Matthew 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 12:22</span></span>

Was brought him one possessed with a devil. See note on [Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028). Compare [Luk
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014).

[Matthew 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 12:23</span></span>

Is not this the Son of David? The promised Messiah King who was to be
the Son of David, according to the prophets ([Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); [Sa2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005)).

[Matthew 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 12:24</span></span>

The Pharisees hearing it. Compare [Mar
3:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022). Mark says that some of these
Pharisees were scribes who had come from Jerusalem. The ecclesiastical
authorities at Jerusalem were now keeping their watch on Jesus.

He casteth not out devils but by Beelzebub. See note on [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025). Beelzebub, the prince of
devils, meant the same as Satan. The Pharisees assert that the Lord's
miraculous power is due to the aid of the devil.

[Matthew 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 12:25</span></span>

Knowing their thoughts. They had not made this charge to Christ, but to
the multitudes.

Every kingdom divided against itself. A general truth is stated. Most
states and kingdoms fall, not by the power of foreign enemies, but by
the weakness due to divisions.

[Matthew 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 12:26</span></span>

If Satan casteth out Satan. If demons were cast out by the aid of Satan,
then Satan was fighting against his own servants. His kingdom was
divided against itself.

[Matthew 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 12:27</span></span>

By whom do your sons cast them out? There were Jewish exorcists who
professed to cast out demons. Josephus tells of one named Eleazar, whom
he says did cast them out. Christ does not say whether they did or not,
but argues: "If I, by Satan, cast out demons, by whom do your own
exorcists, whom you assert have this power, cast them out"? Compare [Act
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013).

[Matthew 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 12:28</span></span>

If I by the Spirit of God, etc. If it is the power of God manifest in
me, then it demonstrates that I am the expected Messiah King, the Son of
David, of whom the multitude spoke. See [Mat
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023).

[Matthew 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 12:29</span></span>

How can . . . spoil his goods, etc.? No one can enter a man's house and
take his goods unless he has first conquered him. If I am not the
Messiah, stronger than Satan, how could I spoil him?

[Matthew 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 12:30</span></span>

He that is not for me, etc. The two kingdoms of Satan and of Christ are
opposed. No neutrality is possible. He that is not for me is against me.

[Matthew 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 12:31</span></span>

The blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven. Compare
[Mar 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#028) and [Luk
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010). Much discussion has arisen
concerning the nature of sin against the Holy Spirit, and nothing is
plainer. [Mar 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#030) explains it. It was
ascribing Christ's works to demoniac influence. These works were wrought
by the power of the Spirit.

[Matthew 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 12:32</span></span>

Whoever speaketh against the Son of man. Personal injuries will be
forgiven on repentance. Christ prayed for his persecutors. Every sin can
be forgiven but that against the Holy Spirit.

Speak against the Holy Spirit. Perversely ascribe the work of the Holy
Spirit to Satan.

Neither in this world nor that to come. Judgment shall overtake him both
here and hereafter. The Jews divided the two worlds, or, rather, ages of
the world, by the coming of Christ. This would then mean that there is
forgiveness to such a sin under neither dispensation. No passage in the
Bible affirms more emphatically the doctrine of eternal punishment.
There is a sin that hath no forgiveness.

[Matthew 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 12:33</span></span>

Either make the tree good, and the fruit good. The principle is
announced in [Mat 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#020) that the tree
is known by its fruits. If his own life and works were evil, then he
might be evil and aided by Satan, but if good, then his power was from
God.

[Matthew 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 12:34</span></span>

Generation of vipers. Poisonous, evil and dangerous, like vipers.

How can ye, etc.? Their hearts were thoroughly evil, hence they could
only speak and do evil, for "out of the good treasure of the heart the
mouth speaketh." On the other hand, the "good man out of the good
treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things."

[Matthew 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 12:36</span></span>

Every idle word. If we shall be called on to give account for every
idle, rash, inconsiderate word, how much more for such blasphemy as the
Pharisees had uttered? How careful, too, should we be to see that our
speech is pure!

[Matthew 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 12:37</span></span>

By thy words shalt thou be justified, etc. Acquitted or condemned in the
day of judgment. To justify is the opposite of to condemn. Those who
confess Christ with the mouth ([Rom
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)) shall be saved; those who deny
him will be lost. Words have a weighty influence on our eternal destiny.

[Matthew 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 12:38</span></span>

Master, we would see a sign from thee. Compare [Mat
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001) and [Luk
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016), [Luk
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029). They had just seen a miracle,
but demand another. Jesus never worked miracles to gratify human
curiosity, or to secure popular applause.

[Matthew 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 12:39</span></span>

An evil and adulterous generation. We must keep in mind that the Lord is
speaking to his enemies. He compares them to a faithless wife. They were
faithless to God.

The sign of Jonah. See next verse.

[Matthew 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 12:40</span></span>

As Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish.
See [Jon 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017). The great fish was
probably not a whale, the Greek is "sea monster," but a white shark,
which abounds abounds in the Mediterranean, and is said to swallow a
horse whole. The miracle was the preservation of the life of Jonah
during his living burial. This was a type of the burial and resurrection
of Christ.

So shall the Son of man be three days and three nights. Jesus says ([Mat
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)) that he will "be raised again
the third day." Hence, in Jewish usage the third day must mean the same
as three days and three nights. It was and is customary with the
Orientals to make any part of the day stand for the whole twenty-four
hours. Compare [Mat 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021), [Mar
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#031), [Ch2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#005) and [Ch2
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#012), [Est
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016), [Gen
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004), [Gen
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012), [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018), [Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028). A traveler in the East writes:
"At length the tenth morning arrived--the tenth morning because, though
we performed nominally ten days quarantine, yet it was, really, only
eight days. We landed at nine o'clock in the evening of the first day,
and were liberated at six o'clock in the morning of the tenth day, but
it was held to be ten days according to the custom of the East." Christ
was buried Friday evening, lay in the grave Saturday, and rose Sunday,
parts of three days, rose "on the third day," and was in the grave the
space of time meant in eastern usage by three days and three nights.

In the heart of the earth. In the sepulcher.

[Matthew 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 12:41</span></span>

The men of Nineveh. The great capital of the Assyrian Empire, situated
on the Tigris river, in its day the greatest city in the world, to which
Jonah was sent to warn it of judgment for its sins. It has been for many
hundred years a ruin.

Shall stand up in judgment. They repented at the preaching of Jonah, but
"this generation" of Jews remained impenitent under the preaching of
"one greater than Jonah." The example of the Ninevites condemns the
Jews.

[Matthew 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 12:42</span></span>

The queen of the south. Of Sheba ([Kg1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001)), supposed to be SabÃ&brvbr;a in
Southern Arabia.

From the ends of the earth. A great distance. On the extreme southern
shores of Asia.

A greater than Solomon is here. A calm assertion of superhuman majesty
and wisdom.

[Matthew 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 12:43</span></span>

When the unclean spirit, etc. The application of these three verses is
found in "even so it shall be unto this wicked generation," the Jews.
With an occasional tendency to repentance, as under the preaching of
John, they became worse and worse until they crucified the Lord and were
destroyed. A man with an unclean spirit, a demon, is chosen to represent
them. He goeth out (transient repentance), returns with seven other evil
spirits worse than himself (a relapse into sin), and the last state is
worse than the first, more wicked and more wretched. So generally with
those who dally with sin.

[Matthew 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 12:46</span></span>

His mother and his brethren. On the brethren of the Lord, see note on
[Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055). Compare [Mar
3:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031) and [Luk
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#019), [Luk
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021). His brethren did not yet believe
in him.

[Matthew 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 12:48</span></span>

Who is my mother, and my brethren? An allusion to his Divine character,
which lifted him above the ordinary ties of the flesh.

Behold my mother and my brethren. His real relatives are those bound to
him by spiritual ties.

[Matthew 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 12:50</span></span>

The same is my brother. Not those with fleshly ties, but those who do
the will of his Father in heaven. Such become God's spiritual children,
and thus become spiritually related to the Son of God. It will be
observed that there is no hint of adoration of Mary, his mother, here,
or elsewhere in the Scriptures. That she was immaculately born, as the
"Queen of Heaven" and the "Mother of God," is a Catholic fable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 13](mat013)

</div>
