<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat002)  [Next](mat004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Preaching of John. The Kingdom of Heaven. John's Raiment
and Food. The Great Multitudes. The Pharisee and Sadducees. Baptism of
the Holy Spirit and Fire. Jesus Comes for Baptism. Jesus Baptized in the
Jordan. The Anointing of the Spirit. The Voice from Heaven.

[Matthew 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 3:1</span></span>

In those days. Many years after the incidents of the last chapter;
somewhere from twenty-five to thirty.

Came John the Baptist. Called the Baptist or Baptizer because he
baptized the people. He came forth as a preacher and reformer. He was
the subject of prophecy ([Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003);
[Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)); his birth was announced by
an angel; he was of a priestly family, the son of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, the cousin of Mary. He was now about thirty years old.

Preaching in the wilderness of Judea. A region thinly inhabited, used
mostly for pasture, a rocky tract in the eastern part of Judea and west
of the Jordan and the Dead Sea.

[Matthew 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 3:2</span></span>

Repent ye. The great rite of John was baptism, but the great duty
commanded was repentance. Repentance is more than a sorrow for sin; it
is a determination to abandon it and live a new life. It means a change
of the will, or heart, new purposes, a determination to leave off
sinning. Sorrow is not repentance, but "godly sorrow worketh repentance"
([Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)).

The kingdom of heaven. The long expected kingdom ruled by the Messiah
King, predicted by the prophets, and especially by Daniel ([Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)). The announcement of this
anxiously-waited-for kingdom thrilled all Judea.

Is at hand. It is to be noted: 1. That the kingdom to which he referred
was in the future, but near. It did not begin with Abraham, or David, or
even with John the Baptist. 2. It is the kingdom of heaven, not an
earthly kingdom, and hence, must have a King sent from heaven. That King
was not yet revealed to the public, but we have seen that one was born
at Bethlehem who was to be the King. John was not the founder, but the
herald of the coming King.

[Matthew 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 3:3</span></span>

The voice of one crying in the wilderness. John was called a voice, (1)
because the whole man was a sermon; (2) because he would call no
attention to himself as a person, but only to the Savior, whose way he
had come to prepare. For the prophecy see [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003).

Prepare ye the way of the Lord. The messengers sent before the eastern
kings prepared the way for the chariots and armies of their monarchs. A
"king's highway" had to be carried through the open land of the
wilderness, valleys filled up, and hills leveled. Interpreted in its
spiritual application, the wilderness was the world lying in evil.

Make his paths straight. Roads that have not been properly directed at
the beginning. So are the ways of men when no preparation has been made
for the GREAT KING. When John cried, Make his paths straight, he meant,
Stop your crooked ways.

[Matthew 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 3:4</span></span>

Raiment of camel's hair. See [Kg2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008).
Not the camel's skin with hair on it, but a garment made of the shaggier
camel's hair, woven in a coarse fabric. It was recognized as a garb of
the prophets ([Zac 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004)), and is still
worn in the East by the poor.

A leathern girdle about his loins. The "leathern girdle" may be seen
around the body of the common laborer. It fastens the loose raiment of
the East about the waist.

His meat. Food.

Locusts. Permitted to the Jews as an article of food ([Lev
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022)), and still used by the poorer
classes in Arabia, Egypt and Nubia. They are a large, voracious insect,
much like the Rocky Mountain grasshopper.

Wild honey. Honey deposited by wild swarms of bees in the rocks. So
abundant was it that Palestine was described as "flowing with milk and
honey." John was no epicure, and used such food as the wilderness
provided.

[Matthew 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 3:5</span></span>

There went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea. These expressions must be
taken, not as meaning every individual, but as showing the wonderful
impression produced by his preaching. All Judea, and among the rest, the
people of Jerusalem came.

[Matthew 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 3:6</span></span>

And were baptized of him in the Jordan. Note that the baptism took place
not at, but in, in the Jordan. Mark says, "in the river Jordan." The
Jordan, the principal stream of Palestine, rises in the mountains of
Lebanon, runs south into the sea of Galilee, leaves it and descends
southward along Galilee, Samaria and Judea, to the Dead Sea. In many
places the streams is fordable, and furnishes good facilities for
baptizing.

Confessing their sins. Baptism itself, a burial in water, a "baptism
into death," a symbol of the burial of one who dies to the old life, is
a confession of sins. There was, perhaps, also a verbal confession. The
acknowledgment of sin, repentance and baptism are prescribed as
conditions of pardon.

[Matthew 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 3:7</span></span>

When he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees. The two principal
religious sects. The first originated in the time of the Maccabees, and
were a kind of Jewish Puritans, but had in the Savior's time degenerated
into a set of formalists, who paid far more attention to outward forms
than to inner life. They were scrupulous in observing ceremonies, very
orthodox, but were filled with spiritual pride. From an early period of
Christ's ministry they opposed him. The other principal sect of the
Jews, the Sadducees, derived their name from Sadduc, the founder of the
sect; were irreligious, sensual and skeptical. They were materialists,
and denied "angel, spirit, or the resurrection of the dead." Annas and
Caiaphas, the high priests, were Sadducees.

Generation of vipers. The guilty, corrupted race had become a generation
of vipers; not only poisoned, but poisonous, hateful to God, hating one
another. The viper is hateful, full of hate, and dangerous.

Who hath warned you? Malachi ([Mal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002); [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)) had predicted the wrath to come.
John's question expresses doubt of their sincerity.

[Matthew 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 3:8</span></span>

Bring forth, therefore, fruits meet for repentance. There is no
repentance whatever unless there is a change of life as the result. The
change of life is the proof of the change of heart.

[Matthew 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 3:9</span></span>

Think not to say . . . We have Abraham to our father. They believed that
Abraham's race was to be saved, if all else were destroyed. John
destroys this refuge of sin.

Of these stones. Pointing, perhaps, to the stones of the Jordan. In thus
sinking the higher claims of Judaism, John points to the Gentiles, who
were to become Abraham's children by faith. (See [Gal
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029).)

[Matthew 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 3:10</span></span>

The axe laid at the root of the trees. A sign that the tree is to be cut
down. The tree meant is the Jewish nation.

Every tree. A fruitless fig-tree was afterward made by our Lord the
representative of the whole Jewish nation ([Luk
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)), but here John declares a
universal law. What does not bear good fruit shall finally be destroyed.

Cast into the fire. When the tree is not fruitful, or bears useless
fruit, it is fit for nothing but to be burned.

[Matthew 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 3:11</span></span>

I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance. His baptism was only a
water baptism. The King could send the Holy Spirit, and give a mightier
baptism, in addition to the outward baptism.

Mightier than I. In that he can perform all that I only promise.

Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. The duty of a slave, or one greatly
inferior in rank. In the Orient sandals are generally removed on
entering a house, and left in charge of a servant, who brings them again
when needed. So humble was John, compared with the King, that he was
hardly worthy to be his servant.

He shall baptize with the Holy Spirit. In order to know what is meant we
must refer to the fulfillment. On the day of Pentecost occurred such a
baptism, the first so recognized in the New Testament. Then the spirits
of the apostles were overwhelmed by the Divine Spirit, so that they
spoke as he gave them utterance. It was Christ who "shed forth" the
baptism of that occasion. This would be plainer had the Greek en, here
rendered "with," has been rendered "in," after the word baptize. Of the
2,600 occurrences of en in the Greek New Testament, it is rendered "in"
in the Common Version 2,045 times. The American Committee of Revisers in
the Revised Version (see margin) so render it in connection with the
word baptize, and are doubtless right. These great scholars, mostly
learned Pedo-baptists, would say, "Baptize in water," "Baptize in the
Holy Spirit."

And with fire. The term fire is used in [Mat
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010), and there means a destroying
agency; it is used again in [Mat 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)
in the same sense; it is used in [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011), also, the intervening verse, and
must be used in exactly the same sense as in the other two verses. It
cannot mean a curse in [Mat 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010) and
[Mat 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012), and a blessing in [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011), without a word of explanation.
It is strange, therefore, that all commentators should not agree that
the baptism of fire is a baptism of trial and suffering. There were two
classes before John. Some would repent and be baptized finally in the
Holy Spirit; there were others who would remain impenitent, and be
baptized in the awful trials that would come upon Israel. The next verse
explains this. John says in it that there is the wheat and the chaff;
one shall be gathered into the garner and the other burned.

[Matthew 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 3:12</span></span>

Fan is in his hand. Rather the winnowing shovel, by which the wheat and
chaff were tossed together into the air, so that the wind would blow the
chaff away. In Palestine grain was threshed on an outdoor threshing
floor, either by hand or the treading of cattle, and winnowed by casting
it up to the wind.

Gather his wheat into the garner. Granary, or grain depository.

Unquenchable fire. A reference is here made to the practice of burning
the chaff under process of winnowing. The wheat is the righteous, the
chaff is the wicked, and Christ is the winnower; the granary is heaven,
the unquenchable fire is hell.

[Matthew 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 3:13</span></span>

Then cometh Jesus. Not named by Matthew since he was taken to Nazareth
in childhood. From Luke we learn that he was subject to his parents, at
twelve years of age astonished the doctors in the temple by his wisdom,
and was now thirty years of age. He had worked in Nazareth as a
carpenter.

Galilee. The northern part of Palestine, containing at this time,
according at this time, according to Josephus, 240 towns and villages
and an immense population.

To be baptized. He came for this purpose. He sought the rite.

[Matthew 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 3:14</span></span>

John forbade him. The objection that John made to the baptism of Christ
implies some knowledge of him. Their mothers were cousins, but there is
no evidence that Jesus and John had ever met. The Spirit had told John
to proclaim the Redeemer and had given him a sign by which he should
know him. When Jesus came before him, he perhaps knew, by the Spirit,
his purity, and may have believed that he was the Messiah, but as yet he
"knew him not" (see [Joh 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)). He
could not be certain until he saw the divine sign.

I have need to be baptized of thee. These words were uttered under the
conviction, not certainty, that Jesus was the Christ.

[Matthew 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 3:15</span></span>

Suffer it to be so now. The term "now" implies that the relation of
Jesus to his work made it proper that now he should be baptized. It is
true that baptism was for sinners; Jesus was sinless; but he humbled
himself, accepted the burden of human duties, and must set a perfect
example to men. He obeyed the Jewish law, and it was needful also that
he obey the Divine rite that John had inaugurated.

Thus it becometh us. In order to fulfill all righteousness, show forth a
perfect obedience, set a perfect example, it became him to submit to the
institution of baptism, and it became John to administer it to him. "Us"
refers to Jesus and John.

[Matthew 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 3:16</span></span>

And Jesus, when he was baptized. The baptism took place in the river
Jordan, and was doubtless by immersion. Dr. Whitby, of the Church of
England, on this passage, says: "The observation of the Greek Church is
this, that he who ascended out of the water must first descend into it.
Baptism is therefore to be performed, not by sprinkling, but by washing
the body." Dr. Schaff, the great Pedo-baptist scholar, says: "While the
validity of baptism does not depend on the quantity or quality of water,
or the mode of its application, yet immersion and emersion is the
primitive and expressive mode to symbolize the idea of entire spiritual
purification and renovation." Dr. Schaff also says: "The Greek word
baptize is derived from a root that means 'to dip,' 'to immerse.'" These
views are endorsed by all the great Pedo-baptist scholars.

Went up straightway out of the water. The Revision says "from the
water," which is correct, as the preposition is apo; yet Mark uses ek in
giving the same account, which the Revision correctly renders "out of."
He went up, praying, as we learn from [Luk
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021).

Lo, the heavens were opened unto him. The skies were parted, rolled
back, so as to reveal, as it were, the throne of God.

Spirit . . . descending like a dove. In form, and not, as some suppose,
in motion merely, which would convey no definite idea. It descended to
anoint him to be Christ.

[Matthew 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 3:17</span></span>

A voice from heaven. Three times God speaks from heaven in connection
with the ministry of Christ--at his baptism, his transfiguration, and in
the temple just before his suffering.

Thou art my beloved Son. The very words addressed to the Messiah in [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007); and from which the Son of God
became one of his standing appellations. Thus the baptism of Christ was
the occasion of his public recognition. No reader should fail to observe
the significance of the time chosen by God for the acknowledgment of the
Son. It is just after he has humbled himself in an act of obedience, in
baptism, that the Holy Spirit anoints him as the Christ, and God
formally acknowledges him as his Son. No more forcible expression of the
estimate set by God on this institution could be given. This example and
the New Testament harmonizes in teaching-- 1. That we must be baptized
if we would follow Christ. 2. That it is when we repent and are baptized
that we receive the Holy Spirit ([Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)). 3. That when we have obeyed the
Lord he will recognize us as his children.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 4](mat004)

</div>
