<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1.md)  
  [Previous](pe1002)  [Next](pe1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001.md)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Duties of Women. Of Husbands. Duties of Christians Towards
Each Other. Attitude Towards Adversaries. Christian Endurance of Wrong.
Christ's Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. Salvation of Those in the
Ark. The Antitype is Baptism.

[1 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 3:1</span></span>

Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection, etc. See notes [Eph
5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021.md). Paul teaches the duty of
submission, and in [Co1 7:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#013.md) shows
that it was not the duty of the believing wife to abandon her
unbelieving husband. Peter goes farther here and teaches that the wife
show her obedience in order to win her husband.

They also may without the word be won. That even those who have steeled
themselves against the gospel and who refuse to listen to it may be
quietly won by the sweet, Christian lives of their wives.

While they behold you chaste conversation. Your pure lives.

Coupled with fear. The shrinking from doing anything that is wrong.

Whose adorning. While urging those pure and holy lives which will
sweetly preach Christ, Peter cannot pass by a foible often seen in the
sex. There is a better adorning than that of the body.

Plaiting the hair. See notes on [Ti1
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md). Compare [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013.md). The allusion is to wearing
ornaments of gold or silver over the hair, a common adornment of the
time.

Jewels of gold. For the extravagant dress of Roman women of the time,
see Farrar's Early Years of Christianity, page 5.

Let it be the hidden man of the heart. The important part is to see that
the heart is right and the spirit adorned with all the graces of holy
life. Seek after inward rather than outward adorning.

In the sight of God. God sees us all the time, and such adorning is of
great worth in his sight.

For after this manner. The holy women whose names are found in sacred
history adorned themselves with "a meek and quiet spirit."

As Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. See [Gen
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012.md); also [Sa1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015.md). This designation showed respect
and submission. Women should follow the example of Sarah, who might be
designated as "the mother of those who are Abraham's children by faith."

Are not put in fear. The fear might result from not doing well. They
were to be quiet, submissive, loving wives, but were not to be kept from
Christian duty by "any fear" which might threaten because of their
heathen surroundings.

[1 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 3:7</span></span>

Ye husbands. Duties of Christian husbands are now briefly stated. They
are to dwell with their wives. The fact that their wives are unconverted
is no ground for separation, but if the wife is converted, still
stronger is the bond.

According to knowledge. A knowledge that shows judgment, moderation and
gentleness as toward one weaker than himself.

Joint heirs. Hence "one in Christ Jesus." The home life is to be
regulated according to knowledge.

That your prayers be not hindered. Mutual prayer is not possible unless
there is mutual love and forbearance. Nor can the husband's prayers be
acceptable unless he treats his wife aright.

[1 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 3:8</span></span>

Be pitiful. Towards all the afflicted.

Be courteous. Humble minded. See Revision. Not haughty.

Hereunto were ye called. Peter enjoins good deeds for evil, and blessing
for reviling, because any other course would be inconsistent with the
Christian calling. Called to a heritage of blessing they must live lives
of blessing, for "as a man soweth so also shall he reap."

For. If you desire to inherit blessing, you must abstain from evil. The
conditions are stated by the Psalmist, [Psa
34:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013.md), from which the next three
verses are quoted.

The eyes of the Lord. He ceases not to regard his righteous servants.

The ears. He not only sees, but hears when they cry to him.

But his face. Is turned in displeasure upon evil doers.

[1 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 3:13</span></span>

Who is he that will harm you? If you are zealous for good who can
inflict real harm upon you? God is with you.

If ye should suffer. Ye may be called to suffer for Christ. That is the
lot of Christians, but instead of calling this an evil, blessed are ye.
See [Mat 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010.md). Great is the reward. It
is only sowing in tears to reap in joy.

Fear not with their fear. Revision. With the fear of the wicked when
danger comes, nor be troubled because you are persecuted.

But sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord. Revision. Let Christ be
honored and reverenced. Fear not man but the Lord.

Yet with meekness and fear. To confess Christ as the ground of your
hope. The answer to adversaries is to be made, not with arrogance and
indignation, but modestly, meekly, reverentially.

Having a good conscience. Before God. This is the element of strength
when accused. A life holy and pure is the best answer to false accusers.

For it is better, if the will of God is so. If God wills that we should
suffer, for the Father sometimes chasteneth children, it is better to
suffer for righteousness, than for evil. See [Ti2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012.md).

[1 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 3:18</span></span>

For Christ also suffered. Even Christ, the Holy One, our example, once
suffered on the cross.

Once. Once only. He suffers no more.

Being put to death in the flesh. He was put to death by the wounds
inflicted on his fleshly body. His natural, earthly life was ended.

Quickened in the spirit. Put to death in the body his spirit was
quickened. Having life in himself, as soon as the body failed through
weakness the power of the indestructible life began to show itself.

In which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison. Revision.
The facts stated are (1) That Christ, put to death in the flesh, but
made alive in the spirit, went and preached. (2) This preaching of
Christ in the spirit was to spirits. (3) Those spirits were in prison.
The Greek word used for prison, denotes a place of custody, not a place
of punishment. These spirits ([Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)) were (4.md) aforetime disobedient.
This states why they were held in prison. (5) The time of their
disobedience is stated. It was while the long-suffering of God waited in
the days of Noah. They had then refused to obey the call to repentance.
It is stated in [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003.md), that the
long suffering of God waited 120 years. This difficult passage has been
given two interpretations. The more common view is that Jesus, after his
suffering, during the interval before his resurrection, went without the
body in a spirit form, to these antediluvians and preached to them. If
this view is correct, it only teaches that an offer of salvation was
then made to these disobedient ones who had never before heard of Christ
before their final judgment. It furnishes no comfort to those that have
an opportunity and reject it in this life. It only shows that one
opportunity is given to all. The other view is that Christ went "in
spirit" in the person of Noah and by him preached to those who were
afterwards held in prison on account of their disobedience. The first
view seems more in harmony with the context; the second furnishes fewer
theological difficulties.

Wherein few, that is, eight souls. Only eight souls out of a great
multitude were saved; these were saved through water, since it bore up
the ark. The word rendered "through," means "by means of."

The like figure whereunto. Literally, "the antitype now saves us,
Baptism." Says Alford, "Water saved them, bearing up the ark; it saves
us, becoming to us baptism." As they entered the Ark, we are "baptized
into Christ," the Savior. See [Gal
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027.md).

Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh. Not as a Jewish
ceremonial washing, which was only a purification of the flesh, but it
is the answer of a good conscience. The Revision says, "the
interrogation of a good conscience." "Inquiry" would be still better.
The soul seeking the forgiveness of sins "inquires" What shall I do to
remove the sense of unforgiven sins and make my conscience void of
offense? The answer is "Repent and be baptized," etc. See [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md). He who obeys the word of the
Lord has the "inquiry" answered in baptism.

Through the resurrection. Baptism would be meaningless and vain were it
not for the resurrection of Christ. It points directly to the burial and
resurrection of the Lord. See [Rom
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001.md) Who is on the right hand of God.
Christ's exaltation followed his death and resurrection. See [Eph
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 4](pe1004.md)

</div>
