<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2002)  [Next](jo1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Purpose of the Second Epistle. The Sayings of Scoffers.
God's Apparent Delay to Give Opportunity for Repentance. The Day of the
Lord. The New Heavens and New Earth. The Blameless Lives We Ought to
Live. Paul's Writings. Final Admonitions.

[2 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 3:1</span></span>

This second epistle. This language implies a former letter written to
the same persons to whom this is addressed.

I stir up your pure minds. In both letters his object was mainly to
exhort them to holy lives.

By way of remembrance. By reminding you of the claims of Christ as shown
by prophets and apostles.

That ye be mindful of the words. Both of what was spoken by the prophets
in the Old Testament, and of what the apostles have now spoken.

Us the apostles. The Twelve, and Paul, who is alluded to in [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015).

Knowing this first. The apostles and prophets have reminded them that
there will be scoffers in the last days. Under the last dispensation.

Where is the promise of his coming? This question is asked by the
scoffers, as though the coming of Christ was so long delayed that all
hope had ended. They take advantage of the disappointment to try to
destroy faith.

All things continue. The scoffers assert that the regular order of
nature continues right on as it was from the beginning. They forget the
deluge.

[2 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 3:5</span></span>

For this they willingly are ignorant of. Their ignorance which causes
them to speak thus is wilful. They obstinately forget all the lessons
taught by the deluge. There the fixed order was interrupted.

That there were heavens. This alludes to the beginning of creation. See
[Gen 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001).

By the word of God. See [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009).

And the earth. The Revision translated, "compacted out of water." That
is, water is a principal element in its formation, a fact seen in
three-fourths of its surface being sea, and water being found in the
depths of the earth everywhere, and being found largely in earthly
combinations.

Whereby. By means of the waters of heaven and earth; "the fountains of
the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened," the
old world was overflowed and perished.

By the same word. The heavens and earth of old were formed by the word
of God, but the same word, which has always been sure, declares that
they are reserved for fire. See [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003); [Psa
97:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003); [Isa
66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015), [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024); [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001).

Against the day of judgment. This destruction by fire will be when the
Lord is revealed in judgment and when perdition comes on ungodly men.

[2 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 3:8</span></span>

But, beloved, be not ignorant. Delay was the objection of the scoffers,
but time is no element in the counsels of God. He has eternity in which
to work out his purposes. He can as well take a thousand years as a day.
If he seems to us short lived creatures to delay it for wise purposes.
See [Psa 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004).

The Lord is not slack. If the day of the Lord seems delayed it is not
due to slackness. It is rather because God is long suffering and is
giving time to call the world to repentance. See [Ti1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004).

But the day of the Lord will come. This expression usually, but not
always, refers to the second advent. Such is the meaning here.

As a thief. When people are not expecting it. Compare [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002); [Mat
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043).

The heavens shall pass away. See [Luk
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033).

The elements shall melt. The material of which they are composed.

The earth also and the works. The earth and all man's creations. That
the world shall come to an end seems to be written in its very
constitution. A slight change in the constitution of the atmosphere, or
the decomposition of its water would wrap it in flame. Science finds the
elements of final dissolution in the relations of the earth and sun.
According to the ratio of increase in two centuries the world will not
have resources to feed its population. In a few hundred years the coal
resources of the world will fail. These and many other facts point to a
necessary and inevitable change.

What manner of persons ought ye to be. Since we have no abiding home on
this earth and seek one beyond, we should live in a state of
preparation.

Looking for. Looking for, preparing for, and desiring the Lord's coming.
Dreadful as that day will be for the impenitent it is a day of relief
and of glorious attainment to the saint.

We, according to his promise. See [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017); also [Isa
66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022). The heavens and the earth are
not to be blotted out, but changed, purified, and made better for the
home of the righteous.

[2 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 3:14</span></span>

Wherefore, beloved. Now follows an earnest exhortation to holiness in
view of the coming of the Lord.

Account that the long suffering of our Lord is salvation. That God's
long suffering is designed to promote salvation.

Even as our beloved brother Paul . . . hath written to you. We cannot
tell what epistles of Paul are alluded to. We have at least three which
were written to the same churches Peter was addressing. See [Pe1
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001).

As also in all his epistles. Peter knew of many epistles, then, that
Paul had written, and knew also that they contained some very profound
argument, which a Jew especially found it difficult to understand (See
Galatian Letter).

The unlearned and unstable. The ignorant and vacillating wrest. Pervert
and give meanings that were never meant.

As also the other scriptures. The other scriptures may mean the Old
Testament, or New Testament writings already written. The point to be
noted is that already when Peter wrote Paul's epistles were accepted as
a part of the Scriptures.

To their own destruction. This should be a warning to all in our day who
twist the Scriptures from their real meaning.

Seeing ye know these things before. That there shall be false teachers;
hence beware of them.

Grow in grace. How they may so grow was shown in [Pe1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002).

And in the knowledge of our Lord. The two kinds of growth must keep
equal pace. He who grows in the one will grow in the other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Introduction](jo1000)

</div>
