<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](eph006)  [Next](phi001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS.

The Letter to the Saints at Philippi differs in some respects from any
of the preceding letters of the Apostle Paul. It contains less logic and
more of the heart. It is distinguished by the absence of didactical
reasoning, and by the presence of a tender friendship and fatherly
affection which is more apparent than in other Pauline letters to the
churches. The letter to the Romans in the profoundest logic; those to
the Corinthians were designed to rebuke certain prevalent sins and
necessarily contain more or less censure; that to the Galatians rebukes
a dangerous heresy which threatened the welfare of the Galatian
churches; that to the Ephesians is a sublime unfolding of the mystery of
God in reference to the Gentiles, but this letter is the outpouring of
the love of the founder of the Philippian Church towards one of the most
affectionate, faithful and self-forgetful of all congregations which he
had planted. It has been remarked that there is no breath of censure for
the Philippian saints, except in so far as it is implied in the tender
exhortation to Euodias and Syntyche found in [Phi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002.md). The history of the origin of the
church and the memory of the loving remembrances of the Philippians help
to explain the affectionate tenderness of the letter.

The account of the founding of the church at Philippi, which occurred in
A. D. 50 or 51, is given in the sixteenth chapter of Acts. Led by a
vision at Troas the apostle, on his second great missionary journey,
crossed into Europe, landing at Neapolis, and proceeding from thence at
once to Philippi, which was "the chief city of that part of Macedonia."
This city had already some claims to a place in history. It received its
name from Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander the Great, who
added to his dominions the little Thracian town which existed there
before, rebuilt and fortified it, and gave it its new name in the year
B. C. 358. In B. C. 42, about ninety-two years before Paul visited it,
it was the field of the decisive battle between Brutus and Cassius, the
leaders of the Republicans, and the Triumvirate of Imperialists, one of
whom was subsequently Augustus CÃ&brvbr;sar. But the place has a higher
interest to the Christian world from the fact that here was planted the
first congregation of Christians that ever existed on the soil of
Europe.

It was not only the scene of gospel triumphs but of suffering for the
cross of Christ. Here it was that Paul and Silas were beaten, cast into
the stocks in the inner prison, by the grace of God converted and
baptized their jailer and his household before the dawn, and were
honorably released by the magistrates in the morning, as Roman citizens,
unjustly beaten and imprisoned. When Paul continued his journey
westward, the recently founded Philippian church followed him with
support, contributing more than once to his necessities ([Phi
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015).md), and when the tidings came
that he was a prisoner in Rome their old affection showed itself still
again by sending one of their members, Epaphroditus, with the offerings
of the church as a provision for his wants ([Phi
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025.md); [Phi
4:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010).md). It seems to have been the
return of Epaphroditus from this ministration of their love, to which we
are indebted for this letter.

It was written from the city of Rome, during the first imprisonment of
Paul, and probably towards its close, perhaps in the year A. D. 63. The
mention of his bonds ([Phi 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012).md), of
the PrÃ&brvbr;torian camp (see Revision in [Phi
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013).md) of CÃ&brvbr;sar's household
([Phi 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022).md), as well as other
allusions ([Phi 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#025.md); [Phi
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024).md) all show that Paul was in the
Roman capital at the time of writing. I will not take space to discuss
the reasons which seem to point to near the close of his first
imprisonment as its date.

Concerning the genuineness of this epistle, there has never been any
reasonable doubt. It has always been accepted by the church, is Pauline
in doctrine, and in diction, abounds probably to a greater extent than
other epistles in personal details, and is in full agreement with all
the historical facts which can be gathered from the history of the
times, and from the allusions in Acts and the other epistles. It bears
every mark of having been written by Paul from the scene of his
imprisonment to the beloved church which he had planted and for which he
had suffered. It is not only contained in the Canon of Scripture dated
A. D. 170, but is mentioned definitely by Polycarp, born in A. D. 69, in
his own Epistle to the Philippians, and is quoted from in an Epistle of
Ignatius of about A. D. 107.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 1](phi001.md)

</div>
