<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](phi000)  [Next](phi002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--Greetings to the Church and Its Officers. Reasons for
Thanksgiving. The Progress of the Gospel in Rome. Different Motives for
Preaching the Gospel. The Apostle's Desire to Depart and Be with Christ.
Exhortations to Unity and Fortitude.

[Philippians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 1:1</span></span>

Paul and Timotheus, the servants, etc. The beloved Timothy was attending
and aiding Paul at Rome. The name of Timothy appears at the head of
several Epistles. In this letter to be a beloved church, so devoted to
him, Paul does not refer to his apostleship in his greeting, as in
preceding Epistles, as one speaking with authority, but exhorts them as
a fellow-servant of Christ.

To all the saints in Christ Jesus. Every one in Christ, i. e., every
Christian was and is a saint.

With the bishops and deacons. We find two classes of officers in this
church organized by an apostle. There was a plurality of each class. All
commentators agree that "the bishops" and "the elders" of the primitive
church are the same, only different names of the same office. Paul calls
the "elders" of Ephesus "bishops." See [Act
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017) (Revision.md). Also in [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md), [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007.md), he calls an "elder" a "bishop."
For the duties of this office, see notes on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md), and [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md). The word "Overseer," which is a
literal translation of the Greek word suggests the nature of the office.
The duties of the deacons are supposed to be explained by the work of
the "Seven Deacons" ordained in the church at Jerusalem. See Acts,
chapter 6. See notes on [Ti1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md).

Grace. The usual apostolic benediction, such as we have found in
preceding Epistles, is conferred.

[Philippians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 1:3</span></span>

I thank my God. Almost all the Epistles open with thanksgiving. How
glorious a faith that which led him always, even in the darkest hour, to
see the hand of God present in blessing! Yet in the remembrance of the
Philippians there was much to cheer his heart.

In every prayer. The repeated assurances shows us that Paul was wont
daily to carry the interests of the churches he planted to God. In the
case of this faithful church he did it with joy.

For your fellowship in furtherance of the gospel \[Revision\]. He is
thankful and full of joy that from the first they had constantly
sympathized with him and aided in extending the gospel. It was a really
missionary church.

Until now. See [Phi 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025.md), and [Phi
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010.md), [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018.md), for illustrations.

Being confident. So faithful have they been that he is confident that
they will be faithful to the end.

He which began a good work. God, who sent Paul to them with the gospel,
began the good work. He will sustain them by his grace.

Day of Jesus Christ. The day they are called to his presence.

Because I have you in my heart. Their faithfulness had engraven them on
his heart. He shows how that faithfulness had been demonstrated. They
were all partakers of his grace, the grace of suffering for the gospel
and of defending it.

In my bonds. He was a prisoner bound. As a prisoner he preached and
defended the gospel. The Philippians sympathized with him, prayed for
him, and sustained him by their offerings, thus becoming partakers. They
not only did this, but defended and suffered for the gospel. See [Phi
1:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028.md).

[Philippians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 1:8</span></span>

Long after you. Love you and long for your presence.

In the bowels of Jesus Christ. See Revision. With a tender love like
that of Christ.

This I pray. Not that their love for him should abound more, but with
the increase of their love there might be fuller knowledge and wiser
judgment.

That ye may approve. This increase in knowledge and judgment would lead
them to approve what is really excellent. How often men approve what
does not bless them! How often the judgment errs!

Without offense. Without leadings others to stumble.

Being filled with the fruits of righteousness. This must follow from
being "sincere," etc. Those who are earnest and sincere occupy
themselves with works of righteousness, such as are due to faith in
Jesus Christ and his help, and which are unto the glory and praise of
God. In no way can we glorify God more than by living holy, helpful
lives.

[Philippians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 1:12</span></span>

I would ye should understand. No doubt the Philippians grieved greatly
that he was a prisoner, but he assures them that all things have turned
to the furtherance of the gospel. He has been given an opportunity to
reach those whom otherwise he never could have had access to.

So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace.
PrÃ&brvbr;torium in the Greek, rendered by the Revision,
"PrÃ&brvbr;torian guard." The prÃ&brvbr;torian camp was the great
military camp of a body of soldiers stationed permanently at Rome,
called the prÃ&brvbr;torian guards. Paul, as a military prisoner, was
under charge of its commander, the prÃ&brvbr;fect. The necessity of
reporting regularly would make him well known, and would give him many
opportunities to preach Christ there and elsewhere. Compare [Act
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016.md).

Many of the brethren. Taking courage from his boldness, though in bonds,
the brethren were engaged in preaching the gospel with greater zeal than
ever before. See [Phi 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md), for some
of the results of this preaching.

[Philippians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 1:15</span></span>

Some, indeed, preach Christ even of envy. The motives of all preachers
are not pure. Some still preach Christ, full of envy for other
preachers, and some from a love of strife. Those envious of Paul were
probably Judaizing Christians. See next verse.

The one preach Christ from contention. Not from sincere love of the
gospel, but from a factious spirit. While preaching, they sought to
undermine Paul's influence, supposing to add affliction to his bonds.
For an illustration of this class, read the first and second chapters of
Galatians, The other of love. These are the true and earnest preachers.
They knew that Paul was not sent to Rome because he was an evil doer,
but because he was set for the defense of the gospel. God had sent him
there to preach it.

What then? So anxious is he to have Christ preached, that, whatever may
be the motives of men, whether their zeal is only a pretence or in
truth, still if only Christ is preached, he will rejoice. This is not a
sanction of a false gospel (see [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008).md), nor of the men themselves, but
rejoicing, if by any means the knowledge of Christ is spread. How
different this glorious unselfishness, and greatness of spirit, from the
narrowness of those who higgle over "plans" and forbid "those who walk
not with them!"

[Philippians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 1:19</span></span>

For I know that this, etc. All this envy and opposition will tend to
promote his salvation. He will be delivered by God who will hear their
prayers, and who will strengthen and direct him by the Spirit of Jesus
Christ.

That in nothing shall I be ashamed. Whatever may come, whether his bonds
lead to death or life, his trust is that the Spirit will give him such
boldness that Christ shall be magnified. There is no anxiety about
himself, only that he may glorify Christ.

For to me to live is Christ. Should he be suffered to live, his life
would be for extending the kingdom of Christ, but personally, to die
would be gain; a release from sufferings and an entrance upon eternal
joys.

[Philippians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 1:22</span></span>

But if I live in the flesh. In the body; i. e., on earth. In this state
the fruit of his labor is Christ. See [Phi
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021.md).

Yet what I shall choose. He can hardly tell whether he would choose the
gain of death, or to continue to live in order that he may work for
Christ.

Having a desire to depart. His feelings would lead him to choose to
depart from the flesh (see [Phi 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024).md),
and to be with Christ. Note that with Paul to depart from the flesh, the
body, is followed by going immediately to Christ.

Nevertheless. Though it is better to depart and dwell with Christ, the
brethren need him in the flesh. That is the reason why he is in the
strait ([Phi 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023).md).

And having this confidence. Rather, "Being fully persuaded of this."
Sure that he is needed on earth by the churches, he has no doubt that he
will be delivered from his present danger and abide and continue, live
to further their faith.

That your rejoicing. Nay, he is assured that the Philippians will
rejoice over a visit from him. There is every reason to believe that his
confidence was justified; that he was released and did again visit
Philippi.

[Philippians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">phi 1:27</span></span>

Only let your conversation. Your manner of life. Whether absent, or
present, he wishes to know that they are perfectly united.

And in nothing terrified by your adversaries. Probably there had been
another outbreak of heathen violence at Philippi such as Paul and Silas
endured ([Act 16:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019).md).

Which is to them. Your courage. When they see that they cannot terrify
or overcome you, it will be a token to them of the ruin which will
befall them, but an assurance to you of your salvation, through the help
of God.

For to you it is given. Two things were granted: (1) The privilege of
believing in Christ. (2) That of suffering for Christ. Such was the lot
of all ancient Christians. See [Heb
12:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003.md), and [Pe1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016.md).

Having the same conflict which ye saw in me. You saw when I was at
Philippi what I had to endure ([Act
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019).md); you hear that I am now a
prisoner threatened with death. You must expect similar conflicts and
meet them with fortitude.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 2](phi002.md)

</div>
