<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philemon Index](plm.md)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](plm001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

[Philemon](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">plm 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.

This, the fourth of the personal letters of Paul, differs from the other
three, as well as from all other epistles of Paul, in that it is neither
doctrinal, nor intended for general church instruction. It has its
interest in that it shows by a particular example the application of the
great principles of Christian brotherhood to social life. It is written
to Philemon, an active Christian of Colosse, a convert of Paul, in
behalf of Onesimus, a runaway slave of Philemon, who had found refuge in
Rome, had in some way been brought under Paul's instruction during his
first Roman imprisonment, and had been brought to Christ. In [Col
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009.md) he is mentioned as belonging to
Colosse, commended as a faithful and beloved brother who had been of
great service, and it is there stated that he would return from Rome to
his old home along with Tychicus, while this epistle explains the
occasion of his return, and throws a practical light on the new
relations of master and slave, which could not be done by precept alone.

A few words concerning ancient slavery will assist in an understanding
of the lesson of the epistle. Slavery was universal. Aristotle, one of
the most enlightened of the Greeks, held that the Creator had made the
majority of the human race for slavery. Even the Mosaic law permitted
the relation, but mitigated the condition of the slave by protective
regulations which made Jewish slavery far the mildest in the world.
Under the Roman law the slave was not considered a man, but a chattel
without any civil rights whatever, completely at the mercy of his
master. The master could sell him, give him away, torture him, crucify
him, put him to death, even feed him to the fishes, and there was no law
to interfere in his behalf. But when Christ came he introduced new
relations between man and man. All in the church were a brotherhood. In
Christ Jesus there was neither bond nor free, male nor female. All stood
on a footing of equality before the Lord; all were brethren; all God's
children, and to be bound to each other by the ties of brotherly love.

Such revolutionary ideas were sure in the course of time to destroy the
condition of slavery, but in the meanwhile, Christianity sought to
prepare men for the revolution before it was declared, and hence the
relation was continued under new regulations. The servant was to
continue to render faithful service to a master who was a brother
beloved, and the master was to love and trust his servant as a brother,
and to do unto him as he would be done by in such a relation. Hence in
the early church thousands of masters and slaves met on an equal footing
and often the slaves were the bishops who ruled the church and watched
over the spiritual welfare of their masters.

Onesimus, an unconverted slave of Philemon, had fled, whether after or
before his master's conversion, is unknown. When he was converted the
principles of Christian teaching would require him to return, but the
conditions of his return are explained in the affectionate letter which
he carries back to Philemon. He returns a servant, but as a more than
servant, "a brother beloved, both in the flesh, and in the Lord," and
Philemon is desired to so receive him in a tender appeal to his
consciousness of how much he owes to him who asks. He is reminded that
Onesimus is Paul's own son in the Gospel, as well as himself. A sense of
the fault is exhibited, and forgiveness for the offender is required,
not by the authority of apostolic power, but of love.

This epistle must have been written about the same time as that to the
Colossians, and was carried by the same messengers. Its genuineness is
accepted by almost all critical authorities, the rationalist Baur being
the only notable exception.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Chapter 1](plm001.md)

</div>
