<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philemon Index](plm.md)  
  [Previous](plm000)  [Next](heb000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--Greetings. Thanksgiving for Philemon's Faith. Entreaty for
Onesimus. The Change in Onesimus. His Return. An Appeal to Philemon's
Love for Paul. Paul's Hope to Visit Colosse. Closing Salutations.

[Philemon 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">plm 1:1</span></span>

Paul, a prisoner. A prisoner at Rome. The first words are an appeal to
the sympathy of Philemon. He refers to his chains five times in this
letter.

Timothy our brother. Two other Epistles of the Captivity name Timothy in
the first verse. See [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md) and [Col
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md).

Unto Philemon. See Introduction. Philemon evidently lived in Colosse,
but Paul had never been there. He had probably converted him in Ephesus,
the capital of the province, during his long sojourn there.

Our beloved Apphia. Supposed to have been Philemon's wife.

And Archippus. The connection has suggested that he was Philemon's son.
He was no doubt a minister. See [Col
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017.md).

The church in thy house. As the early church had no houses of worship,
it met in private houses.

Grace. The benediction of grace would remind him of God's mercy.

[Philemon 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">plm 1:4</span></span>

I thank my God. Here he begins to speak directly to Philemon, whom he
always mentions in his prayers.

Hearing of thy love and faith. The ground of his thankfulness is
Philemon's godly life.

That the communication of thy faith. Rather, "fellowship," as in the
Revision. The Greek word is koinonia, and the prayer is that the
fellowship of faith between Philemon and Onesimus may become effectual
in showing forth forgiveness, which would of course be comprehended in
every good thing. Here, however, the statement is general.

For I had much joy and comfort. Alluding to the time when news came to
him of the state of the church at Colosse and of Philemon's active
Christian life. The news was brought, no doubt, by Epaphras ([Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007).md).

[Philemon 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">plm 1:8</span></span>

Wherefore. After this introduction Paul states the purpose of the
letter.

Though I might be much bold in Christ. As an apostle, and as the one who
gave Philemon the gospel, he had the right to command what is befitting.

Yet. Yet he does not come thus with commands, but as beseeching for
love's sake.

Paul the aged. That his appeal may be more sure to touch Philemon, he
reminds him that Paul is an old, gray-haired, scarred veteran of Christ,
who has grown aged in his service, and is now a prisoner suffering for
his Lord.

For my son Onesimus. His spiritual son, whom he in his bonds, while a
prisoner in chains, had converted. It is possible that Epaphras met
Onesimus, his fellow-townsman in Rome, and brought him to Paul.

Which in time past was to thee unprofitable. He may not only have been a
restless, discontented servant, but in addition, he ran away.

But now profitable. Such a change has taken place in him. He has served
Paul in his bonds well, and will also serve Philemon well.

Whom I have sent again. Not only that he may make amends to thee for his
wrong, but that thou mayst be able to treat him as a brother in Christ.

Mine own bowels. Rather, "My very heart" (Revision). I am so much
attached to him. To be unkind to him would wound Paul's very heart.

Whom I would have retained. Would gladly have kept him with me to render
for thee the service you would be glad to give me while I am in chains,
only (14) without thy mind would I do nothing. He wished, if such a
service was rendered, it might be with Philemon's free consent.

[Philemon 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">plm 1:15</span></span>

Perhaps he therefore departed, etc. Perhaps his departure was
providential, to lead to his conversion, to give you a faithful helper,
and to save him forever.

Not now as a servant. His relation is changed. He is more than a
servant, a Christian brother, beloved, specially to me. See [Plm
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#012.md).

How much more unto thee. He has both temporal, fleshly relations to thee
(those of master and servant), and besides is your brother in Christ.
Both these ties ought to bind him to you. The gospel held Christian
masters responsible for both the moral and the physical welfare of their
servants.

If thou count me a partner. Christian fellow-laborers are partners. See
[Co2 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023.md), where Titus is named as
Paul's partner. Then receive him, as you would me.

[Philemon 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">plm 1:18</span></span>

If he hath wronged thee. By defrauding thee of his service. Some have
seen in this a suggestion that Onesimus had robbed Philemon, but that
inference is not necessary. See Introduction on the gospel and slavery.

I, Paul, have written it with mine own hand. If you hold this wrong
against him, here is my written bond that I will repay it.

Albeit. Here is a reminder that Philemon owed his salvation to Paul, a
reminder which would certainly prevent him from putting in a claim
against the apostle.

Let me have joy of thee. By learning that you have cheerfully granted
all I ask in this letter.

Having confidence. This letter is written in full confidence that even
more than I ask will be granted. Perhaps this is a hint that Philemon
might grant Onesimus his freedom.

[Philemon 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">plm 1:22</span></span>

Prepare me also a lodging. All the letters of the first imprisonment
express confidence that he will be set at liberty. That Paul visited
Asia again is almost certain, and perhaps he visited Colosse.

There salute thee Epaphras. See notes on [Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md). He probably founded the Colossian
church. See also [Col 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012.md).

My fellow-prisoner. Perhaps only in the sense that he shared Paul's
imprisonment by becoming his companion.

Marcus. Mark. See Introduction to Mark.

Aristarchus. A Macedonian. See [Act
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#002.md).

Demas. See [Ti2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010.md) for his later
history, Lucas. See Introduction to Luke. Also [Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014.md). These are all mentioned in the
closing salutations of the Colossian letter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Introduction](heb000.md)

</div>
