<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev007)  [Next](rev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 8:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Silence in Heaven. The Seven Angels with the Seven
Trumpets. The Incense Offered. The Fire Cast on the Earth. The First
Angel Sounds; Hail, Fire, and Blood Follow. The Second Trumpet and the
Mountain Cast into the Sea. The Third Trumpet and the Great Burning
Stars. The Fourth Trumpet and the Sun Darkened.

[Revelation 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 8:1</span></span>

When he opened the seventh seal. It is the Lamb who opens all the seals.

There was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. There has
been a great effort among commentators to interpret the meaning of this
silence. I think that it is a hush of awe before the march of the awful
judgments about to come, the calm before the storm breaks forth, the
oppressive silence before the burst of battle. It is designed to
emphasize the events that follow.

And I saw. Thus John introduces the vision of each seal. The vision is
not the silence in heaven, but what John saw. On this point some
commentators make a mistake here. What he saw was the seven angels which
stand before God; that is, the angels who act as his immediate
ministering servants, to whom were given seven trumpets. The seventh
seal, therefore, embraces these angels and their trumpets, and all they
do in the following verses belongs to this seal. The seventh and last
seal will not be exhausted until the seven trumpet angels have
discharged their mission.

[Revelation 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 8:3</span></span>

And another angel came and stood over the altar. The scene reveals the
altar of the tabernacle, "a pattern made after heavenly things." This is
the altar of sacrifice from which the coal was always taken to light the
incense ([Lev 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#013)). This angel
receives the incense and offers it upon the golden altar, the altar of
incense. The incense is "the prayers of the saints;" these to reach the
throne must be lighted from the altar of sacrifice; or by faith in the
blood of the Lamb of God.

And the smoke. As the smoke arose before the throne, so the prayers of
the saints in the name of the crucified Savior arise to God. The special
significance of all this is that in the terrible judgments about to
follow, the prayers of the true and faithful saints will still come
before God, and his providence will be over them.

And the angel . . . filled it with the fire of the altar, and cast it
upon the earth. Fire is usually a symbol of suffering. This fire cast
from the altar upon the earth indicates that the judgments of God are
about to fall upon it. The earth in the sense used by John is the great
Roman Empire, which embraced the civilized world.

There followed thunders, etc. These mutterings and the quaking are
ominous of the terrible scenes to follow when the angels sound their
trumpets.

[Revelation 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 8:6</span></span>

And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets. See [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002). There is the utmost deliberation.
All must be made ready. The four angels hold back the winds ([Rev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)), then there was the silence of
half an hour ([Rev 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)); now the seven
angels prepared themselves to sound. This implies that all things were
being made ready for the great events to follow. Trumpets. The trumpet
is used to give a signal. Usually it implied the march or charge of
armies. See [Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), [Joe
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015); [Jer
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005); [Eze
33:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001). Sometimes it calls the people
to worship. See [Num 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006); [Ch1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024). The reader will see that the
first is likely to be the significance here.

[Revelation 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 8:7</span></span>

The first angel sounded. When the trumpet sounded there followed the
wonderful scenes described. When the first trumpet is blown John beholds
a mighty storm-cloud rush over the earth. From it pour hail and fire
mingled with blood. They fall upon the earth and a third part is
scorched and blasted. These terms indicate desolation by some kind of
judgments. The scene of the desolation is "the earth," or the Roman
Empire in John's use of the term. The blood indicates carnage. The
scorched and blasted land indicates the devastation of destroying
armies. The language implies a terrible destruction descending upon a
third of the world known to John.

[Revelation 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 8:8</span></span>

And the second angel sounded. Then the scene changes. Now a great
burning mountain is cast into the sea. The sea is the theatre of
destruction. Again there is fire and blood indicating carnage and
destruction. In the first judgment the third part of the earth suffers;
but now a third part of the sea. The symbols imply that some mighty
volcanic power shall be turned upon the sea, and make it a scene of
awful warfare and destruction.

[Revelation 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 8:10</span></span>

And the third angel sounded. With the third trumpet the vision again
changes. Now a great, burning, blazing meteor falls upon a third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of the waters. A "third part of the
earth," a "third part of the sea," and now "a third part of the rivers"
are subjected to judgments.

And the name of the star is called Wormwood. That is, it is bitterness,
because it shall fill the world with bitter sorrow. A star is a symbol
of a great leader. Such a star as this, a blazing meteor, is a symbol of
a leader who suddenly appears, rapidly does an awfully baleful work, and
then disappears. In some way the rivers will be the scenes of his malign
influence. They shall become bitterness and shall be scenes of death.

[Revelation 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 8:12</span></span>

And the fourth angel sounded. Again the scene changes. Now it is the
third part of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars that is
smitten, and darkness follows. The sun is a symbol of the supreme ruler,
and the moon and stars of inferior dignities. If the Roman emperor,
ruler of the world, should be cast from power, his empire overthrown,
the consuls, senators, and great men who supported his power be cast to
the dust, and a period of intellectual and moral darkness should follow,
it would fully meet the symbolism.

[Revelation 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 8:13</span></span>

And I beheld, and heard an angel. An eagle in the Revision. The flight
of this messenger through the midst of heaven shows that an epoch has
been passed with the four trumpet visions, and that another epoch is
about to begin. The voice proclaims, Woe, woe, woe. There are three
woes; there are three woe angels.

Upon the inhabitants of the earth. Upon the earth as known to John. The
geographical scene of those events which are historical must be looked
for somewhere within the bounds of the great Roman world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 9](rev009)

</div>
