<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 6:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Warrior on the White Horse. The Warrior with the Great
Sword. The Black Horse and He that Had the Balances. The Pale Horse,
Death and Hades. The Fifth Seal, the Seal of Persecution. The Sixth Seal
Opened. A Period of Judgment.

[Revelation 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 6:1</span></span>

And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals. The statement "I saw"
means that when the Lamb opened one of the seals John saw the vision
which is described in what follows.

As it were the noise of thunder. A deep, impressive, awe-inspiring
sound.

Come and see. Attend closely to the vision.

And I saw, and behold, a white horse. Let the reader note particularly
what John saw, and then remember that it is symbolical, and that instead
of looking for a literal fulfillment, we are to ask the meaning of the
symbols. There are several features of the vision that fix our
attention: 1. The horse. 2. His white color. 3. The armed warrior. 4.
His crown. 5. His bow. 6. His mission. It is certain that none of these
features would have been named if they did not possess a significance.
What do each of these symbols mean? I will consider them in order: (1)
The horse. He was never used by the Jews or Orientals as a beast of
burden. The ox and the ass were devoted to that office, and the horse
was reserved for war. Whenever the horse is mentioned by the prophets it
will be found in connection with war-like employments. That the horse is
always associated with war can be seen by consulting [Job
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#025.md); [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006.md); [Pro
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#031.md); [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006.md); [Eze
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010.md). Hence this symbol points to a
period of war, though it alone does not declare whether the conflict is
carnal or spiritual, is triumphant or disastrous. (2) The white color.
As there are three more horses in succession under the three following
seals, each of different colors, the color must have a meaning. White
must have a different significance from red, or black, or pale. What is
indicated by the color of the first horse? White is the color of
prosperity, of happiness, and triumph. Whenever a Roman General was
given a triumph his chariot was drawn by milk white horses. In Rev.
chapter 19, the Mighty Conqueror who wears many crowns is seen riding on
a white horse. Commentators are agreed that the white horse signifies
prosperous, victorious wars. (3) The rider. His significance is due to
his arms, his crown, and the white horse he rides. It is enough to state
here that he represents either some conqueror, or a conquering age. (4)
The crown. "There was a crown given to him." This crown is not "the
diadem" (diadema) but the "garland crown" (stephanos). The last was the
crown given as a reward for victory in battle, for great achievements or
for victory in games. The Hero of chapter 19 wears many diadems, kingly
crowns, but this rider wears the garland crown, the stephanos. It is
important to note this distinction. (5) The bow. He is armed with a
usual weapon of war in that age. The bow may simply signify that the
rider is a great, warlike figure, or there may be a special significance
in the fact that he is armed with a bow instead of a sword or spear.

[Revelation 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 6:3</span></span>

And there went out another horse that was red. The second living
creature said, Come and see, and immediately the first vision is
replaced by a second, or a startling character. There appears in the
field of view a second horse, no longer white, but as red as blood. Upon
the horse sat one with a great sword in his hand, to whom "was given
power to take peace from the earth, and to make men that they should
slay one another." The horse is the symbol of war, but the changed color
indicates that the conditions of war are entirely changed. It is no
longer triumphant war in the dominions of their enemies, while within
all is peace, but the land is drenched in blood. During the period of
the first seal the fertile provinces of the Roman Empire never saw the
face of a hostile soldier, unless borne as a captive from the distant
frontiers, where the Roman generals waged triumphant wars in the
countries of their enemies. All was peace within. But now a period of
internal war is indicated. The "earth" contemplated by John was the
Roman earth, or empire. From it peace shall be taken away. Nor is it to
be destroyed by foreign invaders. "They are to kill one another." In as
plain language as symbolism can disclose, it is indicated that the next
great feature of history is that the land shall be torn by civil war.

[Revelation 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 6:5</span></span>

And I beheld, and lo a black horse, etc. Again there appear a horse and
a rider. Again the color of the horse is changed, as well as the
instrument held in the hand of the horseman. If the white and red
colors, the bow and the great sword, had a significance, this must be
true also of the black color and the balances. It has been found that
the horse, whatever his color, is the symbol of war. The black horse
makes it plain that the land is torn by calamitous war, and is filled
with sorrow, mourning and despair. Black is the color of mourning. The
prophet ([Jer 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002).md) says: "Because of
the drought Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are in
deep mourning (lit. black) for the land." The balances used for weighing
food are a symbol of scarcity and famine. "Bread by weight" always
implies scarcity. See [Lev 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026.md); [Eze
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016.md). The prices named also signify
the same. The measure was about a quart, and the penny about sixteen
cents, which would make the wheat worth about <span class="small">5 per
bushel; or, if it be borne in mind that one dollar in that age would
usually purchase as <span class="small">5 now, the wheat would be about
<span class="small">25 per bushel in the modern currency. Oil and wine,
though common foods, are entirely prohibited. An age of war, mourning,
calamity and famine is certainly symbolized.</span></span></span>

[Revelation 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 6:7</span></span>

Behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was death. Again, for
the fourth time John beholds a horse. It is still a time of war. The
horse is now pale, the bloodless color of the dead. Upon him sits an
undescribed figure, called by the apostle DEATH. Behind the dread
destroyer follows Hades, the unseen world, swallowing up the dying
mortals and hiding them from human vision. The means employed to destroy
men are described. Death and Hades employ (1) the sword or war; (2)
hunger, or famine; (3) death, or pestilence, for so is the word here
used often to translated, and such is its meaning in this place; and
finally (4) the destruction caused by the wild beasts of forests and
field. The evident meaning of this symbolism is so plain that all can
understand its application, and we need only ask if the facts
correspond. Do we find the scarcity, want, hunger, and pestilence,
indicated by the prophecy, during the latter portion of this period of
civil commotion? Do we have an awful reign of Death in the forms
signified by the seal?

[Revelation 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 6:9</span></span>

I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of
God. These are clearly Christians who had suffered martyrdom. They had
died "for the word of God." They were under the altar. Since the temple
is typical of the church, the altar, the center of worship, points to
the church and its worship. The brazen altar stood at the door of the
tabernacle, and at the bottom of it all the blood of the offerings was
poured ([Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007).md). Their position
probably points out that their own blood was poured out for Christ.

And they cried with a loud voice. Their cry denotes that the church had
suffered long and severely, and they raise a cry for deliverance.

And white robes were given unto every one of them. The robes of
justification and victory. They are assured that the day when "they will
be avenged" will soon come, but that they must wait a little season.
Others must be added to the number of the martyrs before the number is
fulfilled. It is a time of persecution. The fifth seal is the seal of
persecution, and it evidently marks some notable era in the history of
the Church, when more fiercely than ever before it felt the intolerant
hand of "them who dwelt upon the earth." The fulfillment is to be sought
in a war of extermination waged against Christianity. Again we ask if,
following the events already described, history records events that
fulfill this prophecy?

[Revelation 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 6:12</span></span>

There was a great earthquake. The symbol of political or moral agitation
and upheaval.

The sun became black as sackcloth. The sun, moon, and stars are symbols
of earthly dignitaries, great lights in the political or religious
heavens. In the dream of Joseph, which so maddened his brethren, these
terms are used in this meaning, as well as by the ancient prophets. In
the East it was common to liken the king or emperor to the sun, and the
stars as the symbols of princes or rulers. For the use of the term we
refer the reader to [Dan 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010.md). The
blackness of the sun and the bloody hue of the moon point out scenes of
mourning and bloodshed among rulers and princes. The falling of the
stars would indicate the downfall of those who had high places on the
earth, or rather within the Roman Empire.

The heaven was removed as a scroll. The old religions, supposed to be of
heavenly origin, pass away.

Every mountain and island were moved. Mountain and island are used to
denote earthly rulers and kingdoms, the latter referring more especially
to European provinces which are often called "the isles of the sea" in
the Bible. From the period of Diocletian, the great persecutor, the
title, "Your Eminence," or, in other words, "mountain," was bestowed
upon princes. As a mountain stood above the plain, so the rulers of the
earth were exalted.

And the kings of the earth, and the princes . . . hid themselves. This
implies great terror among "them that dwell on the earth;" their belief
that terrible judgments were impending from God; that the wrath of the
Lamb was manifested, and their efforts to escape.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007.md)

</div>
