<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev006)  [Next](rev008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Four Winds Held. The Sealing of the One Hundred and Forty
Four Thousand. The Great Multitude with the Palms of Victory. They with
White Robes About the Throne.

[Revelation 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 7:1</span></span>

After this. After the opening of the sixth seal.

I saw four angels. The vision that appears before his eyes is that of
four angels at the four points of the compass, holding four winds to
prevent them from rushing in destruction upon the earth. These certainly
represent four destructive powers which are held back for a time from
the land, the sea, and the vegetation of the earth.

I saw another angel. The picture is that of an angel having the seal of
the living God. The object of this seal is indicated in [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003.md). The seal was a mark of ownership.
The seal of God on the forehead would mark those sealed at God's. The
seal mark on the forehead would be visible to everyone; hence the seal
in the forehead has been understood to be the public confession and
profession of Christ. This angel would thus symbolize a great and
successful movement to evangelize the race.

Hurt not, etc. The four winds are forbidden to do their work of
destruction until the sealing has been accomplished; or in other words,
until the preaching of the gospel has wrought a certain result.

[Revelation 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 7:4</span></span>

And I heard the number of them which were sealed. The number first named
is one hundred and forty-four thousand, twelve thousand from each of the
twelve tribes of Israel. These numbers are not to be taken literally,
but only signify that a great number, not a countless number, but a part
of each tribe of Israel, accepted the gospel. Of the tribes Ephraim
appears under the name of Joseph, and Dan is entirely omitted, a fact
possibly due to the early falling away of Dan into idolatry The number
twelve is preserved by counting Levi. For another appearance of the one
hundred and forty-four thousand, see [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md).

[Revelation 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 7:9</span></span>

After this I beheld. First he saw the vast company of those of the blood
of Abraham who had been saved, and then he sees another company, not
numbered, because they were so great that no man could number them.

Of all nations and kindreds. The first multitude represented the Jews
saved through Christ; the second, the countless multitude, represented
the saved of all nations, the Gentile saints.

Before the throne. In the vision they seem to stand before the throne
and before the Lamb, to whom they ascribe the praises of their
salvation.

White robes. Victorious, triumphant.

Palms in their hands. The symbol of joy. The palm branch was used at the
feast of Tabernacles, the feast of thanksgiving.

Salvation to our God. The praise of our salvation be given to God and to
the Lamb.

[Revelation 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 7:11</span></span>

All the angels. In chapter 5 the elders, four living creatures, the
angels about the throne, and every creature join in the praises. Here
again all are named, and the angels worship and join in praising God for
the blessed scene they have just beheld.

[Revelation 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 7:13</span></span>

What are these? The questions are asked by the elder that he may teach.
"These" refer to the vast multitude described in [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md).

Thou knowest. "I do not know but thou dost."

These are they which came out of the great tribulation. See Revision.
Some great period of trial of the church is meant. They have stood the
trial, and been true.

Washed their robes. Have made themselves spotless by trust in the blood
of Christ.

Therefore are they before the throne of God. They are exalted to heaven.

They shall hunger no more. Their sorrows are over forever.

For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them. God
and the Lamb shall bestow upon them every blessing and remove every
sorrow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 8](rev008.md)

</div>
