<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev020)  [Next](rev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 21:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The New Heaven and New Earth. The Bride, the Lamb's Wife. The
City Coming Down out of Heaven. Its Walls, Gates, Foundation. The City
of Gold and Gates of Pearl. The Light of the City. Its Holiness.

[Revelation 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 21:1</span></span>

I saw a new heaven and a new earth. The scriptures both of the Old and
New Testaments point to the destruction of the old earth when the Lord
comes to judgment. See [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010). It
is to undergo a purification and a renewal to fit it for the home of the
saints in glory. The "old heavens and earth," which I understand to
comprehend the old world and its order, so sadly out of joint, pass away
at the time of the great judgment, and the old state of things shall be
succeeded by a new order, both physical and moral.

And the sea is no more. Whether this is to be understood literally, or
whether it means that there shall be no barriers between the peoples,
such as the sea interposes, is not certain.

And I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem. The glorified and heavenly
Church, pure and beautiful as a bride prepared for the bridegroom. This
chapter presents a vision of the final condition of the redeemed and
triumphant church. This vision points out the contrast between the
beginning and the final condition of our race. The career of man began
in a garden, the fitting home of a race few in numbers. It ends, as
revealed by the prophet, in a city, the home where multitudes gather. Of
this city Jerusalem was a type. The redeemed and holy Church, washed by
the Savior's blood, and obedient to his will as a faithful bride to her
husband, is the new Jerusalem.

Behold the tabernacle of God is with men. Of old the Shekinah, the
emblem of God's presence, dwelt in the tabernacle between the Cherubim.
In this glorious city of the future, God shall make his tabernacle and
dwell with men. They shall recognize his presence, his protection, his
fatherly and omnipotent care over them.

And he shall wipe away every tear from their eyes. No sorrow or travail
of any kind shall ever enter within the walls of the city. The cry of
anguish shall never be uttered, hearts shall never be broken, no tear
shall ever dim the eye, and, most glorious of all, death shall be
unknown. Death began his sway when man was expelled from Paradise; he
ends it when the final judgment condemns Satan, death and hades to enter
the lake of fire. The new Jerusalem will be painless, tearless,
deathless, because it will be a sinless city. "The former things have
passed away."

[Revelation 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 21:5</span></span>

Behold, I make all things new. See note on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

Write. This is the third time in this book, in addition to the epistles
to the churches in chapters 2 and 3, where John receives the special
command to "write." The other examples are in [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013) and [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009). See also [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011).

It is done. All things are come to pass.

I am the Alpha and the Omega. See notes on [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008). This shows that the speaker is
Christ.

He that overcometh. Here for the first time, after the close of the
seven epistles of chapters 2 and 3, do we have the promise to him who
overcomes.

But the fearful and unbelieving. Those wedded to sin have no place in
the glorious home prepared for the saints. "The fearful, and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars," have undergone the second
death, the death that has no resurrection, and can never enter or
disturb the holy peace of the glorious city.

[Revelation 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 21:9</span></span>

There came unto me one, etc. This is one of the angels of the vials of
the wrath of God. See chap. 16. They did their work as wrath angels
before the judgment, and are now seen engaged in other work.

I will shew thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife. The glorified church
henceforth to be united with her Lord.

He carried me away in the spirit. He seemed to be stationed on a high
mountain and there to see a mighty city descending out of heaven. The
angel said, "I will show thee the Bride," and he showed him a beautiful
city. The harlot of chapter 17 was a great, wicked city, "Mystery,
Babylon the Great," while the Bride is a great city also, the "holy
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven."

Having the glory of God. Lighted by the divine presence and glory. We
cannot follow all the details of its splendor, but they are designed to
show that it exhibited a splendor such as mortal eye has never seen. The
walls are of jasper, the gates of pearl, the foundations of precious
stones and the streets paved with gold. The dimensions are immense,
beyond even human conception, and its gates stand open night and day.
The names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are written upon its
foundations, and of the tribes of Israel upon its gates.

Twelve gates. As many as there were tribes and apostles.

Twelve angels. As gate-keepers to prevent the unclean from entrance.

Names written thereon. The names of the twelve tribes of Israel. These
were typical of the true Israel, the saints, and shows that all who
belong to the true Israel will enter.

The wall of the city had twelve foundations. The twelve apostles of the
Lamb are foundations of the Church, Jesus Christ being the chief
corner-stone.

[Revelation 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 21:15</span></span>

And he . . . had a golden reed to measure the city. The reed is a divine
measure and the city is to correspond to the measure. In chapter 11 the
church is measured with a reed. Both the earthly and the heavenly church
must agree with the divine plan.

And the city lieth foursquare. It is regular and symmetrical.

Twelve thousand furlongs. I suppose that these vast dimensions, a number
twelve times one thousand, both favorite Hebrew numbers, are intended to
indicate the vastness of the city, rather than its exact size.

The wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits. Again we have
twelve times twelve, the square of a favorite and sacred number. The
city has twelve gates, twelve angels, twelve foundations, and a wall
twelve times twelve cubits high.

That is, of the angel. The measure of a man and of an angel will be the
same in the New Jerusalem.

The wall of it was of jasper. A brightly radiant stone. See [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011).

The city was pure gold. The symbols indicate that the city is beautiful
and rich beyond conception. The costliest materials known to mortals are
named in order to give us some idea.

[Revelation 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 21:19</span></span>

And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished. They were
adorned with precious stones. The twelve apostolic foundations present
every spiritual grace and beauty. The various stones named are among the
most precious known to the ancients.

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls. Each gate composed of a single
pearl.

And the street of the city. The streets were paved with pure gold.

As it were transparent. Transparency is the symbol of purity.

[Revelation 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 21:22</span></span>

And I saw no temple therein. John saw no temple in the city, such as at
Jerusalem. It was all temple. God and the Lamb were present in it
everywhere and every spot was holy. Wherever the knee was bowed the Lord
was present to see and hear. The whole of the New Jerusalem will be an
abode of praise.

And the city had no need of the sun. Night never settles down to shut
out its splendor, and eternal light, springing from the brightness of
God and the Lamb, precludes the need of a sun or moon.

And the nations . . . walk in the light of it. The redeemed of all
nations enjoy the light of the city.

The kings. The idea is that all who have earthly dignities and honors
shall make them offerings to the New Jerusalem.

And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day. The gates were
never shut. This implies, first, that the city has no fear of any foes.
These have all been conquered and subdued. The struggles have been ended
forever and no enemies remain to invade its happy precincts. It implies,
in the second place, that "the nations of the saved" can always enter.
There is always admittance freely to those "who have the right to enter
in through the gate into the city."

They shall bring the glory and the honour. All nations are represented
as contributing to increase its glory, as the nations pay tribute to an
earthly capital.

There shall in no wise enter. Nothing sinful or unclean shall ever
enter, "neither whatever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they
that are written in the Lamb's book of life."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 22](rev022)

</div>
