<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev014)  [Next](rev016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 15:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Seven Angels with the Seven Last Plagues. The Sea of Glass.
The Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. The Temple Opened. The
Temple Filled with the Glory of God.

[Revelation 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 15:1</span></span>

I saw another sign in heaven. Another scene displayed, different from
those just past, and startling in its character.

Seven angels having the seven last plagues. Called the last plagues
because they are the final plagues which are sent upon the beast and its
image; they bring the series to a close. They "fill up the wrath of
God." The great feature of this vision is the seven angels with the
seven last plagues, but they are not seen at first when the vision
opens; not until [Rev 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007.md) is reached.
The vision opens with the scene of [Rev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002.md).

I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire. In [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006.md) "the sea of glass, clear as
crystal," was seen about the throne of God. It is the emblem of the
calmness and purity of God's rule. Here the sea is mingled with fire, a
symbol always denoting judgments. This shows that the time for
judgments, coming from the throne of God, has come.

And them that had gotten the victory over the beast. These are the
redeemed of [Rev 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md), who are there
seen standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion. They now engage in triumphant
songs over the approaching overthrow of their great enemy.

Having the harps of God. Musical instruments wholly dedicated to his
praise.

[Revelation 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 15:3</span></span>

They sing the song of Moses . . . and the song of the Lamb. When Israel
was delivered from Egypt they sang the song Moses as they had done on
the shores of the Red Sea. Here, the spiritual Israel, redeemed,
standing on the crystal sea, sings a song of deliverance, but it is the
old song to a new strain; the song of the Lamb now; of the Redeemer.

Just and true are thy ways. The salvation of the true worshipers and the
judgment seat upon which the wicked beast, demonstrated the truth and
justice of God.

Who shall not fear thee? The judgments now given to the seven angels
showed that God is a consuming fire, as well as a sun and a shield. We
are left in no doubt concerning the identity of these singers. They are
"them that had gained the victory over the beast and his image, and over
his mark and the number of his name." The ground of their rejoicing is
also recorded. "All nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy
judgments are made manifest." The mighty arm of God is to be revealed in
bringing to naught the powers of evil, and especially all the great
enemies over whom they had been victorious. The saints who have
undergone the persecution of the beast are represented as rejoicing
because the day of its judgment has come.

[Revelation 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 15:5</span></span>

Behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was
opened. After that I looked. The apostle looks again and "behold, the
temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven is opened." The
tabernacle of the testimony was the Holy of Holies. Into it none but the
High Priest entered, and he only to make intercession for the
forgiveness of sins. It is the type of the Holy of Holies above, the
mercy seat in the heavens where our High Priest intercedes for us, and
where the smoke of the incense of prayer arises to God.

And the seven angels. The angels mentioned in [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001.md).

Arrayed with precious stone, pure and bright (Revision). Probably
precious stones covered their garments like those of the robe of the
high priest. They come out of the temple as priests of destruction.

And one of the four living creatures. For notes on the Four Living
Creatures see chapter 4. As the servant and agent of the Almighty he
hands the seven vials of God's wrath to the angels. The Revision has
"bowls" instead of "vials." The thought is that in succession seven
plagues are to be poured upon the earth.

[Revelation 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 15:8</span></span>

And the temple was filled with smoke . . . and none was able to enter
into the temple until, etc. Does this mean that the heavens are shut
against man during this period? Does it mean that no one can enter the
true Church until the plagues are poured out? So some have mistakenly
maintained. The doors of the kingdom were opened on Pentecost, and will
never be closed until the marriage supper of the Lamb. The true meaning
is plain. The place of intercession has just been seen. The seven wrath
angels came forth. The smoke then fills the temple so that no one can
approach the place of intercession. The Greek original says no one,
instead of no man. It means that the Divine purpose is fixed; the wrath
angels shall pour out their vials, there is no place longer given for
intercession to prevent the just judgments of God. The time of
intercession has passed by, and the time for judgment has come. "No one
can enter the temple" to the tabernacle of testimony, the place of
intercession, to avert these judgments "till the seven plagues of the
seven angels were fulfilled."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 16](rev016.md)

</div>
