<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 18:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Fall of Babylon Decreed. The People of God Commanded to
Come out of Her. The Kings of the Earth Lament Over Her Fall. The
Merchants and Traffickers Also Lament. The Millstone Cast into the Sea.

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

After these things. Those described in chapter 17.

Another angel. Some have urged that this is Christ. There is no proof of
their correctness.

Having great power. There was assigned to him great authority.

And the earth was lightened with his glory. This was a proof of power
proceeding from God.

And he cried . . . Babylon the great is fallen. Compare this description
with [Isa 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009); [Isa
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023) and [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021). The fall of Babylon has been
already declared ([Rev 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019); [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)) but now it is developed. This
picture is intended to portray her utter desolation.

For all the nations have drunk. Partaken with her in her sins.

Fornication. See note on [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005).

Merchants of the earth are waxed rich. Her luxurious living had made
great markets.

[Revelation 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 18:4</span></span>

Come out of her, my people. This invitation is given to the people of
God yet in captivity, lest by remaining they should be involved in her
destruction. As God once had a captive people in the old Mesopotamian
Babylon, so he has a people in the spiritual Babylon. Ever since the
Reformation began his voice has called on them to come out of her. Nor
can it be doubted that he has many true and earnest worshipers still who
have found enough of Christ in the mazes of the Papacy to have given him
their hearts. The condemnation of the great spiritual despotism is not a
declaration that all whom she has enslaved are the children of the
devil.

Her sins have reached unto heaven. They call therefore for God's
remembrance of her iniquities in judgments.

Reward her even as she has rewarded you. This is addressed to those who
have meted out her judgments. The divine principle of judgments is that
every one shall be rewarded according to his works. What they sow, that
shall they reap. This power shall have returned upon it in double
portion what it has meted out to others.

I sit as a queen. This verse describes her former pride. Compare [Isa
47:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008).

Therefore shall her plagues come. Notwithstanding her pride and
exultation.

Burned with fire. See [Isa 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#016). When
an ancient city was taken and destroyed it was burned with fire.

[Revelation 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 18:9</span></span>

The kings . . . shall bewail her. There will be mourners. Those who have
sinned with her, or profited by her will bewail her fall.

Standing afar off. The picture represents these mourners looking from a
great distance, afraid to approach nearer.

For in one hour is thy judgment come. It has come suddenly.

And the merchants of the earth shall weep. All who had made gain in any
way from the sins or the luxury of Babylon shall mourn. There follows,
then, an enumeration of the articles in which there was traffic.

Slaves and souls of men. The Greek reads, "the bodies and souls of men."
The first seems to refer to the traffic in slaves, a common traffic
until modern times and sanctioned by the Papacy. The latter expression
seems to me to refer to a spiritual traffic. What is the whole system of
masses for the dead, paid for out of the money drawn from mourning
relatives, but a traffic in the souls of men?

The fruits. These things for which Babylon so lusted are all gone from
her forever.

[Revelation 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 18:15</span></span>

The merchants of these things . . . shall stand afar off. The
lamentation of the kings over the fall of the city has been given in
[Rev 18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009). The lamentation of the
merchants is now given. They are also represented as standing afar off.
With them join the shipmasters and mariners who have been engaged in her
trade. These all mourn because their profits from her are brought to an
end.

[Revelation 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 18:20</span></span>

Rejoice over her, thou heaven. While there are mourners, another company
is called upon to rejoice. She had exalted herself against God. All who
have been for God, and who have suffered from her, are called to
rejoice.

[Revelation 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 18:21</span></span>

And a strong angel took up a millstone. See [Jer
51:61-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#061). This symbolical act implies
an utter destruction. In Jeremiah the stone is cast into the Euphrates.
Now it is cast into the sea, because another Babylon is designed.

And the voice of harpers. It is this third angel who declares the
silence and desolation of the city now.

And the sound of the millstone. In the mills grinding food for the
people. The mills were hand-mills, usually worked by women as a domestic
duty.

For with thy sorcery were all the nations deceived. This accounts for
the fact that all nations poured their treasures into her lap.

And in her was found the blood of the prophets. It is because she has
slain the saints of the Most High that these judgments come upon her. As
Jerusalem in the time of Christ filled up the measure of the sins of
Israel (see [Mat 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029), [Mat
23:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035); [Luk
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#051); [Luk
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#033)), so the spiritual Babylon, the
great persecutor, fills up the measure of the sins of the beast and
false prophet, and is required to account for the blood of slaughtered
prophets and saints of all ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
