<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev004)  [Next](rev006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Book in the Hand of God. John's Grief Because No One Can
Open It. The Assurance of the Elder. The Lamb that Had Been Slain. The
New Song. The Grand Chorus of Angels, Elders, and Living Creatures.

[Revelation 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 5:1</span></span>

And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book. The
book is in the right hand of God. It is not a printed book, such as we
have one our shelves. There were no printed books then in existence. It
is a manuscript, written upon both sides, and rolled together in the
form of a scroll, and sealed with seven seals. We learn, what is
recorded in the next chapter, that these seals were so arranged that
when they were loosened in succession each one permitted a part of the
book to be read. Possibly there were seven leaves to the book, since as
each seal was loosed, a leaf of the book was revealed. The parchment was
written on each side; the book was full, complete, nothing more to be
added to what it contained. This sealed book is the book of the future,
sealed to human vision, unknown even to the angels of heaven, and
containing the record of "what shall be hereafter," to the end of time.

[Revelation 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 5:3</span></span>

And no one in the heaven, or on the earth . . . was able to open the
book. No one (the word man does not occur in the Greek) was found able
to open the book, for no one can penetrate the future. It is held in the
strong right hand of Him who sits on the throne, the omnipotent disposer
of the future, who controls the destiny of churches, men, and nations.
The sweep of the panorama, that has pictured forth upon its canvas the
destiny of the Church and the world, cannot begin until the seals of
this book are opened. Had no one been found able to open the seals, the
closing book of the Bible would never have been written.

[Revelation 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 5:4</span></span>

And I wept much, because, etc. The exiled apostle is filled with anxiety
to penetrate the secrets of futurity, and to know the fortunes of that
Church which he loved better than he loved his own life. He was then a
prisoner on a rocky isle of the sea. It was a time of persecution. He
was separated from the saints, and ardently desires to know the results,
in the future, of all the struggles, sufferings and blood of a
persecuted people.

One of the elders saith unto me, Weep not. It is one of the twenty-four
elders that assures him that the book will be opened; and let it be
distinctly noted that such a duty as instructing a prophet in heavenly
things was never laid upon a human being under either covenant. Such
duties mark the elders as belonging to the angelic realm.

The Lion of the tribe of Judah. "Judah is a lion's whelp" ([Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009).md); see also [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md), [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md). Jesus was of the tribe of
Judah, the Root of David, or descended from David.

[Revelation 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 5:6</span></span>

When John looked to behold the Lion of Judah, the root of David, who
should open the book, he beheld the only being in the universe who could
take it from the hand of God. There is none other to whom the future is
revealed. He only, to whom all power in heaven and earth has been given,
can control the events of earth. He only can hold in his hand the book
of destiny, open its leaves, and reveal its record to men. John looked
to see this mighty one who was deemed worthy to exercise the prerogative
of God. But he appears in symbolic form, as a Lamb of God slain for
sins; a sacrificial Lamb bearing wounds, the marks of having been slain.
The Lion had become a Lamb. The Lamb became a Lion, a conqueror, and
"prevailed" so as to be able to hold and open the book, or to hold the
reins of all power by submitting unto death.

Seven horns, and even eyes. This symbolic Lamb had seven horns, the
perfect number joined to the well-known symbol of power; the seven horns
denoting omnipotence; also the Lamb had seven eyes, defined by John to
symbolize the omniscience of him who hath the Spirit without measure.
See note on "the seven Spirits of God" in [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md).

[Revelation 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 5:8</span></span>

When he took the book. The deliverance to him of the book was a signal
for the four living creatures and the elders to fall before the Lamb, as
they had fallen before the throne. They recognize in the fact that he
has the book "that all power in heaven and earth is given into his
hands." Hence, they offer him homage as Divine.

Having every one of them harps. For praise. The grammatical construction
seems to include both living creatures and elders.

Golden vials full of odors. These symbolize the prayers of the saints.
The imagery represents these heavenly assistants presenting these in
heaven in behalf of the saints on earth. The comforting thought is that
these prayers are not lost, but are presented at the throne of God and
before the Lamb.

[Revelation 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 5:9</span></span>

They sung a new song. To the music of their harps. A song that could not
be sung until the Lamb had taken the book.

Didst purchase unto God with thy blood men of every tribe, etc. See the
Revised Version. The Common Version is incorrect, as is now admitted by
all scholars. The song does not sing of what Christ has done for those
who are singing, but of what he has done for men. The singers are not of
those redeemed.

Hast made them. Not "us," as in the Common Version.

Kings and priests. A kingdom and priests. See note on [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md).

And they (not we) shall reign on the earth. As coadjutors of Christ. See
note on [Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010.md).

And I beheld . . . many angels. The countless multitudes of angels also
unite in the praises of the Lamb.

And every creature. All animated creation gives glory to the Lamb.

And the four living creatures said, Amen. They, then, though they may be
in sympathy with, are different from the animated creation. Four orders
join in these honors to the Lamb: (1) The Living Creatures; the
Cherubim; (2) the Twenty-four Elders; (3) the Angels; (4) all Animate
Creation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 6](rev006.md)

</div>
