<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev000)  [Next](rev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--Preface. John to the Seven Churches. In the Spirit on the
Lord's Day. The Revelation of the Son of Man. The Seven Stars and Seven
Candlesticks.

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

The Revelation. Apocalypse, or uncovering, so the Greek word means. The
curtain of the future is lifted.

Of Jesus Christ. The revelation is made by Jesus Christ. See chapter 5.

God gave him to shew. See chapter 5. He who sits on the throne gave to
the Son the sealed book of the future to open it.

Shortly come to pass. The series of events began to unfold in a few
years after John wrote, and has rolled on through all the centuries.
Lange renders the Greek translated "shortly" by the phrase "in quick
succession," which is nearly its meaning. It implies successive order.

He sent and signified. The things "which must shortly come to pass."

By his angel. Here, and throughout the Apocalypse the office of
unveiling the different scenes appears to be assigned to a particular
angel. See [Rev 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md); [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009.md); [Rev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001.md); [Rev
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008.md), etc.

To his servant John. A usual designation of the prophets. See [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005.md); [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007.md); [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010.md).

Who bare record. John is meant, who made the record of all he saw and
heard.

Blessed is he that readeth. There is a reference to the custom that had
already grown up, at the close of the first century, of reading the
apostolic writings publicly in the churches. The benediction is
pronounced on the public reader; on those that hear, and lastly upon
those that keep the words contained in this prophecy.

The time is at hand. The period to which the prophecy relates is near.

[Revelation 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 1:4</span></span>

John to the seven churches which are in Asia. The churches are named in
[Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md). The term "Asia" did not
mean in the first century what it does now, but only the Roman province
called Asia, of which Ephesus was the capital. All the seven churches
are in that province. It is supposed that SEVEN, the perfect and sacred
number, were chosen, because the seven were to symbolize the whole
Church of Christ. There were in the province of Asia more than seven
churches at this time, as we know, Colosse, Miletus ([Act
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017).md) and Hierapolis ([Col
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#013).md) being named in the New
Testament.

Grace be to you. The benediction, like that in the apostolic epistles,
shows that Revelation is an epistle also, addressed directly to seven
churches and through them to all the church.

From him which is. The I AM. See [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md).

From the seven Spirits. The Holy Spirit. The numeral seven indicates
fulness, perfection. It is the sacred number. The sevens are constantly
repeated through Revelation. There are seven churches, seven spirits,
seven seals, seven trumpets, seven thunders, seven vials, etc.

And from Jesus Christ. Some of the glories of Christ, the third whose
grace is invoked, are named.

The faithful witness. Because all that he says is faithful and true.

The first born of the dead. See notes on [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md). Through Christ's resurrection
from the dead life and immortality were brought to light for us all.
Hence he is called the "first born."

The prince. The rightful ruler of all the rulers of the earth.

Unto him that loveth us. The tense is present, as in the Revision. His
love never ceases.

Washed us. Rather, as in the Revision, "loosed us." This was done by the
shedding of his blood.

And he made us. Here the Revision must be followed. He made us to be a
kingdom; to be priests unto his God. His disciples are constituted a
kingdom; a kingdom in which each one is a priest. No disciple needeth a
priest to offer incense or sacrifice for him, for he can go directly to
the Father through Jesus Christ. See notes on [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md). Christians are called priests,
but are never called kings in a correct translation of the New
Testament.

Behold, he cometh. Christ.

With clouds. See [Mat 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030.md); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064.md); [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009.md), [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011.md). The clouds denote the glory and
terrors of his coming.

Every eye shall see him. He will then come to meet all mortals.

They which pierced him. Israel, the nation which rejected and crucified
him is meant. See [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md), which is
here quoted.

All the tribes of earth shall mourn over him. In consternation because
he is coming to judge the world.

I am the Alpha and the Omega. The first and last letters of the Greek
alphabet; hence "the beginning and the end." All begins with God and he
closes the drama of earthly history.

[Revelation 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 1:9</span></span>

I John. He here names himself for the third time. The fourth and fifth
times are in [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002.md) and [Rev
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008.md).

Companion in tribulation. A partaker of the sufferings of the church
like you.

Kingdom and patience. In the kingdom they were called to patient
endurance.

Was in the isle that is called Patmos. For description of this island
see Introduction. "It appears to be the certain result of historical
evidence that the Apostle John was banished to the island of Patmos
during the reign of Domitian (A. D. 81-96) and in the fourteenth year of
that reign, and was recalled from Patmos to Ephesus by the Emperor Nerva
in A. D. 96."--Bible Commentary (Speaker's) on Revelation.

For the word of God. Banished on account of preaching the word of God.

I was in the Spirit. Was lifted to that spiritual exaltation in which
revelations are given.

On the Lord's day. The day of the Lord's Resurrection, the first day of
the week. In the earlier apostolic writings the day was called "the
first day of the week," but by the close of the century it began to be
called "the Lord's day," as here. Epistles of Barnabas, Ignatius and
Dionysius, written near this time, so style it, and the name is of
common occurrence from this time onward, and is confined to Sunday. It
is not confounded with the "Sabbath day" of many centuries. See Dr. Wm.
Smith's Unabridged Dictionary of the Bible, article "Lord's Day."

Heard behind me a great voice. Heard but did not see the speaker.

I am Alpha and Omega. These words are omitted in the Revision, as not
found in the best MS.

What thou seest. In all the visions of the Book of Revelation.

Write in a book. The Greek says "in a roll," which was the form of books
in the East at that time.

Unto Ephesus. The seven churches are now named. For notes on these
churches and the cities where they were located, see the notes on
chapters 2 and 3. Two of the churches named had received epistles from
the Apostle Paul.

[Revelation 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 1:12</span></span>

I saw seven golden candlesticks. The first things seen when he turned to
see whence the voice came were the seven golden candlesticks, which
symbolized the churches ([Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020).md).

And in the midst. It is a beautiful thought that he who said "I will be
with you always" is represented as moving in the midst of the church.

Like unto the Son of man. A term used in [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md) and applied by the Savior to
Himself, but never applied to him by the New Testament writers except
here, [Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014.md) and [Act
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056.md).

A garment down to the foot. The long robe of a high priest girt about
with the golden girdle of a king.

His head and his hair were white. White is the color of purity and of
triumph. The idea here is not age but heavenly glory.

His eyes were as a flame of fire. Bright, piercing, all seeing, flashing
light, and also a consuming fire of the wicked.

Feet like unto fine brass. Shedding forth splendor like burnished brass
heated in a furnace.

His voice. His voice was mighty like the sound of surging waters.

In his right hand seven stars. "The seven stars are the angels of the
seven churches" ([Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020).md).

And out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword. This two-edged sword
is a symbol of the word by which Christ's conquests are won. See [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017.md); [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md), and compare [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015.md).

His countenance. The glory of his countenance is the same that was
manifested at the Transfiguration.

[Revelation 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 1:17</span></span>

I fell at his feet as dead. Overcome with awe. No sinful man can stand
before God and live; hence the impression made by the appearance of the
Lord is that of terror.

Fear not. But when the Lord spoke to the disciple it was with the old
love. How often before had Jesus said "Fear not."

I am the first and the last. See [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008.md). The attributes claimed for
Jehovah are also claimed for Christ.

He that liveth, and was dead. Put to death but living.

Have the keys of death and of Hades. Not only a victor over death, but
the very gates of death and Hades are under his control. Hence he can
deliver from the dead whom he will.

Write. Not only the vision just seen, but the things which are, viz.,
the description of the state of the churches given in the things which
shall be, viz., the revelation of future history recorded in chapters
6-20.

The mystery of the seven stars. The Lord himself at once explains what
the seven stars and seven candlesticks symbolize. The seven candlesticks
represent the churches, or organizations appointed to "let their light
shine" and become "the light of the world."

And the seven stars are the angels of the churches. These were, I think,
the evangelists of the churches. See note below.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002.md)

</div>
