<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 14:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Lamb and His Saints on Mt. Zion. The New Song. The Angel
of the Everlasting Gospel. Blessed Are Those that Die in the Lord. The
Son of Man in the Clouds. The Harvest of the Earth. The Elect Gathered.
The Clusters of the Vine of the Earth Cut Off. Trodden Down in the
Wine-Press.

[Revelation 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 14:1</span></span>

And I looked, and, behold. This is the usual formula in Revelation which
introduces a new vision.

The Lamb stood on the mount Zion. In chapter 13, a false lamb has been
seen, one that had a voice like a dragon. Here, in contrast, is seen the
Lamb of God, the same as in chapter 5, taking the book with seven seals.

On the Mount Zion. Here and in [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022) are the only places in the New
Testament where this expression occurs. It is equivalent to the
"Jerusalem above" of [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026) and
[Heb 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022). Mount Zion, the city of
the great King, the seat of the worship of God in Jerusalem, was a type,
and is used as a symbol of the true Church. In [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022), the saints who have entered
into the covenant of Christ are said to have come, not to the mount that
could not be touched, but to Mount Zion, the city of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem. It is there used for the church of the saints, and
such is its meaning in this passage.

With him a hundred and forty and four thousand, having his name, etc. In
[Rev 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004), the same number are spoken
of as sealed from the twelve tribes of Israel. It means there, a great,
indefinite number. Here, I take that the meaning is the same. It is a
great multitude, a round number, who are associated with the Lamb.

And I heard a voice from heaven. Whose voice is not stated, but it was a
mighty voice, the voice of harpers harping with their harps. Always when
great triumph are achieved or about to be achieved, heaven rings with
the praises of singers. Compare [Rev
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); [Rev
7:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#010); [Rev
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#017).

And they sung as it were a new song before the throne. A song that has
some new features. It was sung in the presence of the Father and the
attending princes of heaven.

No man could learn that song but the hundred and forty four thousand.
None could understand the song but them, those who had been redeemed.

These are they which were not defiled with women. This thought is always
a symbol of purity of life; of refusing sinful intercourse with the
world. Spiritual adultery or fornication is being wedded to the world
and partaking of its sins.

They are virgins. This term is a symbol, and means that their lives are
not defiled by the world. See [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002).

First fruits. First fruits were always dedicated to God. See [Num
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#012). These holy ones are set apart
and dedicated to God and the Lamb.

And in their mouth, etc. This verse states that their lives were holy
and pleasing to God and the Lamb.

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

I saw another angel flying in mid heaven. An angel is a messenger. Any
agency that does God's work or carries his message may be an angel. This
angel is a symbol. (1) His flying indicates some movement or change that
shall take place with great rapidity. (2) The fact that he has the
everlasting gospel shows that the movement symbolized is the
evangelization of the world. (3) That the movement will be world wide is
shown in that he speaks to all races. (4) His proclamation shows that he
not only offers the glad tidings, but declares the consequences of their
rejection. This all implies that the purification of the Church will be
followed by a mighty gospel impulse which will sweep over the world.
There is a sublime missionary spirit on the part of the revived Church.
Full of zeal, breathing the spirit of the Master, permeated with the
apostolic spirit, as in the days of old it will go everywhere preaching
the world. The old, old story told by a holy people, told with a burning
zeal and overflowing love, shall exhibit its divine power in the
salvation of the nations.

[Revelation 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 14:8</span></span>

There followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen. As a result of
the great gospel revival shown in [Rev
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), the city of sin, here called
Babylon, but called "spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord
was crucified" ([Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)) shall fall.

The wine of wrath of her fornication. This Babylon was a city of
fornication, of unholy alliance with the world, wedded to the prince of
this world instead of to Christ, and made the nations sin with her, or
drink her wine. Wine of wrath. So called either because her wrath was
manifested in persecution against those who refused to drink, or because
the wine of God's wrath shall be poured on her (see [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010)).

And the third angel followed. This angel proclaims God's judgment on all
that worship the beast and his image. (See Ch. 13).

The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. Those who received
the mark of the beast, worshiped the beast, drank the wine of Babylon,
shall drink the wine of God's wrath. His judgments shall be poured out
on them.

Shall be tormented with fire and brimstone. These are symbols, just as
wine and cup are symbols. The meaning is that they shall suffer bitter
anguish.

And the smoke of their torment. This is also a symbol suggested by fire
and brimstone. The thought of this verse is the eternal unrest and pain
of those who have followed the beast.

Here is the patience of the saints. The thought that the enemies who
oppress them and torture them will be finally utterly overcome gives the
saints patience to endure.

[Revelation 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 14:13</span></span>

I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write. We are not told whose
voice, but it is a voice of authority. The words to be written are next
stated.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Not all the dead, but those
dead who die in the Lord. Only those die in the Lord who are in the Lord
when they die. The Christian life, begun by faith and baptism into
Christ ([Rom 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)), is a life in
Christ. To be assured of this blessed death one must live a Christian
life.

From henceforth. Probably from the time of this utterance to John,
though some have supposed that the time meant is that of the Lord's
coming, which is declared in [Rev
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014).

Yea, saith the Spirit. The Spirit confirms the blessing pronounced and
states the reason.

They may rest from their labors. Yet though they rest their labors are
not lost; they follow them to eternity to speak for them.

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

I looked, and behold white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto
the Son of Man. Jesus has himself said that the Son of man shall be seen
coming upon the clouds of heaven ([Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)). John here sees the Son of Man
sitting upon a white cloud. The Savior says that his coming shall be
with great power and glory. John now sees upon the head of the Son of
man a golden crown. The Savior says ([Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)) that he will send his angels to
gather the elect. John hears an angel bid him who sat upon the cloud, to
reap the earth, for its harvest was ripe.

Send forth thy sickle and reap. There is gathered first the ripened
harvest of the elect of God. It is an angel that came out of the temple
of God as a messenger of God, carrying to the Son the Father's command
to gather the elect from the four corners of the earth. Then a longing,
waiting Church, "loving the appearing of the Son of man," shall first be
gathered into the heavenly garner. The ripe sheaves are gathered.

The earth was reaped. The harvest of souls is ended forever. But those
who are upon the earth "shall not prevent them that are asleep." At the
voice of the archangel the dead shall wake from their long sleep in the
embrace of earth. Death shall be swallowed up in victory. "Blessed
henceforth forever are the dead who died in the Lord. Yea, saith the
Spirit, they do not rest from their labors and their works do follow
them."

[Revelation 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 14:17</span></span>

Another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having
a sharp sickle. The ripened harvest of the saints has been gathered
first. That was symbolized in [Rev
14:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014). The gathering of the wicked
to judgment is now shown in the symbols. Another angel comes forth with
a sickle in his hand. Christ, by his angels, was the great reaper of the
righteous harvest. They that are Christ's are gathered by him at his
coming, but the wicked are gathered by another, here presented as an
angel reaper.

Another angel came out from the altar. The altar of burnt offerings.

Which had the power over fire. This angel, one that has power over fire,
comes forth from the altar where fire was kept burning. Fire is an
emblem of punishment, of destruction. He bids the angel who holds the
sickle to begin his work, "to put forth his sickle and cut off the
clusters of the vine of the earth, for they are ripe." Grapes are chosen
as a symbol of the wicked because of their harmony with the figure that
describes the fate of the wicked. "The vine of the earth" means the
world that lieth in sin, "earth" being used in an unfavorable sense thus
far in Revelation.

Cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God. They were cast
into the wine-press, then trodden under foot, and from the bruised and
bleeding mass ran red juice like blood. The symbol implies delivery over
to punishment and destruction. As the grapes were trodden and crushed in
the wine-press, so the clusters "of the vine of the earth" are crushed
under the wrath of God.

And the winepress was trodden without the city. The city, whenever it is
not shown to be a wicked city, is Jerusalem, the Apocalyptic symbol of
the Church. These judgments are without the church, judgments upon the
world.

And blood came out of the winepress. This is what John saw. The pressed
juice of the grapes ran out red like blood, and ran in a mighty stream,
deep as the bridle bits of the horses, 1600 furlongs; about 200 miles.
There has been much discussion concerning what this distance signifies.
Some have cited the fact that Palestine is about 200 miles long, and
held that a fearful carnage in that country is predicted. Others have
noted the fact that Italy is about 200 miles wide, and held that this
country is to be the scene of a terrible conflict. In my opinion, the
whole is symbolic of the terrible judgments of the wicked in that day.
The figures, 40x40, or 4x4, multiplied by 10x10, imply the universality
of the judgment. The four quarters, the four winds, the four corners of
the earth are often mentioned, and four is held to be an Apocalyptical
symbol of the earth, while ten, like seven, is a perfect, or sacred
number.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015)

</div>
