<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](act028)  [Next](rom001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.

The depth of thought, logical reasoning, and profound comprehension of
the divine government shown in this Epistle have always been recognized.
Luther says, "It is the chief part of the New Testament." Meyer, that it
is "the grandest, boldest, most complete composition of Paul." Godet
terms it "the cathedral of the Christian faith." That it should be what
Coleridge says, "the most profound work in existence," is not wonderful
when we bear in mind that it was written by the greatest of the
apostles, in the full vigor of his manhood, at the height of his
activity, and addressed to the church of the great imperial city which
was the center of influence and power for the whole world. In this
mighty capital, under the shadow of the palace of the CÃ&brvbr;sars, in
some unknown way, a congregation of believers had been gathered. It is
certain that long before any apostle had set foot in Italy, churches had
been formed in Puteoli and in Rome ([Act
28:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014)). Possibly the "strangers of
Rome," who listened to Peter on the day of Pentecost, had carried back
the Gospel, and had formed the nucleus; but it is probable that the
constant influx of strangers from all portions of the empire had carried
many of the converts made around the Eastern Mediterranean to the great
political center of the world. The greetings of the last chapter of this
Epistle show that Paul had many acquaintances among the number, and the
names seem to imply that most of them were Greeks. Indeed, while there
was a Jewish element in the church, it can hardly be doubted that the
majority of the believers were of Gentile origin. Various passages in
the Epistle, such as [Rom 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005); [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013), [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025), [Rom
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028); [Rom
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001); [Rom
15:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015), give indications of a
Gentile preponderance.

The occasion of writing was the desire of the apostle to labor in the
great city, a desire which had thus far been hindered, and the
opportunity was furnished by the departure of Phoebe from Corinth to
Rome. Still firm in his purpose to see and preach in Rome, a letter to
the church would tend to prepare the way. As they had never been visited
by an apostle, and as at that time there was no New Testament in
existence to which they could go for instruction, it is not strange that
there should be an imperfect comprehension, on the part of many, of
great principles of Christian doctrine, and there was doubtless need
that the relations of Jew and Gentile, and of the Law and the Gospel,
should be set forth with all possible clearness. The great theme of the
Epistle is set forth in [Rom 1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016) :
"The Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek." The great doctrine
is that salvation is not through the Law by works of the Law, but
through the Gospel accepted by Faith. The righteousness of God, the
righteousness which brings justification in the sight of God, does not
come from legal works, but comes from God who gives this righteousness
to those who believe upon and accept his Son. This great doctrinal theme
is discussed with many illustrations and in various phases through
chapters 1-11, and in chapters 12-14 the apostle passes to exhortations
and practical applications, while the sixteenth and last chapter is
devoted to salutations of various saints in Rome known to the apostle.
For a fuller analysis, I must refer the reader to the headings which
accompany the Notes.

As to the date and place of composition, there is hardly room to doubt
that it was written at Corinth, during the three months' stay in Achaia
(Greece), which is mentioned in [Act
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003). According to [Rom
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025), at the time of writing, he was
about to proceed to Jerusalem with offerings for the poor saints, made
by the churches of Macedonia and Achaia. At Corinth, the largest city of
Achaia, he directed such collections to be made. Phoebe, who is
commended in [Rom 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001), lived at
CenchreÃ&brvbr;, the eastern harbor of Corinth. Four of the seven
persons named in [Rom 16:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021), as
being with him, Timotheus, Sosipater, Jason and Gaius, can be shown from
other sources, either to have lived at Corinth, or to have been there at
that time. From these facts, and other circumstances, it seems clear
that it was written at Corinth in the spring of A. D. 58.

We have only space to add that even the most radical rationalistic
criticism has always admitted that this Epistle had for its author the
Apostle Paul. The testimony of the ancient church is unanimous; Renan
has no doubt of its genuineness, and even Dr. Baur, of the Tubingen
school of critics, admits that it is one of the Epistles which must be
ascribed to the authorship of the great Apostle to the Gentiles. While
not the first in order of time, for the two Epistles to the
Thessalonians, that to the Galatians, and the two of the Corinthians,
were written before it, it probably has the precedence in importance
over all the Epistles of the New Testament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 1](rom001)

</div>
