<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom002)  [Next](rom004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Special Privileges of Israel. The Special Claim of the
Jew. God's Faithfulness Shown in Keeping his Covenant with the Children
of Faith. No Difference between Jew and Gentile. By the Law no Flesh
Justified. Justification to the Believer in Christ.

[Romans 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 3:1</span></span>

What advantage then hath the Jew? In the second chapter Paul has shown
that the Jews as well as the Gentiles are included under sin, and that
the possession of the law and the rite of circumcision were of no avail
unless the law was kept faithfully. In this chapter the Jew is supposed
to object to this conclusion; his objections are presented, and
answered. The first is, "What advantage is it then to the Jew to have
the law and the rite of circumcision at all, if all, both Jew and
Gentile, will be judged on the same principles in the judgment day?" The
second verse gives the answer.

Much every way. The Jew had great advantages. He had greater light, more
knowledge, better privileges, higher honors. The greatest advantage was
that they had the oracles of God, the Holy Scriptures, and hence the
promises which revealed a Messiah of mankind. This was not the only
advantage, but the first.

What if some did not believe? In this verse the Jew raises a second
objection. God has made a promise to Abraham to be a God to him and to
his seed in all generations. "Shall God's faithfulness be made of none
effect, his promise be broken, because a great part of Israel does not
believe upon the promised Seed of Abraham, who was to bless all
nations?" God forbid. The Greek means, literally, "Not so." It does not
follow that God is unfaithful, because he rejects unbelieving Israel,
for his covenant with Israel and his promise to Abraham were
conditional.

Let God be true, but every man a liar. That is, Let us believe all men
to have broken their word, rather than God his.

As it is written. [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004). One of
the penitential psalms, in which David mourns over his own sins. God's
sayings, his threatenings, are justified by his judgments. They were in
the case of David. They were also in the rejection of the Jewish nation,
in spite of the promise, when it had rejected the Holy One of Israel.

[Romans 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 3:5</span></span>

But if our unrighteousness commendeth the righteousness of God, etc.
Here is presented the Jews' third objection to the conclusion that
Israel is under judgment for sin. Paul has just shown that God's
righteousness is shown forth in condemning the Jews for their unbelief.
"But," says the Jew, "if our unrighteousness demonstrates God's
faithfulness, when he condemns us for unbelief, is it right that we
should be punished? Our sin gives occasion for God's holiness to be
shown forth. Why, then, should we be punished for furnishing such an
occasion? Speaking after the manner of men, is not God unrighteous, when
he sends wrath on our nation for its unbelief?" God forbid. Rather, "By
no means."

How shall God judge the world? How, if no sin is punished which God
turns to some good purpose, shall he judge all men according to their
deeds?

Why yet am I also judged as a sinner? Here the Jew is supposed to repeat
the last objection in another form. "God's truth is shown by our lie.
His threatenings are demonstrated to be absolutely true by his rejection
of the Jewish nation. If our lie, our false life, has thus shown forth
his glory, why should we be individually condemned?" Let us do evil that
good may come. The apostle replies to this argument with a reductio ad
absurdum. This amounts to saying, "Do evil that good may come," an
abominable doctrine, slanderously charged upon Paul by enemies, would
justify every iniquity. This doctrine, so strongly condemned, has been
taught by the Jesuits.

Whose damnation is just. All who teach such doctrine are justly
condemned.

Are we better than they? If Jews shall be judged as well as Gentiles,
are not we Jews, having the oracles of God, better than they, and hence
likely to be justified? The Jew is still supposed to be speaking. To
this Paul replies, In no wise, for he had already shown (chapters 1 and
2) that both Jews and Gentiles were sinners before God.

[Romans 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 3:10</span></span>

As it is written. [Psa 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) and [Psa
53:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001). Paul quotes the Jewish
Scriptures to confirm his statement.

None righteous. None absolutely free from sin.

None that seeketh after God. A general statement of the sinfulness of
Jew as well as Gentile.

None that doeth good. Not one absolutely good. According to the flesh
all tended to evil.

Their throat is an open sepulchre. Thus far the statements have been
general. Now we come to particulars. If the grave is opened, corruption
is manifest. So corruption comes from the throats of men when they
speak.

The poison of asps. The venom of falsehood, as deadly as the deadly
serpent.

Their feet are swift to shed blood. To carry their owners on a mission
of murder.

There is no fear of God, etc. David, in the psalms quoted, has affirmed
in the strongest possible language, the universal sinfulness. The Jews
accepted David's words as inspired. These words included Jews as well as
Gentiles; hence all are included under sin.

[Romans 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 3:19</span></span>

Whatsoever the law saith, etc. The law of Moses was written for the Jews
especially, and whatsoever it saith, it saith to those under it, to the
Jews; just as the United States law is addressed to the people of the
United States.

That every mouth may be stopped. It has just been seen that even the
mouth of the Jew is stopped, since "none are righteous, no, not one;"
hence all the world, Jew as well as Gentile, are guilty before God.

Therefore, by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified. Since
all are found to be sinners, law-breakers, none can be counted sinless;
or, in other words, justified.

Works of the law. In the Greek, this reads, Works of law. The statement
is general, and of course would include the law of Moses.

For by the law is the knowledge of sin. Again the article is not found
in the Greek before law. Law, generally, when once known, reveals to us
that we are transgressors. The savage steals as a legitimate pursuit,
but when once he hears the law, "Thou shalt not steal," his sin is
revealed.

The righteousness of God without the law (Greek, without law) is
manifested. A righteousness that does not spring from perfect obedience
to law (without law), is predicted both by the law of Moses and the
prophets of Israel.

Even the righteousness . . . by faith of Jesus Christ. The Gospel,
wherein we are "justified by faith, and have peace with God through
Jesus Christ." All were guilty under the law, but the law and prophets
pointed to forgiveness in Christ.

Unto all them that believe. There is justification for every sincere
believer, whether Jew or Gentile, for there is no difference between
them, but not for the unbelieving impenitent.

For all have sinned. This has been already shown.

And come short of the glory of God. Wickliffe says, "Have need of the
glory of God." I believe this suggests the idea. Man was made originally
in the image of God. He was then sinless. No sinner is in the Divine
image. All have sinned, and to have the divine likeness restored, need
to have their sins blotted out. Until this is done they come short of
the glory of God.

Being justified freely by his grace. All who believe upon Jesus Christ
have their sins thus blotted out, being freely, as a divine gift,
justified (that is, counted just, or sinless) by grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Christ redeems the sinner who puts
his trust in him. His blood pays the debt that the sinner owes to
justice. Since Christ, the sinless One, has suffered for sin, God will
accept his suffering for the debt of those who love and trust in him.

Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation. Christ was publicly shown
forth as a MERCY SEAT (a Propitiatory). As God of old met Israel at the
mercy seat when the blood of the atonement was offered, so Christ on the
Cross is our mercy seat. There we meet God who comes to us then in
tender mercy, to declare his righteousness, to show it to us, in
bestowing righteousness upon us in forgiving out past sins. This system
of forgiveness, or righteousness through the cross of Christ, is the
righteousness without law predicted by the Law and the Prophets.

That he might be just. Can God be just, and yet justify the sinner?
Only, because justice was fully satisfied when the sinless Christ died,
not for himself, but for his people. The believer in Christ Jesus,
trusting in him, baptized into Christ, into his death, is in Christ, and
Christ hath paid the penalty for all who are found in him ([Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)).

[Romans 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 3:27</span></span>

Where is boasting then? If we are justified, not by our own righteous
works, not by the law of Moses, but as a free gift of God through a law
of faith, where is the ground for Jew or Gentile to boast?

Therefore. The conclusion of the line of argument is now reached. No man
is justified by works of law (no article in the Greek), but by faith,
the faith that brings into loving obedience to Christ.

Is he the God of the Jews only? If God is the God of all nations, it
ought to be regarded a reasonable thing that he would justify through
faith Gentiles as well as Jews.

As there is one God, there is one plan of justification.

The circumcision, the Jews are justified by faith, a faith not in God,
whom they already acknowledged, but a faith in Christ, God manifest in
the flesh. In the same way the uncircumcision, the Gentile world, are
justified through the faith. The Gospel is meant by the faith (the
article is found in the Greek). The salvation of both is by faith in
Christ crucified.

Do we then make void the law? Do we make it useless through the faith;
i. e., through the Gospel? (the article is found before faith in the
Greek).

We establish the law. Rather, law (the article is not found in the
Greek). Law is confirmed and rendered sacred, when its just demands are
met by the suffering of the Son of God himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 4](rom004)

</div>
