<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom003)  [Next](rom005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Abraham not Justified by Works, but by Faith. His Faith
Reckoned for Righteousness. David Describes the same Blessedness. This
Blessedness of Forgiveness for Gentiles as well as Jews. Abraham Counted
Righteous Before He Was Circumcised. The Promise of a Redeemer and of a
Land Made to Abraham Before He Was Circumcised. The Greatness of
Abraham's Faith. To All, Whether Jew or Gentile, Righteousness will be
Imputed, Who have Abraham's Faith.

[Romans 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 4:1</span></span>

What shall we say then? Paul, having show that faith is the essential
principle of justification, now inquires concerning Abraham's faith and
justification.

Abraham, our father. "Our forefather according to the flesh," in the
Revision. The ancestor of the Jewish race.

Hath found. The thought is, Hath he found justification by works, or by
faith?

Hath whereof to glory. If Abraham was justified by his own righteous
works, he would have ground for glorying in himself.

What saith the Scripture? The passage quoted is found in [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), and is quoted three times in the
New Testament--here, and in [Gal 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)
and in [Jam 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023). God promised an heir
to Abraham, and, although it seemed contrary to nature, he believed the
promise. His faith in the promise was reckoned as righteousness. It was
the ground of his acceptance with God. His faith was a trusting faith,
which contained in it the element of obedience. No other faith justifies
(see [Jam 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023)).

To him that worketh. Who earns wages as a servant. To that one a reward
is not of grace, a free gift, but a debt. If one has rendered himself
righteous by his works, this is true of him.

But to him that worketh not. Does not trust his works for acceptance
with God.

But believeth, etc. Trusts in the mercy of him who justifies sinners who
come to him penitent and believing.

His faith, etc. It is made the ground of his acceptance with God. By
faith he clings to Christ, the Savior.

[Romans 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 4:6</span></span>

David also. Paul has shown that Abraham's justification was through
faith, rather than through works. He next cites David as describing a
justification which is not due to our own righteousness, but to God's
mercy. Such names as that of Abraham, the father of their race, and
David, the great king, would be authoritative with the Jews. The
quotation is from [Psa 32:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001). David
himself had been a great sinner, and had been forgiven.

Blessed are they. The class described as blessed are those whose sins
are forgiven, counted righteous because their sins are blotted out.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. This is another
form of the thought of [Rom 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007). One
whose sins have been forgiven will not find them imputed to him at
judgment. We obtain this blessedness by a faith in Christ which leads us
to accept the gospel.

[Romans 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 4:9</span></span>

Cometh this blessedness upon the circumcision only. The next question
is, Who shall enjoy this blessing of forgiveness? Shall it be Jews only,
or shall the uncircumcision, the Gentiles, enjoy it? Abraham's faith was
counted for righteousness; will this be true of all, both Jews and
Gentiles?

How was it then reckoned? To settle the question, whether this
blessedness applies to Gentiles as well as Jews, the inquiry is made
whether Abraham was a Jew or Gentile when it was said of him, "His faith
was counted for righteousness." He was not circumcised for at least
fourteen years after this statement was made of him. Compare [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006) with [Gen
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#025). He was then justified, without
circumcision, while yet a Gentile.

He received the sign of circumcision. The outward mark in the flesh.

A seal. A seal is often appended to a legal document as a proof. The
covenant is made before the seal is annexed. Circumcision was not the
covenant, but an outward mark of a covenant that before existed. The
righteousness, of which it was a seal, had been acknowledged many years
before.

That he might be the father of all them that believe. Both Jews and
Gentiles, circumcised and uncircumcised. The righteous, uncircumcised
Abraham belonged to the latter class.

The father of circumcision. Of the circumcision described in [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029). Abraham is the "great father,"
the father, not of the circumcision only, but of all who have such faith
as he had before he was circumcised. When Abraham was "counted righteous
through faith," there was no difference between Jew and Gentile.
Christianity, by its revelation of "righteousness through faith," leads
back to the same condition.

[Romans 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 4:13</span></span>

For the promise. The reference is to the substance of various promises
to Abraham for himself and his seed. See [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#014); [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018).

Was not . . . through the law. Was not through law, the article being
wanting in the Greek. No body of law had been given. The Mosaic law was
given many years afterward. The law of circumcision had not been
enacted. It was through the righteousness of faith, not of law, or works
of law, that Abraham secured the promise.

For if they which are of the law (of law, the article wanting) are
heirs. If keeping law makes men heirs, then faith is void. It sets aside
God's plan of "counting faith as righteousness," and destroys the
promise which depends on faith.

Because the law worketh wrath. The law threatens punishment to all who
break its enactments, and since none keep it perfectly, it works
punishment for all. Whereas, if no law had been given, there could be no
transgression of its demands.

[Romans 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 4:16</span></span>

Therefore it is of faith. The inheritance promised to Abraham and his
seed. It comes through faith, and hence is a free gift (of grace).

That it might be sure. It could not be sure if it had to be secured by
the righteousness that is of law, since none can keep the law perfectly.
But all can secure it through faith.

To all the seed. To all children of Abraham, whether those of the law,
the Jews, or those of the faith of Abraham, who become his children by
exercising his faith, whether Jew or Gentile. See [Gal
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007).

As it is written. [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005).

A father of many nations. The name of the patriarch was changed from
Abram (a father) to Abraham (father of a multitude).

Before him whom he believed. This is to be joined with [Rom
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016), "who is the father of us all . .
. before . . . God."

Who quickeneth the dead. Abraham had to believe that the Divine power,
which can give life to the dead, would give new life to his aged body
and that of Sarah.

Who against hope. Though an old man, and his wife an aged woman, far
beyond the time of child-bearing, he yet believed the promise that he
would have numerous offspring.

Being not weak in faith. Strong in faith, though weak in body.

His own body now dead. Its vital powers exhausted. But God could quicken
the dead, and he had the promise of God.

He staggered not. He accepted the promise with unfaltering faith.

Being fully persuaded. He was certain that God not only could, but would
do what he promised.

Therefore it was imputed, etc. The faith that secures God's
righteousness is a faith that does not falter, but accepts and acts upon
God's promises.

[Romans 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 4:23</span></span>

Now it was not written for his sake alone. But in order that we might
have an example of God's plan of justification.

For us also. If we believe our faith shall save us.

On him that raised Jesus. The same God who quickened Abraham's body, as
good as dead, raised up our Lord.

Who was delivered for our offences. "He died for us;" "was made sin for
us." He was to be "cut off, but not for himself."

Raised again for our justification. The resurrection of Christ was his
own justification against the condemnation of the world. In his
justification, all for whom he died, who have laid hold on him by faith
and are found in him, are justified with him, in that their sins are
forgiven. Without the resurrection, the sepulcher of Christ would be the
grave of all our hopes. This is beautifully symbolized in baptism. "We
are buried by baptism into death," his death, "planted in the likeness
of his death," figuratively die with him. We are also "planted in the
likeness of his resurrection." We rise with him, "new creatures,"
justified by his resurrection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 5](rom005)

</div>
