<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1001)  [Next](th1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--How the Gospel was Brought to Thessalonica. The Manner of
Paul's Preaching. His Manner of Life. His Exhortations. Their
Persecutions. His Desire to Return to Comfort Them.

[1 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 2:1</span></span>

Our entrance . . . was not in vain. The existence of the flourishing
church, where none had before existed, was proof of that fact.

Were shamefully treated . . . at Philippi. See [Act
16:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019.md). Even after such cruel
treatment at the first place in Europe where they preached the gospel,
they were no less bold in . . . God to speak . . . the gospel at
Thessalonica, the second place they labored, though with much
contention. With fierce opposition. See [Act
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013.md).

For our exhortation was not of deceit. The message they preached did not
spring from deceit, or unclean lives, or guile. It was in all sincerity,
and hence they were bold.

So we speak. God had given them the gospel as a trust. They were
"stewards of the mysteries of God." They spoke as those faithful to a
trust, seeking to please God instead of men.

[1 Thessalonians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 2:5</span></span>

Flattering words. He would have used these if he had sought to please
men, but he told them plainly of their sins.

Nor a cloke of covetousness. Nor did he have a covetous motive and
conceal it by fair pretences.

Nor . . . sought we glory. Enemies of the cross sought some motive to
explain the devotion of the apostles to the work. When all others
failed, they named the desire of glory, as though men would make
themselves "offscouring" for the sake of glory.

When we might, etc. They might have demanded glory, and stood on the
dignity of the apostles' office, and required pecuniary support.
Instead, they worked at Thessalonica with their own hands for a support
(see [Th1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009).md).

Were gentle. Instead of throwing ourselves on our dignity as apostles.

But also our own souls. You were so dear to us that we not only were
willing to impart the gospel, but would have given our lives to you and
for you.

[1 Thessalonians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 2:9</span></span>

Ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail. There was hard and
exhausting labor, "night and day." The apostle was not willing to be
chargeable to them; hence, while preaching "in season, out of season,"
he labored at his trade for a support. To this day the weaving of black
cloths for tents is a great industry at Thessalonica.

Ye are witnesses. How holy and blameless were our lives.

As a father doth his children. As tenderly and earnestly.

Hath called you unto his kingdom. The kingdom of Christ, visible as the
church on earth.

[1 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 2:13</span></span>

Not as the word of men. They had received the gospel preached by Paul as
the word of the Lord, a divine message.

Which effectually worketh. The word, received into the heart, is the
good seed of the kingdom, and springeth up to eternal life.

Became followers. Imitators of the churches in Judea, enduring
persecution faithfully.

Ye also have suffered. As the Jews persecuted the churches in Judea, so
you have been persecuted by your own countrymen. The persecution at
Thessalonica was first stirred up by unbelieving Jews, but they induced
the heathen to join in it. They "stirred up the people" ([Act
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013).md).

Who both killed. The Jews in Thessalonica had incited the persecution
there. Their hostility to righteousness elsewhere is cited. They not
only slew the Savior, but had killed their own prophets ([Mat
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#031).md).

Persecuted us. The apostles and evangelists, and especially Paul. Their
hatred pursued them everywhere.

Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles. Nothing created such animosity
on the part of the Jews as preaching the gospel to the Gentiles. See
[Act 22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021.md).

To fill up their sins alway. To fill the measure of their sins so full
that God would reject them as a people. Compare [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016.md); [Mat
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032.md).

For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. They were ripe for
destruction. Before twenty years it came.

[1 Thessalonians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th1 2:17</span></span>

We, brethren, being taken from you. Forced away from them, his heart
remained with them.

We would have come. Once and again, twice, he had purposed to return to
them, but Satan hindered. How, is not stated, but some difficulties
intervened that Paul attributed to Satan. His agency is often manifest
when we do not recognize it; sometimes in wicked opposition, sometimes
even "as an angel of light."

What is our crown of rejoicing? As the victor in the games could point
to his crown as the proof of his powers, so Paul could point to the
Gentile churches as the proof of ministry.

At his coming. Paul took pride in the thought how great a work the Lord
at his coming would behold which he had wrought in the gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th1003.md)

</div>
