<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1000)  [Next](th1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

SUMMARY.--Salutation. Thanksgiving for the Faith of the Thessalonians.
Commendation for Spreading the Gospel. The Great Change in Their Lives.

[1 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy. Silvanus is the same as the Silas of Acts.
We learn from Acts (chapters 15 to 18) that both Silas and Timothy
attended Paul on the second missionary journey during which the Epistle
was written. Paul does not speak of his apostleship in this salutation,
as in later epistles, because at this early period the Judaizing
Christians had not begun to spread doubts whether he was an apostle.

In God the Father. Hence, separated from the Gentiles.

The Lord Jesus Christ. Hence, separated from the Jews.

[1 Thessalonians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 1:2</span></span>

We. The plural, perhaps, is used because Silas and Timothy were joined
in the greeting, but the Epistle is Paul's, not the joint work of three
persons.

Give thanks. Almost all Paul's letters begin with thanksgiving.

Remembering . . . your work of faith. He states reasons for
thankfulness.

Work of faith. Works which result from faith.

Labor of love. Toil for others caused by love for them and for Christ.

Patience of hope. Patient endurance of toil, hardship and persecution
through a hope in Christ. Probably a hope that soon these would cease
with the coming of Christ. The Thessalonians, as we learn, expected his
speedy coming.

Knowing . . . your election of God. That you are of the elect, the
"chosen nation." All Christians were the elect, and the expression is
another way of saying, "Knowing that you have become Christians."

For our gospel came not unto you in word only. God gave the spoken word
power, the power of the Holy Spirit which dictated it. Observe that the
"power" is referred to the preachers.

Ye know. Ye know what was the life, the earnestness and the power in the
Holy Spirit of us while we were preaching among you.

[1 Thessalonians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 1:6</span></span>

Ye became followers of us. Followed them as they followed the Lord.

Having received the word in much affliction. In the midst of opposition
and persecution. See Acts, chapter 17.

With joy of the Holy Ghost. With rejoicing as soon as they accepted the
gospel.

So that ye were ensamples. Their earnestness was such that they were
worthy of imitation by all who had become Christian.

Macedonia. The great Roman province, of which Thessalonica was the
capital, lying north of the Ã†gean Sea.

Achaia. The Roman province of which Corinth was the capital. It embraced
most of Greece.

[1 Thessalonians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 1:8</span></span>

For from you sounded out. The effect of the gospel in Thessalonica was
so striking that the report of it went through all Macedonia and Greece,
and awakened inquiry, so that a knowledge of the gospel was thus spread
abroad.

So that we need not to speak anything. Wherever he went he found that
the news of the church in the great city of Thessalonica had preceded
him, so that he did not need to tell it.

For they themselves. The people "every place" ([Th1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008).md).

How ye turned to God from idols. Most of them had been heathen. See the
accounts in [Act 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004.md).

And to wait for his Son from heaven. The apostles saw the Lord ascend,
but he left a promise that he would return, with the time wholly
unrevealed. Hence, in preaching the gospel, they made his return to the
world very prominent, and perhaps believed themselves in his speedy
coming. Until after Jerusalem was destroyed the churches waited, as
though the Lord would soon be revealed. We should still wait, "watch and
pray." We know not the hour when he may either come, or we be called to
him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th1002.md)

</div>
