<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1002)  [Next](ti1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Qualifications of Bishops. Of Deacons. Their Wives. The
Reason for Writing to Timothy of These Matters. The Mystery of
Godliness.

[1 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 3:1</span></span>

If a man desire the office of a bishop. Here, for the first time in the
New Testament, is there a delineation of the qualifications and duties
of bishops and deacons. Both offices have been alluded to in Acts, and
both are named in [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001). To form a
correct idea of the New Testament bishop we must get away from modern
episcopacy. The New Testament bishop was not diocesan, but in charge of
a single church. Each church had a plurality. Elders or presbyters, and
bishops were only different designations for the same office. This
arrangement was not changed until after the close of the first century
and the death of the last of the apostles. Of these statements, admitted
by the candid learned even of episcopal bodies, the following proofs may
be submitted: (1) Paul ([Act 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017))
summons the "elders" of the church at Ephesus, and in [Ti1
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#028) calls them "bishops." (2) In the
church of Philippi the "bishops and deacons" are named as the officers
([Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)). (3) Paul in this Epistle
names bishops and deacons as the officers (chapter 2), but in [Ti1
5:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017), names "elders" as officers
intrusted with the same duties already named as those of the bishops.
(4) In the Epistle to Titus, Paul commands ([Ti1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)) to "ordain elders in every city,"
but in turn describing the qualifications of an elder he calls him a
bishop ([Ti1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)). (5) Peter ([Pe1
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)) addresses "elders" and commands
them to exercise the office of "bishops" over the flock. The Greek word
as well as the word bishop, etymologically means to act as an overseer,
or to take the oversight. (6) I might add that Clement of Rome, who
wrote to Corinthians about the beginning of the second century, uses the
terms interchangeably.

Desireth a good work. A very important duty.

[1 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 3:2</span></span>

A bishop then must be blameless. None must be appointed because they
desire the place. None are eligible unless they fill the following
qualifications.

Blameless. Not under charges; of good repute.

The husband of one wife. A married man, and having only one wife. In
those loose times of divorce, men might be converted who had
successively several wives. Divorce for unscriptural reasons would not
free a man from his first, lawful wife. Hence the limitation to those
who had only one living wife. I do not think there is any reference to
re-marriage after the death of a wife.

Vigilant. Temperate. See Revision.

Sober. Sedate.

Given to hospitality. Often saints by persecution were made homeless.
The bishops must set the example of receiving such.

Apt to teach. Men who have the knowledge and discretion which fit them
to teach the flock.

Not given to wine. Not a drunken brawler, is the idea of the Greek. We
must always bear in mind that the church had been formed of Gentiles
whose morals had been at a very low standard.

One that ruleth well his own house. This implies that he must be a man
of family.

Having his children. He must be a father with obedient children.

For if a man know not. The order of his own house will show whether he
is fit to have a charge in the house of God. The sins of Eli's sons
showed that Eli, though a good man, was unfitted to rule.

Not a novice. One recently converted. Those chosen for bishops must be
old and tried. Paul and Barnabas did not ordain elders until their
second visit to the churches ([Act
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)).

Lifted up with pride. A novice, suddenly exalted, was in danger of undue
elation.

Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without. Have an
established character which speaks well for the church among the
unconverted.

Lest he fall into reproach. Into some snare of the devil, some improper
conduct, which will bring reproach on the church.

[1 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 3:8</span></span>

Likewise must the deacons. The ancient church understood that the seven
appointed in Acts, chapter 6 were the first deacons. They were not
called deacons, but filled a diaconate. In [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001), we find deacons existing. Their
office seemed to have been to look after the temporal matters of the
church, and especially to care for the poor and the widows.

Not double-tongued. Not saying one thing to one man, and another thing
to others.

Not greedy of filthy lucre. Men who are covetous and unscrupulous as to
modes of getting money are not to be chosen.

Holding the mystery of the faith. The gospel, God's revealed mystery to
all believers.

Let these also first be proved. Not novices, but men fully tested.
Before they use the office of a deacon, their character must be
thoroughly examined, and they must be found blameless.

[1 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 3:11</span></span>

Even so must their wives. The word in the Greek may mean women or wives.
It is rendered wife in [Ti1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012). The
Revision says, "Women must be, etc." I believe that the Old Version is
nearer right. The duties of women generally are not spoken of in the
midst of a discussion of elders and deacons. Either deaconesses are
meant, or the wives of bishops and deacons; more likely the latter. We
know that an injudicious wife may mar the work of a church officer.

Not slanderers. Not given to tattling.

[1 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 3:12</span></span>

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife. The same word is used in
the Greek here for wife that is used in [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011). See notes on "one wife" under
[Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

Ruling their children. See notes on [Ti1
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

For they that, etc. These demands for the office are high, for those who
exercise it well purchase a good degree. Secure a high position in the
church and in God's favor.

And great boldness in the faith. To fill these duties well gives
strength, and often fits for higher duties. Stephen and Philip became
evangelists.

[1 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 3:14</span></span>

These things I write, . . . hoping to come unto thee shortly. It is not
certain that he was ever able to visit Ephesus again, though it is
thought that he did on his way to Crete.

But if I tarry. In that case he wrote that Timothy might understand how
to act.

Behave thyself in the house of God. Conduct thyself in the management of
the church.

Which is the church of the living God. The house of God is not the
temple of Diana, which stood there at Ephesus.

The pillar and ground of the truth. The church is the pillar and support
of the truth because it preaches it to the world, preserves it, and
transmits it from generation to generation.

Without controversy. Undoubtedly.

Great is the mystery of godliness. The mystery that God has revealed to
us in the gospel in order to make men godly. The great things revealed
in this mystery are next named, certainly wonderful things, well called
great.

God was manifest in the flesh. Was manifested in Jesus Christ.

Justified in the Spirit. When, after his condemnation to death, the
power of God raised him from the dead.

Seen of angels. The angels were at the open tomb and told the women of
his resurrection.

Preached unto the Gentiles. A wonderful fact in the mind of a Jew like
Paul, who had been trained to believe that the Gentiles were accursed.

Received up into glory. At the Ascension. Six elements enter into this
mystery of godliness, elements all of which were fully revealed in the
gospel. The mystery is not something incomprehensible, but the hidden
wisdom of God revealed in the gospel; a sense similar to that in which
mystery is always used in the Scriptures. Compare [Mat
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011); [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020); [Rev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005), [Rev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 4](ti1004)

</div>
