<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Prayers for Rulers. The Will of God that All Should Be Saved.
How Men Must Pray. Concerning the Dress of Women at Worship. Concerning
Women Teaching.

[1 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 2:1</span></span>

I exhort, first of all. This chapter contains some directions concerning
public worship. Paul probably means that, first in order, prayers should
be offered for all men, etc. So says Conybeare and Howson, and many
others. Thus should the worship open.

Supplications, prayers, intercessions. It is difficult to distinguish
between these three words. "Perhaps the idea in 'supplication' is that
of want; in 'prayers' that of solemn devotion, and in 'intercessions'
that of individual petitions to God."--Plumptree.

For kings, and for all that are in authority. For all rulers over us.
This duty is not dependent on the righteousness of the rulers. The Roman
emperors were intensely wicked. Jews were enjoined to pray for their
heathen rulers ([Jer 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007.md); [Ezr
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010).md).

That we may lead, etc. The special object of these prayers is that the
earthly rulers may be so overruled that Christians shall live and
worship in peace. Wars, seditions and persecutions would be injurious to
the saints.

[1 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 2:3</span></span>

For this. This custom of praying for rulers. Our prayers should be as
comprehensive as the will of God to save.

Who will have all men to be saved. The Scriptures uniformly represent it
as the divine will that all should come to life. But he does not will to
save men irrespective of the conditions of salvation. They must, in
order to be saved, come to a knowledge of the truth. In other words,
must hear, receive, and obey the gospel.

[1 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 2:5</span></span>

For there is one God. One God of all men, not many gods. Hence the One
God desires equally the salvation of all his creatures.

And one mediator. For all men. The gospel scheme is universal.

The man, Christ Jesus. Taking upon himself manhood in order to be the
Savior of all men.

Who gave himself a ransom for all. Not for an elect nation, like the
Jews, or for the elect individuals arbitrarily selected, but for all
men. All men have been redeemed by his blood, if they will accept the
ransom.

To be testified. The testimony, or preaching of this ransom, was to be
given at due seasons.

Whereunto. To testify of this ransom.

I am ordained a preacher. Appointed a herald. See margin of Revision.

An apostle. An apostle also, with the authority of an apostle.

I speak the truth. The Judaizers denied his apostleship. Hence this
special affirmation.

[1 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 2:8</span></span>

I will therefore that men pray everywhere. This refers back to [Ti1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001.md).

Everywhere. In all places of public worship.

Lifting up holy hands. This seems to indicate an attitude in prayer. The
hands lifted up must be sanctified to holy deeds.

Without wrath and doubting. Wrath would unfit for prayer. So would
doubt; but the word rendered "doubt," is better rendered "disputing," as
in the Revision.

[1 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 2:9</span></span>

In like manner, that women also. When they come to the public worship,
let them not spend their thoughts in adorning their bodies, but adorn
themselves in modest apparel. In simple attire which not attract
attention.

With shamefacedness. A shrinking from all that is indelicate.

Sobriety. Self-restraint; not yielding to vain impulses.

Not with braided hair. The Gentile women were much given to arranging
the hair in plaits over the head, with bands of gold. Such vain and idle
show at worship is forbidden, as well as the wearing of pearls, or
costly array. At the house of God a display is not comely. Compare [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003.md).

But. There is another adorning which better becomes godly women. Let
their lives be adorned by kindly, helpful deeds.

[1 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 2:11</span></span>

Let the women learn in silence. In the public worship on the Gentile
churches the teaching was confined to the men. For a discussion of the
reasons, see notes on [Co1 14:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md),
where the same directions are given.

With all subjection. Submission to the authorized teachers of the
church.

I suffer not a woman to teach. To become an authorized teacher of the
church, a work confined to the presbyters.

Nor to usurp authority. Authoritative teaching and ruling were united.

Some reasons drawn from the story of man in Eden are given for these
rules. It will be seen that Paul regards these events as shadowing forth
spiritual lessons.

Adam was first formed. Man came in order before woman.

And Adam was not deceived. It was man who was first created, but woman
who first led into the transgression. For these reasons a burden was
laid on women which is spoken of in the next verse.

Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing. Rather, through
childbearing. Work was laid upon the fallen man; the pains of
childbearing on the fallen woman. The apostle means here, that women
will be saved in the line of their duties, and that those duties are
domestic rather than public. There surely is no recommendation of the
celibacy of monasticism. Possibly, too, another thought still may be
alluded to. The first woman was assured that her seed should bruise the
serpent's head. It was woman's glory that one of her sex was chosen to
be the mother of our Lord. Thus through childbearing the Savior of all
men comes into the world.

If they continue. Domestic duties will not save unless to these are
added the graces of a holy life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003.md)

</div>
