<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti1006)  [Next](ti2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY.

The Second Epistle to Timothy has a melancholy interest as the last
letter which Paul ever wrote, written from his second imprisonment in
Rome, only a short time before his martyrdom. In the Introduction to
First Timothy the uniform first testimony of the early church that Paul
was released, shortly after the close of Acts, and engaged for several
years in missionary work, was stated. On this point the testimony is
clear, and goes back even to Clement of Rome, a companion of Paul named
in one of his Epistles, who states in his Epistle to the Corinthians
that Paul was enabled to carry out his purpose of preaching the gospel
in the extreme West. This verdict of antiquity is supported by
criticism, and the allusions in the three Pastoral Epistles can only be
explained by conceding that there was a release, a period of missionary
activity, and finally a second arrest, and imprisonment in Rome.

On this hypothesis Conybeare and Howson outline the interval between the
dates of the two letters of Timothy. Shortly after the first was written
Paul is supposed to have again visited Ephesus, to have gone from
thence, in company with Titus, to Crete. The latter was left in charge
of the work there when Paul left for Europe ([Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)). Where the Epistle to Titus was
written cannot be certainly known, but it was at some point on the route
from Crete to Nicopolis, a city situated on the Grecian shore of the
Adriatic Sea ([Tit 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012)). If Paul
reached there for the winter, as he proposed, it is probable that here
he was again arrested, and from thence borne to Rome to trial. The only
writing extant that came from this second period of imprisonment is the
Second Epistle to Timothy.

Timothy, his "beloved son" in the gospel, was still laboring in distant
Ephesus, but the aged apostle, about to go to rest from his weary
labors, desired to see him once more in the flesh. Hence, he bids him
come, as speedily as possible; but, lest he might arrive too late to
receive his parting words, he impresses upon him in this letter, with
the earnestness of a last charge, the various duties of his office, and
especially of opposing the dangerous heresies which threatened to
destroy the vitality of the Christian religion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 1](ti2001)

</div>
