[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za18)  [Next](za20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXPERIMENT 14.

If a good theodolite is placed on the summit of Shooter's Hill, in Kent,
and *levelled*, the line of sight, on being directed to Hampstead Hill,
will cut the cross on St. Paul's Cathedral, and fall upon a part of
Hampstead Hill, the altitude of which is the same as that of Shooter's
Hill. The altitude of each of these points is 412 feet above the Trinity
high water mark, at London Bridge. The distance from Shooter's Hill to
St. Paul's Cathedral is 7 statute miles, and from St. Paul's to
Hampstead Hill, 5 miles. If the earth is a globe, the line of sight from
the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "levelled"
theodolite would be a tangent, below which St. Paul's cross would be 32
feet, and Hampstead Hill 96 feet. The highest point of Hampstead Hill is
430 feet, which we find, on making the proper calculation, would be 78
feet below the summit of Shooter's Hill; whereas, according to the
Ordnance Survey, and as may be proved by experiment, the three points
are in the same direct line; again demonstrating that the earth is a
plane.

The diagrams, figs. 42 and 43, will show the difference

<span id="img_fig42"></span> ![FIG. 42.](img/fig42.jpg)  
FIG. 42.

between the theory of rotundity and the results of actual survey. A,
represents Hampstead Hill; C, St. Paul's cross; B, Shooter's Hill; and
D, D, the datum line--the Trinity high water mark. In fig. 43, A, B, C,
and D, D, represent the same points respectively as in fig. 42.

<span id="img_fig43"></span> ![FIG. 43.](img/fig43.jpg)  
FIG. 43.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

In the account of the trigonometrical operations in France, by M. M.
Biot and Arago, it is stated that the light of a powerful lamp, with
good reflectors, was placed on a rocky summit, in Spain, called Desierto
las Palmas, and was distinctly seen from Camprey, on the Island of
Iviza. The elevation of the two points was nearly the same, and the
distance between them nearly 100 miles. If the earth is a globe, the
light on the rock in Spain would have been more than 6600 feet, or
nearly one mile and a quarter, below the line of sight.

<span class="small">"The length of some of the sides of the great
triangles (in the English survey) is upwards of 100 miles; and many
means were employed to render the stations visible from each other at
such great distances. The oxy-hydrogen, or Drummond's Light, was
employed in some instances; but a heliostat, for reflecting the sun's
rays in the direction of the distant observer, was more generally and
successfully employed. Lieutenant-Colonel Portlock, R.E., who observed
the station on Precelly, a mountain in South Wales, from the station on
Kippure, a mountain about 10 miles south-west of Dublin--the distance
between the stations being 108 miles--says: 'For five weeks I watched in
vain; when, to my joy, the heliostat blazed out in the early beams of
the rising sun, and continued visible as a bright star the whole
day.'" <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)</span>

Many other very long "sights" have been taken by surveyors of different
countries, which upon a globe of 25,000 miles in circumference, would
have been quite impossible; but with the demonstrated fact that the
earth is a plane, are practical and consistent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[59:1](za19.htm#fr_6) Handbook to the Official
Catalogue of the Great Exhibition of 1851.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Experiment 15](za20)
