[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za20)  [Next](za22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# CHAPTER III.

### THE EARTH NO AXIAL OR ORBITAL MOTION.

IF a ball is allowed to drop from the mast-head of a ship at rest, it
will strike the deck at the foot of the mast. If the same experiment is
tried with a ship *in motion*, the same result will follow; because, in
the latter case, the ball is acted upon simultaneously by two forces at
right angles to each other--one, the momentum given to it by the moving
ship in the direction of its own motion; and the other, the force of
gravity, the direction of which is at right angles to that of the
momentum. The ball being acted upon by the two forces together, will not
go in the direction of either, but will take a diagonal course, as shown
in the following diagram, fig. 46.

<span id="img_fig46"></span> ![FIG. 46.](img/fig46.jpg)  
FIG. 46.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="small">The ball passing from A to C, by the force of
gravity, and having, at the moment of its liberation, received a
momentum . from the moving ship in the direction A, B, will, by the
conjoint action of the two forces A, B, and A, C, take the direction A,
D, falling at D, just as it would have fallen at C, had the vessel
remained at rest.</span>

It is argued by those who hold that the earth is a revolving globe, that
if a ball is dropped from the mouth of a deep mine, it reaches the
bottom in an apparently vertical direction, the same as it would if the
earth were motionless. In the same way, and from the same cause, it is
said that a ball allowed to drop from the top of a tower, will fall at
the base. Admitting the fact that a ball dropped down a mine, or let
fall from a high tower, reaches the bottom in a direction parallel to
the side of either, it does not follow therefrom that the earth moves.
It only follows that the earth *might* move, and yet allow of such a
result. It is certain that such a result would occur on a stationary
earth; and it is mathematically demonstrable that it would also occur on
a revolving earth; but the question of motion or non-motion--of which is
the fact it does not decide. It gives no proof that the ball falls in a
vertical or in a diagonal direction. Hence, it is logically valueless.
We must begin the enquiry with an experiment which does not involve a
supposition or an ambiguity, but which will decide whether motion does
actually or actually does not exist. It is certain, then, that the path
of a ball, dropped from the mast-head of a *stationary ship* will be
*vertical*. It is also certain that, dropped down a deep mine, or from
the top of a high

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

tower, upon a *stationary earth*, it would be *vertical*. It is equally
certain that, dropped from the mast-head of a *moving* ship, it would be
*diagonal*; so also upon a *moving earth* it would be *diagonal*. And as
a matter of necessity, that which follows in one case would follow in
every other case, if, in each, the conditions were the same. Now let the
experiment shown in fig. 46 be modified in the following way:--

Let the ball be thrown *upwards* from the mast-head of a *stationary
ship*, and it will fall back to the mast-head, and pass downwards to the
foot of the mast. The same result would follow if the ball were thrown
upwards from the mouth of a mine, or the top of a tower, on a
*stationary earth*. Now put the ship *in motion*, and let the ball be
thrown *upwards*. It will, as in the first instance, partake of the two
motions--the upward or vertical, A, C, and the horizontal, A, B, as
shown in fig. 47; but

<span id="img_fig47"></span> ![FIG. 47.](img/fig47.jpg)  
FIG. 47.

because the two motions act conjointly, the ball will take the diagonal
direction, A, D. By the time the ball has arrived at

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> D, the ship will
have reached the position, 13; and now, as the two forces will have been
expended, the ball will begin to fall, by the force of gravity alone, in
the vertical direction, D, B, H; but during its fall towards H, the ship
will have passed on to the position S, leaving the ball at H, a given
distance behind it.

The same result will be observed on throwing a ball upwards from a
railway carriage, when in rapid motion, as shown in the following
diagram, fig. 48. While the carriage or tender passes

<span id="img_fig48"></span> ![FIG. 48.](img/fig48.jpg)  
FIG. 48.

from A to B, the ball thrown upwards, from A towards (2, will reach the
position D; but during the time of its fall from D to B, the carriage
will have advanced to S, leaving the ball behind at B, as in the case of
the ship in the last experiment.

The same phenomenon would be observed in a circus, during the
performance of a juggler on horseback, were it not that the balls
employed are thrown more or less forward, according to the rapidity of
the horse's motion. The juggler standing in the ring, on the solid
ground, throws his balls as vertically as he can, and they return to his
hand; but when on the back of a rapidly-moving horse, he should throw
the balls vertically, before they fell

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

back to his hands, the horse would have taken him in advance, and the
whole would drop to the ground behind him. It is the same in leaping
from the back of a horse in motion. The performer must throw himself to
a certain degree forward. If he jumps directly upwards, the horse will
go from under him, and he would fall behind.

Thus it is demonstrable that, in all cases where a ball is thrown
upwards from an object moving at right angles to its path, that ball
will come down to a place behind the point from which it was thrown; and
the distance at which it falls behind depends upon the time the ball has
been in the air. As this is the result in every instance where the
experiment is carefully and specially performed, the same would follow
if a ball were discharged from any point upon a revolving earth. The
causes or conditions operating being the same, the same effect would
necessarily follow.

The experiment shown in fig. 49, demonstrates, however, that

<span id="img_fig49"></span> ![FIG. 49.](img/fig49.jpg)  
FIG. 49.

these causes, or conditions, or motion in the earth, do not exist.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A strong cast-iron
cannon was placed with the muzzle upwards. The barrel was carefully
tested with a plumb line, so that its true vertical direction was
secured; and the breech of the gun was firmly embedded in sand up to the
touch-hole, against which a piece of slow match was placed. The cannon
had been loaded with powder and ball, previous to its position being
secured. At a given moment the slow match at D was fired, and the
operator retired to a shed. The explosion took place, and the ball was
discharged in the direction A, B. In thirty seconds the ball fell back
to the earth, from B to C; the point of contact, C, was only 8 inches
from the gun, A. This experiment has been many times tried, and several
times the ball fell back upon the mouth of the cannon; but the greatest
deviation was less than 2 feet, and the average time of absence was 28
seconds; from which it is concluded that the earth on which the gun was
placed did *not move* from its position during the 28 seconds the ball
was in the atmosphere. Had there been motion in the direction from west
to east, and at the rate of 600 miles per hour (the supposed velocity in
the latitude of England), the result would have been as shown in fig.
49. The ball, thrown by the powder in the direction A, C, and acted on
at the same moment by the earth's motion in the direction A, B, would
take the direction A, D; meanwhile the earth and the cannon would have
reached the position B, opposite to D. On the ball beginning to descend,
and during the time of its descent, the gun would have passed on to the
position S, and the ball would have dropped at B, a consider-able
distance behind the point S. As the average time of the ball's absence
in the atmosphere was 28 seconds--14 going upwards, and 14 in
falling--we have only to multiply the time by the supposed velocity of
the earth, and we find that instead of the ball coming down to within a
few inches of the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

muzzle of the gun, it should have fallen behind it a distance of 8400
feet, or more than a mile and a half! Such a result is utterly
destructive of the idea of the earth's possible rotation.

The reader is advised not to deceive himself by imagining that the ball
would take a parabolic course, like the balls and shells from cannon
during a siege or battle. The parabolic curve could only be taken by a
ball fired from a cannon inclined more or less from the vertical; when,
of course, gravity acting in an angular direction against the force of
the gunpowder, the ball would be forced to describe a parabola. But in
the experiment just detailed, the gun was fixed in a perfectly
*vertical* direction, so that the ball would be fired in a line the very
contrary to the direction of gravity. The force of the powder would
drive it directly upwards, and the force of gravity would pull it
directly downwards. Hence it could only go up in a right line, and down
or back to its starting point; it could not possibly take a path having
the slightest degree of curvature. It is therefore demanded that, if the
earth has a motion from west to east, a ball, instead of being dropped
down a mine, or allowed to fall from the top of a tower, shall be *shot
upwards* into the air, and from the moment of its beginning to descend,
the surface of the earth shall turn from under its direction, and it
would fall behind, or to the west of its line of descent. On making the
most exact experiments, however, *no such effect is observed;* and,
therefore, the conclusion is in every sense unavoidable, that THE EARTH
HAS NO MOTION OF ROTATION.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### EXPERIMENT 3.

When sitting in a rapidly-moving railway carriage, let a
spring-gun <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) be fired forward, or in the
direction in which the train is moving. Again, let the same gun be
fired, but in the opposite direction; and it will be found that the ball
or other projectile will always go farther in the first case than in the
latter.

If a person leaps backwards from a horse in full gallop, he cannot jump
so great a distance as he can by jumping forward. Leaping from a moving
sledge, coach, or other object, backwards or forwards, the same results
are experienced.

Many other practical cases could be cited to show that any body
projected from another body in motion, does not exhibit the same
behaviour as it does when projected from a body at rest. Nor are the
results the same when projected in the same direction as that in which
the body moves, as when projected in the opposite direction; because, in
the former case, the projected body receives its momentum from the
projectile force, *plus* that given to it by the moving body; and in the
latter case, this momentum, *minus* that of the moving body. Hence it
would be found that if the earth is a globe, and moving rapidly from
west to east, a cannon fired in a due easterly direction would send a
ball to a greater distance than it would if fired in a due westerly
direction. But the most experienced artillerymen--many of whom have had
great practice, both at home and abroad, in almost every latitude--have
declared that no difference whatever is

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

observable. That in charging and pointing their guns, no, difference in
the working is ever required, notwithstanding that the firing is at
every point of the compass. Gunners in war ships have noticed a
considerable difference in the results of their firing from guns at the
bow, when sailing rapidly towards the object fired at, and when firing
from guns placed at the stern while sailing away from the object: and in
both cases the results are different to those observed when firing from
a ship at perfect rest. These details of practical experience are
utterly incompatible with the supposition of a revolving earth.

During the period of the Crimean War, the subject of gunnery, in
connection with the earth's rotation, was one which occupied the
attention of many philosophers, as well as artillery officers and
statesmen. About this time, Lord Palmerston, as Prime Minister, wrote
the following letter to Lord Panmure, the Secretary for War:--

"December 20th, 1857.

"My dear Panmure.

"There is an investigation which it would be important and at the same
time easy to make, and that is, whether the rotation of the earth on its
axis has any effect on the curve of a cannon-ball in its flight. One
should suppose that it has, and that while the cannon-ball is flying in
the air, impelled by the gunpowder in a straight line from the cannon's
mouth, the ball would not follow the rotation of the earth in the same
manner which it would do if lying at rest on the earth's surface. If
this be so, a ball fired in the meridional direction--that is to say,
due south or due north--ought to deviate to the west of the object at
which it was.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

aimed, because during the time of flight, that object will have gone to
the east somewhat faster than the cannon-ball will have done. In like
manner, a ball fired due east, ought to fly less far upon the earth's
surface than a ball fired due west, the charges being equal, the
elevation the same, and the atmosphere perfectly still. It must be
remembered, however, that the ball, even after it has left the cannon's
mouth, will retain the motion from west to east which it had before
received by the rotation of the earth on whose surface it was; and it is
possible, therefore, that, except at very long ranges, the deviations
above mentioned may in practice turn out to be very small, and not
deserving the attention of an artilleryman. The trial might be easily
made in any place in which a free circle of a mile or more radius could
be obtained; and a cannon placed in the centre of that circle, and fired
alternately north, south, east, and west, with equal charges, would
afford the means of ascertaining whether each shot flew the same
distance or not.

"Yours sincerely,

"PALMERSTON."

The above letter was published, by Lord Dalhousie's permission, in the
"Proceedings of the Royal Artillery Institution for 1867."

It will be observed that Lord Palmerston thought that firing eastwards,
or in the direction of the earth's supposed rotation, the ball would
"fly less far upon the earth's surface than a ball fired due west." It
is evident that his Lordship did not allow for the extra impulse given
to the ball by the earth's motion. But the answer given by the advocates
of the theory of the earth's motion is the following: Admitting that a
ball fired from the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

earth *at rest* would go, say *two* miles, the same ball, fired from the
earth *in motion*, would go, say *three* miles; but during the time the
ball is passing through the air, the earth will *advance one* mile in
the *same direction*. This one mile deducted from the *three* miles
which the ball actually passes through the air, leaves the two miles
which the ball has passed in *advance* of the cannon; so that
*practically* the distance to which a ball is projected is precisely the
same upon a moving earth as it is upon the earth at rest. The following
diagram, fig. 50, will illustrate the path of a ball under the
conditions above described.

<span id="img_fig50"></span> ![FIG. 50.](img/fig50.jpg)  
FIG. 50.

Let the curved line A, B, represent the distance a ball would fly from a
cannon placed at A, upon the earth, *at rest*. Let A, C, represent the
distance the same ball would fly from the conjoint action of the powder
in the cannon, A, and the earth's rotation in the direction A, C. During
the time the ball would require to traverse the line A, C, the earth and
the cannon would arrive at the point D; hence the distance D, C, would
be the same as the distance A, B.

The above explanation is very ingenious, and would be perfectly
satisfactory if other considerations were not involved in it. For
instance, the above explanation does not *prove* the earth's motion--it
merely *supposes* it; but

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

as in all other cases where the result of supposition is explained, it
creates a dilemma. It demands that during the time the ball is in the
air, the cannon is advancing in the direction of the supposed motion of
the earth. But -this is granting the conditions required in the
experiments represented by figs. [47](#img_fig47), [48](#img_fig48), and
[49](#img_fig48). If the cannon can advance in the one case, it must in
the other; and as the result in the experiment represented at [fig.
49](#img_fig49), was that the ball, when fired vertically, essentially
returned to the vertical cannon; that cannon could not have advanced,
and therefore the earth could not have moved.

### EXPERIMENT 4.

Take a large grinding stone, and let the whole surface of the rim be
well rubbed over with a saturated solution of phosphorus in olive oil;
or cover the stone with several folds of coarse woollen cloth or
flannel, which saturate with boiling water. If it be now turned rapidly
round, by means of a multiplying wheel, the phosphoric vapour, or the
steam from the flannel, which surrounds it and which may be called its
atmosphere--analogous to the atmosphere of the earth--will be seen to
follow the direction of the revolving surface. Now the surface of the
earth is very irregular in its outline, mountains rising several miles
above the sea, and ranging for hundreds of miles in every possible
direction; rocks, capes, cliffs, gorges, defiles, caverns, immense
forests, and every other form of ruggedness and irregularity calculated
to adhere to and drag along whatever medium may exist upon it: and if it
is a globe revolving on its axis, with

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the immense velocity at the equator of more than a thousand miles an
hour, it is exceedingly difficult if not altogether impossible to
conceive of such a mass moving at such a rate, and yet not taking the
atmosphere along with it. When it is considered, too, that the medium
which it is said surrounds the earth and all the heavenly bodies, and
filling all the vast spaces between them, is almost too ethereal and
subtle to offer any sensible resistance, it is still more difficult to
understand how the atmosphere can be prevented being carried forward
with the earth's rapidly revolving surface. Study the details of
pneumatics or hydraulics as we may, we cannot suggest an experiment
which will show the possibility of such a thing. Hence we are compelled
to conclude that if the earth revolves, the atmosphere revolves also,
and in the same direction. If the atmosphere rushes forward from west to
east continually, we are again obliged to conclude that whatever floats
or is suspended in it, at any altitude, must of necessity partake of its
eastward motion. A piece of cork, or any other body floating in still
water, will be motionless, but let the water be put in motion, in any
direction whatever, and the floating bodies will move with it, in the
same direction and with the same velocity. Let the experiment be tried
in every possible way, and these results will invariable follow. Hence
if the earth's atmosphere is in constant motion from west to east, all
the different strata which are known to exist in it, and all the various
kinds of clouds and vapours which float in it must of mechanical
necessity move rapidly eastwards. But what is the fact? If we fix upon
any star as a standard or *datum* outside the visible atmosphere, we may
sometimes observe a *stratum* of clouds going for hours together in a
direction the very opposite to that in which the earth is supposed to be
moving. See fig. 51, which represents a section of a

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span id="img_fig51"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
51.](tn/fig51.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig51.jpg)  
Fig. 51.  
</span>

globe, surrounded with an atmosphere, moving at the rate of 1042 miles
an hour at the equator, and in the direction of the arrows 1, 2, 3,
while a stream of clouds are moving in the opposite direction, as
indicated by the arrows, 4, 5, 6. Not only may a stratum of clouds be
seen moving rapidly from east to west, but at the same moment other
strata may often be seen moving from north to south, and from south to
north. It is a fact well known to aeronauts, that several strata of
atmospheric air are often moving in as many different directions at the
same time. It is a knowledge of this fact which leads an experienced
aeronaut, when desiring to rise in a balloon, and to go in a certain
direction, not to regard the manner in which the wind is blowing on the
immediate surface of the earth, because he knows that at a greater
altitude, it may be going at right angles, or even in opposite and in
various ways simultaneously. To ascertain whether and at what altitude a
current is blowing in the desired direction, small, and so-called
"pilot-balloons" are often sent up and carefully observed in their
ascent. If during the passage of one of these through the variously
moving

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

strata, it is seen to enter a current which is going in the direction
desired by the aëronaut, the large balloon is then ballasted in such a
manner that it may ascend at once to the altitude of such current, and
thus to proceed on its journey.

On almost any moonlight and cloudy night, different *strata* may be seen
not only moving in different [directions](errata.htm#1) but, at the same
time, moving with different velocities; some floating past the face of
the moon rapidly and uniformly, and others passing gently along,
sometimes becoming stationary, then starting fitfully into motion, and
often standing still for minutes together. Some of those who have
ascended in balloons for scientific purposes have recorded that as they
have rapidly passed through the atmosphere, they have gone though strata
differing in temperature, in density, and in hygrometric, magnetic,
electric, and other conditions. These changes have been noticed both in
ascending and descending, and in going for miles together at the same
altitude.

<span class="small">"On the 27th November, 1839, the sky being very
clear, the planet Venus was seen near the zenith, notwithstanding the
brightness of the meridian sun. It enabled us to observe the higher
stratum of clouds to be moving in an *exactly opposite direction* to
that of the wind--a circumstance which is frequently recorded in our
meteorological journal both in the north-east and south-east trades, and
has also often been observed by former voyagers. Captain Basil Hall
witnessed it from the summit of the Peak of Teneriffe; and Count
Strzelechi, on ascending the volcanic mountain of Kiranea, in Owhyhee,
reached at 4000 feet an elevation above that of the trade wind, and
experienced the influence of an opposite current of air of a</span>

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="small">different hygrometric and thermometric condition. .
. . Count Strzelechi further informed me of the following seemingly
anomalous circumstance--that at the height of 6000 feet he found the
current of air blowing *at right angles to both the lower strata*, also
of a different hygrometric and thermometric condition, but warmer than
the inter-stratum." <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)</span>

Such a state of the atmosphere is compatible only with the fact which
other evidence has demonstrated, that *the earth is at rest*. Were it
otherwise-if a spherical mass of eight thousand miles in diameter, with
an atmosphere of only fifty miles in depth, or relatively only as a
sheet of note paper pasted upon a globe of one yard in diameter, and
lying upon a rugged, adhesive, rapidly revolving surface, there is
nothing to prevent such an atmosphere becoming a mingled homogeneous
mass of vapour.

Notwithstanding that all practical experience, and all specially
instituted experiments are against the possibility of a moving earth,
and an independent moving and non-moving atmosphere, many mathematicians
have endeavoured to "demonstrate" that with regard to this earth, such
was actually the case. The celebrated philosophic divine, Bishop
Wilkins, was reasoned by the theorists of his day into this belief; and,
in consequence, very naturally suggested a new and easy way of
travelling. He proposed that large balloons should be provided with
apparatus to work against the varying currents of the air. On ascending
to a proper altitude, the balloon was to be kept practically in a state
of rest, while the earth revolved underneath it; and when the desired
locality came into view, to stop the working of

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the fans, &c., to let out the gas, and drop down at once to the earth's
surface. In this simple way New York would be reached in a few hours, or
rather New York would reach the balloon, at the rate, in the latitude of
England, of more than 600 miles an hour.

The argument involved in the preceding remarks against the earth's
rotation has often been met by the following, at first sight, plausible
statement. A ship with a number of passengers going rapidly in one
continued direction, like the earth's atmosphere, could nevertheless
have upon its deck a number of distinctly and variously moving objects,
like the clouds in the atmosphere. The clouds in the atmosphere are
compared to the passengers on the deck of a ship; so far the cases are
sufficiently parallel, but the passengers are sentient beings, having
within themselves the power of distinct and independent motions: the
clouds are the reverse; and here the parallelism fails. One case is not
illustrative of the other, and the supposition of rotation in the earth
remains without a single fact or argument in its favour. Birds in the
air, or fish and reptiles in the water, would have offered a parallel
and illustrative case, but these, like the passengers on the ship's
deck, are sentient and independent beings; clouds and vapours are
dependent and non-sentient, and must therefore of necessity move with,
and in the direction of, the medium in which they float.

Everything actually observable in Nature; every argument furnished by
experiment; every legitimate process of reasoning; and, as it would
seem, everything which it is possible for the human mind practically to
conceive, combine

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

in evidence against the doctrine of the earth's motion upon axes.

ORBITAL MOTION.--The preceding experiments and remarks, logically and
mathematically suffice as evidence against the assumed motion of the
earth in an orbit round the sun. It is difficult, if not impossible, to
understand how the behaviour of the ball thrown from a vertical gun
should be other in relation to the earth's forward motion in space, than
it is in regard to its motion upon axes. Besides, it is demonstrable
that it does not move upon axes, and therefore, the assumption that it
moves in an orbit, is utterly useless for theoretical purposes. The
explanation of phenomena, for which the theory of orbital and diurnal
motion was framed, is no longer possible with a globular world rushing
through space in a vast elliptical orbit, but without diurnal rotation.
Hence the earth's supposed orbital motion is logically void, and
non-available, and there is really no necessity for either formally
denying it, or in any way giving it further consideration. But that no
point may be taken without direct and practical evidence, let the
following experiment be tried.

Take two carefully-bored metallic tubes, not less than six feet in
length, and place them one yard asunder, on the opposite sides of a
wooden frame, or a solid block of wood or stone: so adjust them that
their centres or axes of vision shall be perfectly parallel to each
other. The following diagram will show the arrangement.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="img_fig52"></span> ![Fig. 52.](img/fig52.jpg)  
Fig. 52.

Now, direct them to the plane of some notable fixed star, a few seconds
previous to its meridian time. Let an observer be stationed at each
tube, as at A, B; and the moment the star appears in the tube A, T, let
a loud knock or other signal be given, to be repeated by the observer at
the tube B, T, when he first sees the same star. A distinct period of
time will elapse between the signals given. The signals will follow each
other in very rapid succession, but still, the time between is
sufficient to show that the same star, S, is not visible at the same
moment by two parallel lines of sight A, S, and B, C, when only one yard
asunder. A slight inclination of the tube, B, C, towards the first tube
A, S, would be required for the star, S, to be seen through both tubes
at the same instant. Let the tubes remain in their position for six
months; at the end of which time the same observation or experiment will
produce the same results--the star, S, will be visible at the same
meridian time, without the slightest alteration being required in the
direction of the tubes: from which it is concluded that if the earth had
moved *one single yard* in an orbit through space, there would at least
be observed the slight inclination of the tube, B, C, which the
difference in position of one yard had previously required.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But as no such
difference in the direction of the tube B, C, is required, the
conclusion is unavoidable, that in six months a given meridian upon the
earth's surface does not move a single yard, and therefore, that the
earth has not the slightest degree of orbital motion.

Copernicus required, in his theory of terrestrial motions, that the
earth moved in an extensive elliptical path round the sun, as
represented in the following diagram, fig 53, where S is the

<span id="img_fig53"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
53.](tn/fig53.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig53.jpg)  
Fig. 53.  
</span>

sun, A, the earth in its place in June, and B, its position in December;
when desired to offer some proof of this orbital motion he suggested
that a given star should be selected for observation on a given date;
and in six months afterwards a second observation of the same star
should be made. The first observation A, D, fig. 53, was recorded; and
on observing again at the end of six months, when the earth was supposed
to have passed to B, the other side of its orbit, to the astonishment of
the assembled astronomers, the star was observed in exactly the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

same position, B, C, as it had been six months previously! It was
expected that it would be seen in the direction B, D, and that this
difference in the direction of observation would demonstrate the earth's
motion from A to B, and also furnish, with the distance A, S, B, the
elements necessary for calculating the actual distance of the star D.

The above experiment has many times been tried, and always with the same
general result. No difference whatever has been observed in the
direction of the lines of sight A, D, and B, C, whereas every known
principle of optics and geometry would require, that if the earth had
really moved from A to B, the *fixed star* D, should be seen in the
direction B, D. The advocates of this hypothesis of orbital motion,
instead of being satisfied, from the failure to detect a difference in
the angle of observation, that the earth could not possibly have changed
its position in the six months, were so regardless of all logical
consistency, that instead of admitting, and accepting the consequences,
they, or some of them, most unworthily declared that they could not
yield up the theory, on account of its apparent value in explaining
certain phenomena, but demanded that the star D, was so vastly distant,
that, notwithstanding that the earth *must have moved* from A to B, this
great change of position would not give a readable difference in the
angle of observation at B, or in other words the amount of parallax ("
annual parallax," it was called) was inappreciable!

Since the period of the above experiments, many have declared that a
very small amount of "annual parallax" has been detected. But the
proportion given by different observers has been so various, that
nothing definite and satisfactory can yet be decided upon. Tycho Brahe,
Kepler, and others, rejected the Copernican theory, principally

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

eon account of the failure to detect displacement or parallax of the
fixed stars. Dr. Bradley declared that what many had called "parallax,"
was merely "aberration." But "Dr. Brinkley, in 1810, from his
observations with a very fine circle in the Royal Observatory of Dublin,
*thought* he had detected a parallax of 1″ in the bright star Lyra
(corresponding to an annual displacement of 2″). This, however, proved
to be illusory; and it was not till the year 1839, that Mr. Henderson,
having returned from filling the situation of astronomer royal to the
Cape of Good Hope, and discussing as series of observations made there
with a large "mural circle," of the bright star, α Centauri, was enabled
to announce as a positive fact the existence of a measurable parallax
for that star, a result since fully confirmed with a *very trifling
correction* by the observations of his successor, Sir T. Maclear. The
parallax thus assigned α Centauri, is so very nearly a whole second in
amount (0″.98), that we may speak of it as such. It corresponds to a
distance from the sun of 18,918,000,000,000 British statute miles.

"Professor Bessel made the parallax of a star in the constellation
Cygnus to be 0″.35. Later astronomers, going over the same ground, with
more perfect instruments, and improved practice in this very delicate
process 'of observation, have found a somewhat larger result, stated by
one at 0″.57, and by another at 0″.51, so that we may take it at 0″.54,
corresponding to somewhat less than twice the distance of a
Centauri;" <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) or to nearly 38 billions of
miles.

It might seem to a non-scientific mind that the differences

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

above referred to of only a few fractions of a second in the parallax of
a star, constitute a very slight amount; but in reality such differences
involve differences in the distance of such stars of millions of miles,
as will be seen by the following quotation from the *Edinburgh Review*
for June, 1850:--

"The rod used in measuring a base line is commonly ten feet long; and
the astronomer may be said only to apply this very rod to measure the
distance of the fixed stars! An error in, placing a *fine dot*, which
fixes the length of the rod, amounting to one five-thousandth part of an
inch, will amount to an excess, of 70 feet in the earth's diameter; of
316 miles in the sun's distance, and to 65,200,000 miles in that of the
*nearest fixed star*!

"The second point to which we would advert is, that as the astronomer in
his observatory has nothing to do with ascertaining length as distances,
except by calculation, his whole skill and artifice are exhausted in the
measurement of angles. For it is by these alone that spaces inaccessible
can be compared. Happily *a ray of light is straight*. Were it not so
(in celestial spaces at least) there were an end of our astronomy. It is
as inflexible as adamant, which our instruments unfortunately are not.
Now an angle of *a second* (3600 to a degree), is a subtle thing, it is
an apparent breadth, utterly invisible to the unassisted eye, unless
accompanied by so intense a splendour (as in the case of the fixed
stars) as actually to raise by its effect on the nerve of sight a
spurious image, having a sensible breadth. A silkworm's fibre subtends
an angle of one second at 3½ feet distance. A ball 2½ inches in diameter
must be removed in order to subtend an angle of one second, to 43,000
feet, or about 8 miles; while it would be utterly invisible to the
sharpest sight aided even by a telescope of some power. Yet it is on the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span class="small">measurement of *one single second* that the
*ascertainment* of a *sensible parallax in any fixed star depends*; and
an error of one-thousandth of that amount (a quantity still immeasurable
by the most perfect of our instruments) would place a fixed star *too
far* or *too near* by 200,000,000,000 of miles."</span>

Sir John Herschel says:--

<span class="small">"The observations require to be made with the very
best instruments, with the minutest attention to everything which can
affect their precision, and with the most rigorous application of an
innumerable host of 'corrections,' some large, some small, but of which
the smallest, neglected or erroneously applied, would be quite
sufficient to overlay and conceal from view the minute quantity we are
in search of. To give some idea of the delicacies which have to be
attended to in this inquiry, it will suffice to mention that the
stability not only of the instruments used and the masonry which
supports them, but of the very rock itself on which it is founded, is
found to be subject to annual fluctuations capable of seriously
affecting the result."</span>

Dr. Lardner, in his "Museum of Science," page 179, makes use of the
following words

<span class="small">"Nothing in the whole range of astronomical research
has more baffled the efforts of observers than this question of the
parallax. \* \* \* Now, since, in the determination of the exact
uranographical position of a star, there are a multitude of disturbing
effects to be taken into account and eliminated, such as precession,
nutation, aberration, refraction, and others, besides the proper motion
of the star; and since, besides the errors of observation, the
quantities of these are subject to more or less uncertainty, it will
astonish no one to be told that they may en-tail upon the final result
of the calculation, an error of 1″; and</span>

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="small">if they do, it is vain to expect to discover such a
residual phenomenon as parallax, the entire amount of which is less than
one second."</span>

The complication, uncertainty, and unsatisfactory state of the question
of annual parallax, and therefore of the earth's motion in an orbit
round the sun, as indicated by the several paragraphs above quoted, are
at once and for ever annihilated by the simple fact, experimentally
demonstrable, that upon a base line of only a single yard, there may be
found a parallax, as certain and as great, if not greater, than that
which astronomers pretend to find with the diameter of the earth's
supposed orbit of many millions of miles as a base line. To place the
whole matter, complicated, uncertain, and unsatisfactory as it is, in a
concentrated form, it is only necessary to state as an absolute truth
the result of actual experiment, that, a given fixed star will, when
observed from the two ends of a base line of not more than three feet,
give a parallax equal to that which it is said is observed only from the
two extremities of the earth's orbit, a distance or base line, of one
hundred and eighty millions of miles! So far, then, from the earth
having passed in six months over the vast space of nearly two hundred
millions of miles, the combined observations of all the astronomers of
the whole civilized world have only resulted in the discovery of such
elements, or such an amount of annual parallax, or sidereal
displacement, as an actual change of position of a few feet will
produce. It is useless to say, in explanation, that this very minute
displacement, is owing to the almost infinite distance of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the fixed stars; because the *very same stars* show an equal degree of
parallax from a very minute base line; and, secondly, it will be proved
from practical data, in a subsequent chapter, that all the luminaries in
the firmament are only a few thousand miles from the surface of the
earth.

<span id="img_goatsep"></span> ![](img/goatsep.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[69:1](za21.htm#fr_7) The barrel containing a
spiral spring, so that the projecting force will always be the same,
which might not be so with gunpowder.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[77:1](za21.htm#fr_8) "South Sea Voyages," p. 14,
vol. i. By Sir James Clarke Ross, R.N.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[83:1](za21.htm#fr_9) Sir John F. W. Herschel,
Bart., in "Good Words."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The True Form and Magnitude of the Earth](za22)
