[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za35)  [Next](za37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOSS OF TIME ON SAILING WESTWARD.

Captain Sir J. C. Ross, at p. 132 of his "Antarctic Voyages," says:--

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="small">"November 25th. Having by sailing to the eastward
gained 12 hours, it became necessary, on crossing the 180th degree, and
entering upon west longitude, in order to have our time correspond with
that of England, to have two days following of the same date, and by
this means lose the time we had gained, and still were gaining as we
sailed to the eastward!"</span>

The gaining and losing of time on sailing "round the world" east and
west, is generally referred to as another proof of the earth's
rotundity. But it is equally as fallacious as the argument drawn from
circumnavigation, and from the same cause, namely, the assumption that
on a globe only will such a result occur. It will be seen by reference
to the following diagram, fig. 88, that such an effect must arise
equally upon a plane as upon a globe.

<span id="img_fig88"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
88.](tn/fig88.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig88.jpg)  
FIG. 88.  
</span>

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="small">Let V, represent a vessel on the meridian of
Greenwich V, N; and ready to start on a voyage eastward; and S,
represent the sun moving in an opposite direction, or westward. It is
evident that the vessel and the sun being on the same meridian on a
given day, if the ship should be stationary the sun would go round in
the direction of the arrows, and would meet it again in 24 hours. But
if, during the next 24 hours, the ship has sailed to the position X, say
45 degrees of longitude eastward, the sun in its course would meet it
three hours earlier than before, or in 21 hours--because 15 degrees of
longitude correspond to one hour of time. Hence three hours would be
gained. The next day, while the sun is going its round the vessel will
have arrived at Y, meeting it 6 hours sooner than it would have done had
it remained at V, and, in the same way, continuing its course eastward,
the vessel would at length meet the sun at Z, twelve hours earlier than
if it had remained at V; and thus passing successively over the arcs 1,
2, and 3, to V, or the starting point, 24 hours, or one day will have
been gained. But the contrary follows if the ship sails in the opposite
direction. The sun having to come round to the meridian of Greenwich V,
S, N, in 24 hours, and the ship having in that time moved on to the
position fig. 3, will have to overtake the ship at that position, and
thus be three hours longer in reaching it. In this way the sun is more
and more behind the meridian time of the ship as it proceeds day after
day upon its westerly course, so that on completing the
circum-navigation the ship's time is one day later than the solar time,
reckoning to and from the meridian of Greenwich.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Declination of the Pole Star](za37)
