[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za40)  [Next](za42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

### SPHERICITY INEVITABLE FROM SEMI-FLUIDITY.

An argument for the earth's rotundity is thought, by many, to be found
in the following facts:

"Fluid or semi-fluid substances in a state of motion invariably assume
the globular form, as instanced in rain, hail, dew, mercury, and melted
lead, which, poured from a great height, as in the manufacture of small
shot, becomes divided into spherical masses."

"There is abundant evidence, from geology, that the earth has been a
fluid or semi-fluid mass, and it could not, therefore, continue in a
state of motion through space without becoming spherical."

In the first place, in reply to the above, it is denied that hail is
always globular. On examination immediately after or during a
hail-storm, the masses present every variety of form, and very few are
found perfectly globular. Rain and dew cannot so well be examined during
their fall, but when standing on hard surfaces in minute quantities,
they generally appear spherical, a result simply of "attraction of
cohesion." The same of mercury; and in reference to the formation of
shot, by pouring melted lead from the top of a very high tower into cold
water, it is a mistake to suppose that all, or even a large proportion,
is converted into truly spherical masses. From twenty to fifty per cent.
of the masses formed are very irregular in shape, and have to be
returned to the crucible for re-melting. In addition to which it may be
remarked, that the tendency in falling fluids to become globular is
owing to what, in chemical works, is called "attraction of cohesion"
(not "attraction of gravitation "), which is very

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

limited in its operation. Its action is confined to small quantities of
matter. If, in the manufacture of shot, the melted metal is allowed to
fall in masses of several ounces or pounds, instead of being divided (by
pouring through a sieve or "cullender" with small holes) into particles
weighing only a few grains, it will never take a spherical form. Shot of
an inch diameter could not be made by this process; bullets of even half
an inch can only be made by casting the metal into spherical moulds. In
tropical countries the rain, instead of falling in drops, or small
globules, often comes down in large irregular masses or gushes, which
have no approximation whatever to sphericity. So that it is manifestly
unjust to affirm, of large masses like the earth, that which attaches
only to minute portions, or a few grains, of matter.

Without denying that the earth has been, at some former period, or was,
when it first existed, in a pulpy or semi-fluid state, it is requisite
to prove beyond all doubt that it has a motion through space, or the
conclusion that it is therefore spherical is premature, and very
illogical. It should also be proved that it has motion upon axes, or it
is equally contrary to every principle of reasoning to affirm that the
equatorial is greater than the polar diameter, as the inevitable result
of the centrifugal force produced by its axial or diurnal rotation. The
assumption of such conditions by Sir Isaac Newton, as we have seen when
speaking of the measurement of arcs of the meridian, was contrary to
evidence, and led to and maintains a "muddle of mathematics" such as
philosophers will, sooner or later, be ashamed of. The whole matter,

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

taken together, entirely fails as an argument for the earth's rotundity.
It has been demonstrated that axial and orbital motion do not exist,
and, therefore, any argument founded upon and including them as facts is
necessarily fallacious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Degrees of Longitude](za42)
