[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za51)  [Next](za53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the *Liverpool Mercury* of May 23, 1851, the following letter
appeared:

### THE SUPPOSED MANIFESTATION OF THE ROTATION OF THE EARTH.

"SIR,--The French, English, and European continental journals have given
publicity to an experiment made in Paris with a pendulum; which
experiment is said to have had the same results when made elsewhere. To
the facts set forth no contradiction has been given, and it is therefore
to be hoped that they are true. The correctness of the inferences drawn
from the facts is another matter. The first position of these theorists
is, that in a complete vacuum, beyond the sphere of the earth's
atmosphere, a pendulum will continue to oscillate in one and the same
original plane. On that supposition their whole theory is founded. In
making this supposition the fact is overlooked that there *is no
vibratory motion* unless through atmospheric resistance, or by force
opposing impulse. Perpetual progress in rectilinear motion may be
imagined, as in the corpuscular theory of light; circular motion may
also be found in the planetary systems; and parabolic and hyperbolic
motions in those of comets; but vibration is artificial and of limited
duration. No body in nature returns the same road it went, unless

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

artificially constrained to do so. The supposition of a permanent
vibratory motion, such as is presumed in the theory advanced, is
*unfounded in fact* and absurd in idea; and the whole affair of this
proclaimed discovery falls to the ground.

"T."                      

Another writer declared that he and others had made many experiments,
and had discovered that the plane of vibration had nothing whatever to
do with the meridian longitude, nor with the earth's motion, but
followed the plane of the magnetic meridian.

The *Liverpool Mercury*, of May 17th, 1851, contains the following

<span class="small">"A scientific gentleman in Dundee recently tried the
pendulum experiment, and he says 'that the pendulum is capable of
showing the earth's motion, I regard as a gross delusion; but that, it
tends to the *magnetic meridian* I have found to be a fact.'"</span>

In many cases the experiments have not shown a change at all in the
plane of oscillation of the pendulum; in others the alteration has been
in the wrong direction, and very often the rate of variation has been
altogether different--too fast or too slow--to that which theory
indicated. The following is a case in illustration:--

<span class="small">"On Wednesday evening the Rev. H. H. Jones,
F.R.A.S., exhibited the apparatus of Foucault to illustrate the diurnal
rotation of the earth, in the Library Hall of the Manchester Athenæum.
The preparations were simple. A circle of chalk was drawn in the centre
of the floor, immediately under the arched skylight. The circle was
exactly 360 inches in its circumference,</span>

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

<span class="small">every inch being intended to represent one degree.
According to a calculation Mr. Jones had made, and which he \_ produced
to the Philosophical Society six weeks ago, the plane of oscillation of
the pendulum would, at Manchester, diverge about one degree in five
minutes, or perhaps a very little less. He therefore drew this circle
exactly 360 inches round, and marked the inches on its circumference.
The pendulum was hung from the skylight, immediately over the centre of
the circle, the point of suspension being 25 feet high. At that length
of wire it should require 2½ seconds to make each oscillation across the
circle. The brazen ball, which at the end of a fine wire constituted the
pendulum, was furnished with a point, to enable the spectator to observe
the more easily its course. A long line was drawn through the diameter
of the circle, due north and south, and the pendulum started so as to
swing exactly along this line; to the westward of which, at intervals of
three inches at the circumference, two other lines were drawn, passing
through the centre. According to the theory, the pendulum should diverge
from its original line towards the west, at the rate of one inch or
degree in five minutes. This, however, Mr. Jones explained, was a
perfection of accuracy only attainable in a vacuum, and rarely could be
approached where the pendulum had to pass through an atmosphere subject
to disturbances; besides, it was difficult to avoid giving it some
slight lateral bias at starting. In order to obviate this as much as
possible, the steel wire was as fine as would bear the weight, 1-30th of
an inch thick; and the point of suspension was adjusted with delicate
nicety. An iron bolt was screwed into the framework of the skylight,
into it a brass nut was inserted; the wire passed through the nut (the
hollow sides of which were bell-shaped, in order to give it fair play),
and at the top the wire ended in a globular piece, there being</span>

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="small">also a fine screw to keep it from slipping. . . .
The pendulum was gently drawn up to one side, at the southern end of the
diametrical line, and attached by a thread to something near. When it
hung quite still the thread was burnt asunder, and the pendulum began to
oscillate to and fro across the circle; before it had been going on
quite seven minutes it had reached nearly the third degree towards the
west, whereas it ought to have occupied a quarter of an hour in getting
thus far from its starting line, even making no allowance for the
resistance of the atmosphere." <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133)</span>

Besides the irregularities so often observed in the time .and direction
of the pendulum vibrations, and which are quite sufficient to render
them worthless as evidence of the earth's motion, the use which the
Newtonian astronomers made of the general fact that the plane of
oscillation is variable, was most unfair and illogical. It is true that
the advocates of a globular and revolving world had no single fact or
experiment which they could point to as proof of their theory, and "a
desire has always been felt that some method could be devised of
rendering this rotation palpable to the senses. Even the illustrious
Laplace participated in this feeling, and has left it on record;
'although,' he says, 'the rotation of the earth is now established with
all the certainty which the physical sciences require, still a *direct
proof* of that phenomenon ought to interest both geometricians and
astronomers.' No man ever knew the laws of the planetary motions better
than Laplace, and before penning such a sentence it is probable that he
had turned the subject in his mind, and without

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

discovering any process by which the object could be attained." <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134)

This acknowledged absence of any "direct proof'' of the earth's rotation
evidently created a premature rejoicing when it was announced from Paris
that at length an experiment had been hit upon which would render it
"palpable to the senses." A trumpet-tone proclaimed to the scientific
world that at length, after centuries of groping speculation, a visible
proof of the earth's diurnal motion had been discovered; that what had
remained for generations a pure assumption, was now found to be a
mechanical fact. It was obtruded and commented upon--never logically
discussed, in every journal, both scientific and literary, as well as
merely miscellaneous, in almost every part of the world. The pride and
exultation of astronomers became almost unbounded, and heedless of
restraint. But after a time their clamorous triumph over all who had
doubted the truthfulness of the Newtonian system suddenly ceased. The
blinding meteor had fallen into the sea and become extinguished. A
deceptive theory had allured them into a morass of false and illogical
reasoning. They had long before assumed that the earth had diurnal
rotation; and now, instead of admitting the simple fact that the
pendulum, under certain conditions, did not maintain its original plane
of vibration, they again, contrary to every principle of justice and
reason, recklessly dared to *assume* that it was not the pendulum at
all, but the earth underneath it which "parted company," and moved away
to the west.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

The motion of the earth was *first assumed* to exist; and when there
still was no visible sign of motion, they again *assumed* that their
*first* assumption was right, and affirmed that that which really and
visibly moved *could not* be moving, because that which could not be
seen or proved to move *must* be in motion according to their theory or
first assumption! The pendulum, as though a living creature, conscious
of unbearable defamation, subsequently became so irregular in its
behaviour that the astronomers did and were glad to disown it as an ally
or friend of their calumnious philosophy. They struggled fiercely to
retain its peculiarities as a proof of their groundless assumptions, but
the battle was short and decisive. The pendulum ignored the connection;
and the scientific world was compelled to submit to a divorce, and to
acknowledge defeat. Their reasoning had been dexterous, but false and
devious. A greater violation of the laws of investigation was never
perpetrated. The whole subject, as developed and applied by the
theoretical philosophers, was to the fullest degree unreasonable and
absurd--not a "jot or tittle" better than the "reasoning" contained in
the following letter:--

"TO THE EDITOR OF 'PUNCH.'

"SIR,--Allow me to call your serious and polite attention to the
extraordinary phenomenon demonstrating the rotation of -the earth, which
I at this present moment experience, and you yourself, or anybody else,
I have not the slightest doubt, would be satisfied of, under similar
circumstances. Some sceptical and obstinate individuals may doubt that
the earth's motion is visible, but I say from personal observation it's
a positive fact.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

I don't care about latitude or longitude, or a vibratory pendulum
revolving round the sine of a tangent, on a spherical surface, nor axes,
nor apsides, nor anything of the sort. That is all rubbish. All I know
is I see the ceiling of this coffee-room. going round. I perceive this
distinctly with the naked eye--only my sight has been sharpened by a
slight stimulant. I write after my sixth go of brandy-and-water, whereof
witness, my hand.

"SWIGGINS.

"Goose and Gridiron, May 5, 1851.

"P.S.--Why do two waiters come when I only call one?" <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135)

The whole matter, as handled by the astronomical theorists, is fully
deserving of the ridicule implied in the above quotation. But because
great ingenuity and much thought and devotion have been manifested in
connection with it, and the general public thereby greatly deceived, it
is necessary that the subject should be fairly and seriously examined.
What are the facts as developed by numerous, and often-repeated
experiments?

FIRSTLY,--When a pendulum, constructed according to plan of M. Foucault
is allowed to vibrate, its plane of the vibration is often stationary
and often variable. The variation is not uniform--is not always the same
in the same place; nor the same in its rate, or velocity, or in its
direction. This great variability in its behaviour is not compatible
with the assumption of an earth or world globular in form and moving
with uniform velocity. It cannot therefore be taken as evidence; for
that which is inconstant is inadmissible, and not to be relied on. Hence
it is not evidence, and nothing is proved or decided by its
consideration.

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

SECONDLY.--Admitting the plane of vibration as changeable, where is the
connection between such change and the supposed motion of the earth?
What principle of reasoning guides the experimenter to the conclusion
that it is the earth which moves underneath the pendulum; and not the
pendulum which moves over the earth? What logical right or necessity
forces one conclusion in preference to the other?

THIRDLY.--Why was not the peculiar arrangement of the point of
suspension of the pendulum specially considered in regard to its
possible influence on the plane of oscillation? Was it not known, or was
it overlooked, or was it, in the climax of theoretical revelry,
ignored--thought unworthy of consideration--that a "ball-and-socket"
joint, or a globular point of suspension on a plane surface, is one
which facilitates *circular* motion more readily than any other, and
that a pendulum so suspended (as M. Foucault's) could not, after passing
over one arc of vibration, return through the same arc without many
chances to one that its globular point of suspension would slightly turn
or twist on its bed, and therefore give to the return or backward
oscillation a slight change of direction? Changes in the electric and
magnetic conditions of the atmosphere, as well as alterations in its
density, temperature, and hygrometric state may all tend in addition to
the peculiar mode of suspension, to make the pendulum oscillate in
irregular directions. So far, then, as we have been able to trace the
subject, we are compelled by the evidence obtained to deny that the
variations observed in the oscillations of a freely vibrating pendulum
have any connection whatever with

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

the motion or non-motion of the surface over which it vibrates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[307:1](za52.htm#fr_133) "Manchester Examiner,"
supplement, May 24, 1851.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[308:1](za52.htm#fr_134) "The Scotsman," a
scientific article, by the editor, Mr. Charles Maclaren.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[310:1](za52.htm#fr_135) "Punch," May 10, 1851.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Railways, and ''Earth's Centrifugal Force''](za53)
