[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za52)  [Next](za54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RAILWAYS, AND "EARTH'S CENTRIFUGAL FORCE."

<span class="small">"Another proof of the diurnal motion of the earth
has been made manifest since the introduction of railways. On railways
running due north and south in the northern hemisphere, it is found that
there is a greater tendency in the carriages to run off the line to the
right than to the left of a person proceeding from the north to the
south, or from the south to the north in the northern hemisphere. And
this is the case in all parts of the world on lines of railways so
placed, whether they are long or short."</span>

The above quotation is mostly assertion. The author gives no proof of
his statement, and therefore any one has a right to contradict him
without giving his reasons. It is true that writers, in their anxiety to
furnish some kind of practical evidence in support of their theory of
diurnal motion, have occasionally vented their thoughts on this subject
in local journals, but they seem to be uncertain whether the few cases
they have referred to are really such as would satisfy any scientific
investigator. The author has made many inquiries from practical men
connected with several of the leading railways which run north and south
in Great Britain, but has never received any corroboration of such an
idea. In more than one instance the most thoroughly practical men, some
who have run hundreds of miles every day for many years, have smiled
almost contemptuously at hearing that such a notion had ever entered the
head of any reasoning person. It certainly has been found that in some
places the winds prevail

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

in one direction more than another, and at such times a tendency to
deflection has been noticed; but it has been observed almost as often in
one direction as in another, and therefore the possibility of any
influence arising from diurnal rotation is looked upon as merely a
dream. If the earth really does move on axes, objects in motion on its
surface would manifest an unmistakeable degree of deflection from a
right line running north and south; but nothing of the kind is
practically observable, therefore the earth *does not* move diurnally.
Thus, as ever, theory, when standing against fact, must, sooner or
later, be extinguished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deflection of Falling Bodies](za54)
