[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za58)  [Next](za60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES.

THE Copernican or Newtonian theory of astronomy requires that the "axis
of the earth is inclined 23° 28´ to that of the ecliptic."

<span class="small">"And from observation it is found that the sun does
not every year cut the equator in the same point. If on a certain day he
cuts the equator at a certain point, on the same day in the next year he
cuts it at another point situated 50″.103 west of the former, and thus
arrives at the equinox 20´ 23″ before having completed his revolution in
the heavens, or passed from one fixed star to another. Thus the tropical
year, or the true year of the seasons, is shorter than the sidereal
year. . . . Retrograding every year 50″.103 to the west, the
equinoxes</span>

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<span class="small">make a complete revolution in 25,868 years. Thus the
first point of Aries which formerly corresponded to the vernal equinox,
is now 30° more to the west, though by a convention amongst astronomers
it always answers to the equinox. . . . This change in the obliquity of
the equator to the ecliptic is confirmed by the observations of ancient
astronomers, and by calculation. We can convince ourselves of it by
comparing the actual situation of the stars with respect to the ecliptic
to that which they occupied in the earliest times. Thus we find that
those which, according to the testimony of the ancients, were situated
north of the ecliptic, near the summer solstice, are now more advanced
towards the north, and have receded from this plane; that those which
were south of the ecliptic, near the summer solstice, have approached
this plane; and that some have passed into it, and even beyond it, on
their course northward. The contrary changes take place near the winter
solstice." <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138)</span>

That the sun does not "cut the equator" every year in the same point,
and that "the stars which were, in earliest times, situated north of the
summer solstice, are now, in relation to the sun's position, more
advanced towards the north," cannot be doubted; but because the earth is
not a globe, and neither rotates on axes nor moves in an orbit round the
sun, these changes cannot be attributed to what has been called the
"precession of the equinoxes, It has been found, as stated at page
[105](za24.htm#page_105)-9 of this work, that the path of the sun is
always over the earth, and concentric with the northern centre, and that
the distance of the annual path has been gradually increasing ever since
observations have been made--more than a quarter of a

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

century. And when we consider that in Great Britain, and countries still
more to the north, evidences have been found of a more tropical
condition having once existed, we are forced to the conclusion that this
gradual enlargement of the sun's course has been going on for centuries;
and that at a former period the northern centre, and places such as
Greenland, Iceland, Siberia, &c., at no great distance from it, have
been tropical regions.

"People have dug down in the earth in Scotland, and in Canada--colder
still--nay, even on the icy shores of Baffin's Bay; and on Melville
Island, the most northern region of the earth that has ever been reached
by man, there have been found--what? magnificent buried forests, and
gigantic trees, which could only live now in the warmest countries of
our earth--palm trees, and immense ferns, which, in our day, have
scarcely light and heat enough to grow, even in the torrid zone." <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139)

"It is well known, as a matter of history, that when Green-land was
discovered, it possessed a much warmer climate than it does at present.
The ice packs have been extending south from the polar regions for some
centuries. The cause of this is not well understood, the fact only is
known." <span id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140)

As a natural result of the same enlargement of the sun's path, the south
must have been gradually changing--its frost and darkness diminishing;
and many have declared that such is really the fact.

<span class="small">"This climate appears to be in general much more
temperate now (1822) than it was forty years ago. . . . Immense bodies
of ice were then annually found in the latitude of 50° S.</span>

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">During the three voyages which I have made in these seas,
I have never seen southern ice drifting to the northward of South
Georgia (54° S.) Great changes must therefore have taken place in the
south polar ice." <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141)</span>

When comparing the accounts of voyages, both to the north and south,
made by the earliest navigators, with the statements made by those of
recent periods, many incidental proofs are found of the increase of cold
in the arctic regions, and corresponding decrease in the
[antarctic](errata.htm#11). Hence we find that the various changes which
have been attributed to the "procession of the equinoxes," are really
due to the sun's gradually increasing distance from the northern centre,
and his advance towards the south. How long the sun's path has been
moving southwards, or how near it was to the polar centre when the
advance commenced, or whether it was once vertical there, are questions
which cannot yet be answered. If ever the sun had a vertical position
over the northern centre there could not, of course, be alternations of
heat and cold, or day and night, but one perpetual day and tropical
summer. It is evident then that ever since day and night commenced, the
sun must have moved in a concentric path at some distance from the polar
centre; but because the path was much nearer than it is at the present
day, the whole of the northern region must have been tropical, with long
days, and scarcely darkness during the nights; but long continued day,
gently gliding into evening or twilight, and summer alternating with
spring and autumn, but never with darkness and winter. Hence,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

with so much day and so little night, such gentle alternations of
temperature, and the sun-light almost continually playing at a
considerable altitude, this region must have teemed with animal and
vegetable life of the most beautiful character. Everything must have
been developed with the most perfect structure, the most brilliant
colours, the greatest physical powers, and the most intense moral and
mental capacities. Such a region could not be less than a paradise, as
beautiful and perfect as any ever recorded in the sacred books of
ancient theologists, or of which it is possible for the human mind even
now to conceive. There are frequent and singular references to be found
in the sacred books, legends, and poems, of various nations, to the
north as having been the abode of happy, powerful, and highly
intelligent beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[324:1](za58.htm#fr_137) "Lecture on
Astronomy," p. 105, by M. Arago.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[325:1](za59.htm#fr_138) "Lectures on
Astronomy," by M. Arago.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[326:1](za59.htm#fr_139) "Professor L. Gaussen
"World's Birthday," p. 174.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[326:2](za59.htm#fr_140) "London Journal,"
February 14, 1857.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[327:1](za59.htm#fr_141) "Voyages to the
South," by Captain James Weddell, F.R.S.E., p. 95.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Planet Neptune](za60)
