[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za62)  [Next](za64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

### MOON TRANSPARENT.

IT is more than three centuries and a half since Fernando de Magulhane
observed that the moon, during a solar eclipse, was not perfectly
opaque. He says:--

<span class="small">"On the forenoon of October 11th, 1520, an eclipse
of the sun was expected. At eight seconds past ten a.m. the sun, having
then reached the altitude of 42°, began to lose its brightness, and
gradually continued so to do, changing to a dark red colour, without any
cloud intervening that could be perceived. No part of the body of the
sun was hid, but the whole appeared as when seen through a thick smoke,
till it passed the altitude of 44½°, after which it recovered its former
lustre." <span id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149)</span>

During a partial solar eclipse the sun's outline has many times been
seen through the body of the moon. But those who have been taught to
believe that the moon is a solid opaque sphere, are ever ready with
"explanations," often of the most inconsistent character, rather than
acknowledge the simple fact of semi-transparency. Not only has this been
proved by the visibility of the sun's outline through segments, and
sometimes the very centre, of the moon, but often, at new moon, the
outline of the whole, and even the several shades of light on the
opposite and illuminated part have been distinctly seen. In other words
we are often able to see through the dark side of the moon's body the
light on the other side.

<span class="small">"In this faint light the telescope can distinguish
both the larger spots, and also bright shining points, and even when
more than half the moon's disc is illuminated, a faint grey</span>

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<span class="small">light can still be seen on the remaining portion by
the aid of the telescope. These phenomena are particularly striking when
viewed from the high mountain plateaus of Quito and Mexico." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150)</span>

Many have laboured hard to make it appear that these phenomena are the
result of what they have assumed to be light reflected from the
earth--"Earth light," "the reflection of a reflection." The sun's light
thrown back from the moon to the earth and returned from the earth to
the moon! It seems never to have occurred to these "students of
imagination" that this so-called "earth-light" is most intense when the
moon is youngest, and therefore illuminates the earth the least. When
the operating cause is least intense, the effect is much the greatest!

Besides the fact that when the moon is only a few hours old, and
sometimes until past the first quarter, the naked eye is able to see
through her body to the light shining on the other side, both fixed
stars and planets have been seen through a considerable part of her
substance, as proved by the following quotations

<span class="small">"On the 15th of March, 1848, when the moon was seven
and a half days old, I never saw her *unillumined* disc so beautifully.
. . . On my first looking into the telescope a star of about the 7th
magnitude was some minutes of a degree distant from the moon's dark
limb. I saw that its occultation by the moon was inevitable. . . . The
star, instead of disappearing the moment the moon's edge came in contact
with it, apparently glided on the moon's dark face, as if it had been
seen *through a transparent moon*; or, as if a star were between me and
the moon. . . .</span>

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

I have seen a similar apparent projection several times. . . . The cause
of this phenomenon is involved in impenetrable mystery." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151)

"Occultation of Jupiter by the moon, on the 24th of May, 1860, by Thomas
Gaunt, Esq. 'I send you the following account as seen by me at Stoke
Newington. The observation was made with an achromatic of 3.3 inches
aperture, 50 inches focus; the immersion with a power of 50, and the
emersion with a power of 70. At the immersion I could not see the dark
limb of the moon until the planet appeared to touch it, and then only to
the extent of the diameter of the planet; but what I was most struck
with was the appearance on the moon as it passed over the planet. It
appeared as though the planet was a dark object, and glided on to the
moon instead of behind it; and the appearance continued until the planet
was hid, when I suddenly lost the dark limb of the moon
altogether.'" <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152)

"Occultation of Jupiter by the moon, May 24, 1860, observed by T. W.
Burr, Esq., at Highbury. The planet's first limb disappeared at 8h. 44m.
6.7s., the second limb disappeared at 8h. 45m. 4.9s. local sidereal
time, on the moon's dark limb. The planet's first limb reappeared at 9h.
55m. 48s.; the second limb reappeared at 9h. 56m. 44.7s., at the bright
limb. The planet was well seen, notwithstanding the strong sunlight (4h.
34m. Greenwich mean time), but of course without any belts. The moon's
dark limb could not be detected until it touched the planet, when it was
seen very sharply defined and black; and as it passed the disc of
Jupiter in front appeared to brighten. So that the moon's limb was
preceded by a bright band of light, doubtless an effect of
contrast." <span id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_153)

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

"Occultation of the Pleiades, December 8, 1859, observed at the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich; communicated by the Astronomer Royal. Observed
by Mr. Dunkin with the alt-azimuth, the disappearance of 27 *Tauri* was
a most singular phenomenon; the star appeared to *move a considerable
time along the moon's limb*, and disappeared behind a prominence at the
first time noted (5h. 34m.); in a few seconds it re-appeared, and
finally disappeared at the second time noted (5h. 35m.)."

"Observed by Mr. Criswich, with the north equatorial, 27 *Tauri* was
*not occulted at all*, though it passed so close to some of the
illuminated peaks of the dark limb as hardly to be distinguished from
them." <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154)

In the "Philosophical Transactions" for 1794 it is stated:--

<span class="small">Three persons in Norwich, and one in London, saw a
star on the evening of March 7th, 1794, in the dark part of the moon,
which had not then attained the first quadrature; and from the
representations which are given the star must have appeared very far
advanced upon the disc. On the same evening there was an occultation of
*Aldebaran*, which Dr. Maskelyne thought a singular coincidence, but
which would now be acknowledged as the cause of the phenomenon." <span
id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155)</span>

The above quotations are only a few from many cases which have been
recorded; and if, with the evidence advanced in the chapter on eclipses,
they are insufficient to prove that the moon is not an opaque reflecting
body but is really a semi-transparent, self-luminous structure, to such
minds evidence is valueless, and reasoning a

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

vain pretension. Nothing could possibly for a moment prevent such a
conclusion being at once admitted, except the pre-occupation of the mind
by a strabismic presumptuous hypothesis, which compels its votaries to
yield assent to its details, even if directly contrary to every fact in
the natural world, and to every principle of mental investigation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[337:1](za63.htm#fr_149) "Discoveries in the
South Sea," p. 39, by Captain James Burney.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[338:1](za63.htm#fr_150) "Description of the
Heavens," p. 354, by Alex. von Humboldt.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[339:1](za63.htm#fr_151) Sir James South, of
the Royal Observatory, Kensington, in a letter in the "Times" newspaper
of April 7, 1848.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[339:2](za63.htm#fr_152) Monthly Notices of
Royal Astronomical Society, for June 8, 1860.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[339:3](za63.htm#fr_153) Monthly Notices of
Royal Astronomical Society for June 8, 1860.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[340:1](za63.htm#fr_154) Monthly Notices of
Royal Astronomical Society, December 9, 1859.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[340:2](za63.htm#fr_155) Rev. T. W. Webb in
Monthly Notice of Royal Astronomical Society for May 11, 1860.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shadows on the Moon](za64)
