[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp03)  [Next](itp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# PART I.

# The Intermediate in the Service of Religion

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### CHAPTER I.

### As Prophet or Priest

A CURIOUS and interesting subject is the connection of the Uranian
temperament with prophetic gifts and divination. It is a subject which,
as far as I know, has not been very seriously considered--though it has
been touched upon by Elie Reclus, Westermarck, Bastian, Iwan Bloch, and
others. The fact is well known, of course, that in the temples and cults
of antiquity and of primitive races it has been a widespread practice to
educate and cultivate certain youths in an effeminate manner, and that
these youths in general become the priests or medicine-men of the tribe;
but this fact has hardly been taken seriously, as indicating any
necessary connection between the two functions, or any relation in
general between homosexuality and psychic powers. Some such relation or
connection, however, I think we must admit as being obviously indicated
by the following facts; and the admission

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

leads us on to the further enquiry of what the relation may exactly be,
and what its rationale and explanation.

Among the tribes, for instance, in the neighbourhood of Behring's
Straits--the Kamchadales, the Chukchi, the Aleuts, Inoits, Kadiak
islanders, and so forth, homosexuality is common, and its relation to
shamanship or priesthood most marked and curious. Westermarck, in his
well-known book, *The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas*, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) quoting from Dr. Bogoraz, says:--"It
frequently happens that, under the supernatural influence of one of
their shamans, or priests, a Chukchi lad at sixteen years of age will
suddenly relinquish his sex and imagine himself to be a woman. He adopts
a woman's attire, lets his hair grow, and devotes himself altogether to
female occupation. Furthermore, this disclaimer of his sex takes a
husband into the *yurt* (hut) and does all the work which is usually
incumbent on the wife, in most unnatural and voluntary subjection. . . .
These abnormal changes of sex imply the most abject immorality in the
community, and appear to be strongly encouraged by the shamans, who
interpret such cases as an injunction of their individual deity."
Further, Westermarck says "the change

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

of sex was usually accompanied by future shamanship; indeed nearly all
the shamans were former delinquents of their sex." Again he says, "In
describing the Koriaks, Krasheninnikoff makes mention of the *Ke'yev*,
that is men occupying the position of concubines, and he compares them
with the Kamchadale *Koe'kcuc*, as he calls them, that is men
transformed into women. Every *Koe'kcuc*, he says, 'is regarded as a
*magician* and interpreter of dreams. . . . The *Koe'kcuc* wore women's
clothes, did women's work, and were in the position of wives or
concubines.'" And (on p. 472) "There is no indication that the North
American aborigines attached any opprobrium to men who had intercourse
with those members of their own sex who had assumed the. dress and
habits of women. In Kadiak such a companion was on the contrary regarded
as a great acquisition; and the effeminate men, far from being despised,
were held in repute by the people, most of them being wizards."

This connection with wizardry and religious divination is particularly
insisted upon by Elie Reclus, in his *Primitive Folk* (Contemporary
Science Series). Speaking of the Inoits (p. 68) he says:--"Has a boy
with a pretty face also a graceful demeanour? The mother no longer
permits him to associate with companions of his own age, but clothes him
and brings him up as a girl. Any stranger would

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

be deceived as to his sex, and when he is about fifteen he is sold for a
good round sum to a wealthy personage. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
'Choupans,' or youths of this kind are highly prized by the Konyagas. On
the other hand, there are to be met with here and there among the
Esquimaux or kindred populations, especially in Youkon, *girls* who
decline marriage and maternity. Changing their sex, so to speak, they
live as boys, adopting masculine manners and customs, they hunt the
stag, and in the chase shrink from no danger; in fishing from no
fatigue."

Reclus then says that the Choupans commonly dedicate themselves to the
priesthood; but all are not qualified for this. "To become an *angahok*
it is needful to have a very marked vocation, and furthermore a
character and temperament which every one has not. The priests in office
do not leave the recruiting of their pupils to chance; they make choice
at an early age of boys or girls, not limiting themselves to one sex--a
mark of greater intelligence than is exhibited by most other
priesthoods" (p. 71). The pupil has to go through considerable
ordeals:--"Disciplined by abstinence and prolonged vigils, by hardship
and constraint, be must learn to endure pain stoically and to subdue his
bodily desires, to make the body obey

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

unmurmuringly the commands of the spirit. Others may be chatterers; he
will be silent, as becomes the prophet and the soothsayer. At an early
age the novice courts solitude. He wanders throughout the long nights
across silent plains filled with the chilly whiteness of the moon; he
listens to the wind moaning over the desolate floes;--and then the
aurora borealis, that ardently sought occasion for 'drinking in the
light,' the *angahok* must absorb all its brilliancies and splendours. .
. . And now the future sorcerer is no longer a child. Many a time he has
felt himself in the presence of Sidné, the Esquimaux Demeter, he has
divined it by the shiver which ran through his veins, by the tingling of
his flesh and the bristling of his hair. . . . He sees stars unknown to
the profane; he asks the secrets of destiny from Sirius, Algol, and
Altair; he passes through a series of initiations, knowing well that his
spirit will not be loosed from the burden of dense matter and crass
ignorance, until the moon has looked him in the face, and darted a
certain ray into his eyes. At last his own Genius, evoked from the
bottomless depths of existence, appears to him, having scaled the
immensity of the heavens, and climbed across the abysses of the ocean.
White, wan, and solemn, the phantom will say to him: 'Behold me, what
dost thou desire?' Uniting himself with the Double from beyond the
grave,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the soul of the *angakok* flies upon the wings of the wind, and quitting
the body at will, sails swift and light through the universe. It is
permitted to probe all hidden things, to seek the knowledge of all
mysteries, in order that they may be revealed to those who have remained
mortal with spirit unrefined" (p. 73).

Allowing something for poetic and imaginative expression, the above
statement of the ordeals and initiations of the *angakok*, and their
connection with the previous career of the *Choupan* are well based on
the observations of many authorities, as well as on their general
agreement with similar facts all over the world. There is also another
passage of Reclus (p. 70) on the duties of the *angahok*, which seems to
throw considerable light on certain passages in the Bible referring to
the *kedeshim* and *kedeshoth* of the Syrian cults, also on the *kosio*
of the Slave Coast and the early functions of the priesthood in
general:--"As soon as the *Choupan* has moulted into the *angakok*, the
tribe confide to him the girls most suitable in bodily grace and
disposition; he has to complete their education--he will perfect them in
dancing and other accomplishments, and finally will initiate them into
the pleasures of love. If they display intelligence, they will become
seers and medicine-women, priestesses and prophetesses. The summer
*kachims* (assemblies),

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

which are closed to the women of the community, will open wide before
these. It is believed that these girls would be unwholesome company if
they had not been purified by commerce with a man of God."

Catlin, in his *North American Indians* (vol. i., pp. 112-114),
describes how on one occasion he was in a large tent occupied in
painting portraits of some of the chiefs of the tribe (the Mandans)
among whom he was staying, when he noticed at the door of the tent, but
not venturing to come in, three or four young men of handsome presence
and rather elegantly dressed, but not wearing the eagle's feathers of
warriors. He mentally decided to paint the portrait of one of these
also; and on a later day when he had nearly done with the chiefs, he
invited one of these others to come in and stand for him. The youth was
overjoyed at the compliment, and smiled all over his face. He was clad
from head to foot in the skin of the mountain goat, which for softness
and whiteness is almost like Chinese crape, embroidered with ermine and
porcupine quills; and with his pipe and his whip in his hand, and his
long hair falling over neck and shoulders, made a striking and handsome
figure, which showed, too, a certain grace and gentleness as of good
breeding. "There was nought about him of the terrible," says Catlin,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "and nought to
shock the finest, chastest intellect." But to Catlin's surprise, no
sooner had he begun to sketch his new subject, than the chiefs rose up,
flung their buffalo robes around them, and stalked out of the tent.

Catlin's interpreter afterwards explained to him the position of these
men and the part they played in the tribal life; and how the chiefs were
offended at the idea of their being placed on an equality with
themselves. But the offence, it seemed, was not on any ground of
immorality; but--and this is corroborated by the customs of scores of
other tribes--arose simply from the fact that the young men were
associated with the *women*, and shared their modes of life, and were
not worthy therefore to rank among the *warriors*. In their own special
way they held a position of some honour.

"Among the Illinois Indians," says Westermarck (vol. ii., p. 473), "the
effeminate men assist in \[*i.e.*, are present at\] all the juggleries
and the solemn dance in honour of the calumet, or sacred tobacco-pipe,
for which the Indians have such a deference. . . . but they are not
permitted either to dance or to sing. They are called into the councils
of the Indians, and nothing can be decided without their advice; for
because of their extraordinary manner of living they are looked upon as
*manitous*, or supernatural beings, and persons of consequence."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The Sioux, Sacs,
and Fox Indians," he continues, "give once a year, or oftener, a feast
to the Berdashe, or I-coo-coo-a, who is a man dressed in women's
clothes, as he has been all his life." And Catlin (*N.A. Indians*, vol.
ii., p. 214) says of this Berdashe:--"For extraordinary privileges which
he is known to possess, he is driven to the most servile and degrading
duties, which he is not allowed to escape; and he being the only one of
the tribe submitting to this disgraceful degradation is looked upon as
medicine and sacred, and a feast is given to him annually; and
initiatory to it a dance by those few young men of the tribe who can--as
in the illustration--dance forward and publicly make their boast
(without the denial of the *Berdashe*) that" \[then follow three or four
unintelligible lines of some native dialect; and then\] "such and such
only are allowed to enter the dance and partake of the feast."

In this connection it may not be out of place to quote Joaquin Miller
(who spent his early life as a member of an Indian tribe) on the
prophetic powers of these people. He says ("*Life among the Modocs*," p.
360) "If there is a race of men that has the gift of prophecy or
prescience I think it is the Indian. It may be a keen instinct sharpened
by meditation that makes them foretell. many things with such precision,
but I have seen some things

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

that looked much like the fulfilment of prophecies. They believe in the
gift of prophecy thoroughly, and are never without their seers."

In this connection we may quote the curious remark of Herodotus, who,
after mentioning (i. 105) that some of the Scythians suffered from a
disease of effeminacy (Θήλεια νόσος), and were called Enarees, says (iv.
67) that "these Enarees, or Androgyni, were endowed by Venus with the
power of *divination*," and were consulted by the King of the Scythians
when the latter was ill.

The Jesuit father Lafitau, who published in 1724, at Paris, an extremely
interesting book on the manners and customs of the North American tribes
among whom he had been a missionary, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)
after speaking of warlike women and Amazons, says (vol. I, p. 53):--"If
some women are found possessing virile courage, and glorying in the
profession of war, which seems only suitable to men; there exist also
men so cowardly as to live like women. Among the Illinois, among the
Sioux, in Louisiana, in Florida, and in Yucatan, there are found youths
who adopt the garb of women and preserve it all their lives, and who
think themselves honoured in stooping to all their occupations; they
never marry; they take part in all ceremonies in

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

which religion seems to be concerned; and this profession of an
extraordinary life causes them to pass for beings of a superior order,
and above the common run of mankind. Would not these be the same kind of
folk as the Asiatic worshippers of Cybele, or those Easterns of whom
Julius Firmicus speaks (*Lib. de Errore prof. Relig.*), who consecrated
to the Goddess of Phrygia, or to Venus Urania, certain priests, who
dressed as women, who affected an effeminate countenance, who painted
their faces, and disguised their true sex under garments borrowed from
the sex which they wished to counterfeit."

The instance, just quoted, of the Enarees among the Scythians, who by
excessive riding were often rendered impotent and effeminate, is very
curiously paralleled in quite another part of the world by the so-called
*mujerados* (or feminised men) among the Pueblo-Indians of Mexico. Dr.
W. A. Hammond, who was stationed, in 1850, as military doctor, in New
Mexico, reported <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) that in each village
one of the strongest men, being chosen, was compelled by unintermitted
riding to pass through this kind of metamorphosis." He then became
indispensable for the religious orgies which were celebrated among the
Pueblo-Indians in the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

same way as they once were among the old Greeks, Egyptians, and other
people. . . . These Saturnalia take place among the Pueblos in the
Spring of every year, and are kept with the greatest secrecy from the
observation of non-Indians." <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) And
again, "To be a *mujerado* is no disgrace to a Pueblo-Indian. On the
contrary, he enjoys the protection of his tribes-people, and is accorded
a certain amount of honour."

Similar customs to those of the American Indians were found among the
Pacific islanders. Captain James Wilson, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) in visiting the South Sea Islands in 1796-8,
found there men who were dressed like women and enjoyed a certain
honour; and expresses his surprise at finding that "even their women do
not despise these fellows, but form friendships with them." While
William Ellis, also a Missionary, in his *Polynesian Researches*, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6) (vol. i., p. 340), says that they not only
enjoyed the sanction of the priests, but even the direct example of one
of their divinities. He goes on to say that when he asked the natives
why they made away with so many more female than male children, "they
generally answered that the *fisheries*, the *service of the* 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

temple and especially *war* were the only purposes for which they
thought it desirable to rear children!"

But one of the most interesting examples of the connection we are
studying is that of Apollo with the temple at Delphi. Delphi, of course,
was one of the chief seats of prophecy and divination in the old world,
and Apollo, who presided at this shrine, was a strange blend of
masculine and feminine attributes. It will be remembered that he was
frequently represented as being very feminine in form--especially in the
more archaic statues. He was the patron of song and music. He was also,
in some ways, the representative divinity of the Uranian love, for he
was the special god of the Dorian Greeks, among whom comradeship became
an institution. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) It was said of him
that to expiate his pollution by the blood of the Python (whom he slew),
he became the slave and devoted favorite of Admetus; and Müller <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) describes a Dorian religious festival, in
which a boy, taking the part of Apollo, "probably imitated the manner in
which the god, as herdsman and slave of Alcestis, submitted to the most
degrading service." Alcestis, in fact, the wife of Admetus, said of
Apollo (in a

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

verse of Sophocles cited by Plutarch): οὑμὸς δ\`ἀλέκτωρ αὐτον ἦγε πρὸς
"μύλην". When we consider that Apollo, as Sun god, corresponds in some
points to the Syrian Baal (masculine), and that in his epithet Karneios,
used among the Dorians, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) he corresponds
to the Syrian Ashtaroth *Karnaim* (feminine), we seem to see a possible
clue connecting certain passages in the Bible--which refer to the rites
of the Syrian tribes and their occasional adoption in the Jewish
Temple--with some phases of the Dorian religious ritual.

"The Hebrews entering Syria," says Richard Burton, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) "found it religionised by Assyria and
Babylonia, when the Accadian Ishtar had passed West, and had become
Ashtoreth, Ashtaroth, or Ashirah, the Anaitis of Armenia, the Phœnician
Astarte, and the Greek Aphrodite, the great Moon-goddess who is queen of
Heaven and Love. . . . She was worshipped by men habited as women, and
*vice versâ*; for which reason, in the Torah (Deut. xxii. 5), the sexes
are forbidden to change dress."

In the account of the reforming zeal of King Josiah (2 Kings xxiii.) we
are told (v. 4) that "the King commanded Hilkiah, the high priest, and
the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth
out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal,
and for the grove, and for all the host of heaven; and he burned them
without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron. . . . And he brake down the
houses of the sodomites, that were by the house of the Lord, where the
women wove hangings for the grove."

The word here translated "sodomites" is the Hebrew word Kedeshim,
meaning the "consecrated ones" (males), and it occurs again in 1 Kings
xiv. 24; xv. 12; and xxii. 46. And the word translated "grove" is
Asherah. There is some doubt, I believe, as to the exact function of
these *Kedeshim* in the temple ritual, and some doubt as to whether the
translation of the word given in our Authorised Version is
justified. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) It is clear, however,
that these men corresponded in some way to the *Kedeshoth* or sacred
women, who were--like the *Devadasis* of the Hindu temples--a kind of
courtesan or prostitute dedicated to the god, and strange as it may seem
to the modern mind, it is probable that they united some kind of sexual
service with prophetic functions. Dr. Frazer, speaking <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) of the sacred slaves or *Kedeshim* in
various parts of Syria, concludes

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that "originally no sharp line of distinction existed between the
prophets and the *Kedeshim*; both were 'men of God,' as the prophets
were constantly called; in other words they were inspired mediums, men
in whom the god manifested himself from time to time by word and deed,
in short, temporary incarnations of the deity. But while the prophets
roved freely about the country, the *Kedeshim* appears to have been
regularly attached to a sanctuary, and among the duties which they
performed at the shrines there were clearly some which revolted the
conscience of men imbued with a purer morality."

As to the Asherah, or sometimes plural Asherim, translated "grove,"--for
which the women wove hangings--the most generally accepted opinion is
that it was a wooden post or tree stripped of its branches and planted
in the ground beside an altar, whether of Jehovah or other gods. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) Several biblical passages, like Jeremiah
ii. 27, suggest that it was an emblem of Baal or of the male organ, and
others (*e.g.*, Judges ii. 13, and iii. 7) connect it with Ashtoreth,
the female partner of Baal; while the weaving of hangings or garments
for the "grove" suggests the combination of female with male in one
effigy. <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) At any rate we may conclude

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

pretty safely that the thing or things had a strongly sexual
signification.

Thus it would seem that in the religious worship of the Canaanites there
were male courtesans attached to the temples and inhabiting their
precincts, as well as consecrated females, and that the ceremonies
connected with these cults were of a markedly sexual character. These
ceremonies had probably originated in an ancient worship of sexual acts
as being symbolical of, and therefore favorable to, the fertility of
Nature and the crops. But though they had penetrated into the Jewish
temple they were detested by the more zealous adherents of Jehovah,
because--for one reason at any rate--they belonged to the rival cult of
the Syrian Baal and Ashtoreth, the *Kedeshim* in fact being "consecrated
to the Mother of the Gods, the famous Dea Syria." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) And they were detestable, too, because
they went hand in hand with the cultivation of 'familiar spirits' and
'wizards'--who of course knew nothing of Jehovah! Thus we see (2 Kings
xxi.) that Manasseh followed the abominations of the heathen, building
up the high places and the 'groves' and the altars for Baal. "And he
made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used
enchantments, <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) and dealt with

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

familiar spirits and wizards, and wrought much wickedness. . . . and he
set a graven image of the 'grove' in the house of the Lord." But Josiah,
his grandson, reversed all this, and drove the familiar spirits and the
wizards out of the land, together with the *Kedeshim*.

So far with regard to Syria and the Bible. But Dr. Fraser points out the
curious likeness here to customs existing to-day among the Negroes of
the Slave Coast of West Africa. In that region, women, called Kosio, are
attached to the temples as wives, priestesses and temple prostitutes of
the python-god. But besides these "there are male *Kosio* as well as
female *Kosio*, that is there are dedicated men as well as dedicated
women, priests as well as priestesses, and the ideas and customs in
regard to them seem to be similar. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)
"Indeed," he says, "the points of resemblance between the prophets of
Israel and of West Africa are close and curious." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) It must be said, however, that Dr. Frazer
does not in either case insist on the inference of homosexuality. On the
contrary, he rather endeavours to avoid it, and of course it would be
unreasonable to suppose any *invariable* connection of these "sacred
men" with this peculiarity. At the same time the general inference in
that direction is strong and difficult to evade.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

Throughout China and Japan and much of Malaysia, the so-called Bonzes,
or Buddhist priests, have youths or boys attached to the service of the
temples. Each priest educates a novice to follow him in the ritual, and
it is said that the relations between the two are often physically
intimate. Francis Xavier, in his letters from Japan (in 1549), mentions
this. He says that the Bonzes themselves allowed that this was so, but
maintained that it was no sin. They said that intercourse with woman was
for them a deadly sin, or even punishable with death; but that the other
relation was, in their eyes, by no means execrable, but harmless and
even commendable. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) And, as it was
then, so on the whole it appears to be now, or to have been till very
lately. In all the Buddhist sects in Japan (except Shinto) celibacy is
imposed on the priests, but homosexual relations are not forbidden.

And to return to the New World, we find Cieza de Leon-who is generally
considered a trustworthy authority--describing practices and ceremonials
in the temples of New Granada in his time (1550) strangely similar to
those referred to in the Hebrew

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bible:--"Every
temple or chief house of worship keeps one or two men, or more,
according to the idol--who go about attired like women, even from their
childhood, and talk like women, and imitate them in their manner,
carriage, and all else." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) These
served in the temples, and were made use of "almost as if by way of
sanctity and religion" (*casi come por via de santidad y religion*); and
he concludes that "the Devil had gained such mastery in that land that,
not content with causing the people to fall into mortal sin, he had
actually persuaded them that the same was a species of holiness and
religion, in order that by so doing he might render them all the more
subject to him. And this (he says) Fray Domingo told me in his own
writing--a man of whom everyone knows what a lover of truth he is."

Thus, as Richard Burton remarks, <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21)
these same usages in connection with religion have spread nearly all
over the world and "been adopted by the priestly castes from Mesopotamia
to Peru."

It is all very strange and difficult to understand. Indeed, if the facts
were not so well-established and so overwhelmingly numerous, it would
appear incredible to most of us nowadays that the conception

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of "sacredness" or "consecration" could be honestly connected, in the
mind of any people, with the above things and persons. And yet it is
obvious, when one sums up the whole matter, that though in cases Cieza
de Leon may have been right in suggesting that religion was only brought
in as a cloak and excuse for licentiousness, yet in the main this
explanation does not suffice. There must have been considerably more at
the back of it all than that: a strange conviction apparently, or
superstition, if one likes to call it so, that unusual powers of
divination and prophecy were to be found in homosexual folk, and those
who adopted the said hybrid kind of life--a conviction moreover (or
superstition) so rooted and persistent that it spread over the greater
part of the world.

Is any explanation, we may ask, of this strange and anomalous belief
possible? Probably a *complete* explanation, in the present state of our
knowledge, is not possible. Yet some suggestions in that direction we
may perhaps venture to give. Before doing so, however, it may be as well
to dwell for a moment on the further and widely prevalent belief in the
connection between homosexuality and sorcery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[16:1](itp04.htm#fr_0) 2 vols. (Macmillan, 1908),
vol. ii., p. 458.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[18:1](itp04.htm#fr_1) See also Bancroft's
*Native Races of the Pacific States*, vol. i., p. 82.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[24:1](itp04.htm#fr_2) *Moeurs des Sauvages
Ameriquains, comparées aux moeurs des premiers temps*, par le p. Lafitau
(Paris, 1724).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[25:1](itp04.htm#fr_3) Wm. A. Hammond in
*American Journal of Neurology and Psychiatry* (August, 1882), p. 339.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[26:1](itp04.htm#fr_4) See Dr. Karsch, Jahrbuch
Sex. Zwisch, vol. iii., p. 142.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[26:2](itp04.htm#fr_5) First Missionary Voyage to
the South Sea Islands (London, 1799), p. 200.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[26:3](itp04.htm#fr_6) 2 vols. (London, 1829).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[27:1](itp04.htm#fr_7) See chapters v., vi., and
vii. in this vol.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[27:2](itp04.htm#fr_8) *History and Antiquities
of the Doric Race*, vol. i., p. 338.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[28:1](itp04.htm#fr_9) See *infra*, ch. viii.,
[p. 12](itp03.htm#page_12).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[28:2](itp04.htm#fr_10) *The Thousand Nights and
a Night* (1886), vol. x., p. 229.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[29:1](itp04.htm#fr_11) See Frazer's A*donis,
Attis and Osiris* (2nd edition, 1907), pp. 14, 64 note, etc.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[29:2](itp04.htm#fr_12) *Ibid*., p. 67.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[30:1](itp04.htm#fr_13) See Frazer's *Adonis*,
p. 14, note, etc.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[30:2](itp04.htm#fr_14) See a full consideration
of this subject in *Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism*, by
Thomas Inman (2nd edition, 1874), p. 120 *et seq*. Also a long article
by A. E. Whatham in *The American Journal of Religious Psychology and
Education*, for July, 1911, on "The Sign of the Mother-goddess."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[31:1](itp04.htm#fr_15) See Westermarck's
*Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas*, vol. ii., p. 488.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[31:2](itp04.htm#fr_16) All this suggests the
practice of some early and primitive science, and much resembles the
accusations made in the thirteenth century against our Roger Bacon,
pioneer of modern science.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[32:1](itp04.htm#fr_17) *Adonis*, etc. p. 60.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[32:2](itp04.htm#fr_18) *Ibid*., p. 66.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[33:1](itp04.htm#fr_19) See T. Karsch-Haack,
*Forschungen über gleichgeschlechtliche Liebe* (Munich), Die Japaner, p.
77. Also *The Letters of Fr. Xavier*, translated into German by Joseph
Burg (3 vols., 1836-40).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[34:1](itp04.htm#fr_20) See *la Chronica del
Peru*, by Cieza de Leon (Antwerp, 1554), ch. 64.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[34:2](itp04.htm#fr_21) *Op. cit.*, p. 243. 34

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. As Wizard or Witch](itp05)
