[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp07)  [Next](itp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

# Part II.

# The Intermediate as Warrior

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### Military Comradeship among the Dorian Greeks

IN the preceding chapters, especially the earlier ones, we have seen
how, among a vast number of primitive peoples, the Uranian temperament
and tendency has contributed to the cultivation of divination and
prophecy, religious ceremonial, song, dance, literature, medicine, and
so forth. We inferred *a priori* that the man of those days who
experienced a distaste for warfare and the chase would not unnaturally
discover other fields of activity, and develop these milder arts and
crafts of life, and we found that as a matter of fact this commonly
happened. Such a man was no doubt in some cases "effeminate," as we
should say: but where not exactly that, he was, at any rate, a trifle
more feminine than his quite normal brother--and hence the
differentiation in his pursuits.

We have now, however, to see that among some early peoples the Uranian
temperament favored a

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

quite different development; it took on a much more masculine character,
and led to the formation of military comradeships of a passionate kind
which, instead of discounting, immensely strengthened the warlike ardour
of the people concerned, and confirmed their success in campaigns and
conquests. The homosexual tendency, in fact, among such peoples, instead
of urging towards effeminacy, worked greatly in the opposite direction.
It bred ideals of heroism, courage, resource, and endurance among the
men, and exalted these virtues into the highest place of public honor.
Such was the case among the Dorian Greeks of the 7th century or so,
B.C.--of whom I am treating in the present section; and such also seems
to have been the case among the Japanese Samurai of the 12th, 13th, and
later centuries, A.D., whom I shall deal with presently. In a lesser
degree, too, there is evidence of a similar tendency among some other
tribes and peoples.

The chief modern accounts of the Dorian Military love are to be found in
the *History and Antiquities of the Doric Race*, by C. O. Müller, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) and in Professor E. Bethe's long treatise,
*Die Dorische Knabenliebe*, printed in Frankfurt in 1907. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) John

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Addington Symonds
also, in his *A Problem in Greek Ethics*, pp. 23, 24 *et seq*. of the
original edition (1883), gives a sketch of the subject and his views
about it.

It seems that the rough and warlike tribes of the Dorians, descending
into Greece from Doris and the mountains of the north and west at an
early period, probably before 800 B.C., subdued and enslaved the former
inhabitants as they came, and largely introduced their own institutions
into the countries which they occupied. They spread thus over Sparta and
a large part of the Peloponnesus, through the southern archipelago of
the Ægean to the coast of Asia Minor, and finally to the island of
Crete, in which latter place their customs were preserved for a long
period in primitive integrity.

Chief among such customs was this one of military comradeship or
paiderastia. The Greek word παιδεραστία (literally "boy-love") had
apparently a wide range of meaning. For a full understanding of it, J.
A. Symonds' *Problem in Greek Ethics* may with advantage be consulted.
The term seems to have applied generally to the love of an elder comrade
for a younger; but as far as it referred to or originated from the
military relationship it is evident that our word "boy" is hardly
appropriate. Clearly the younger had to be of sufficient

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

age or physical stature to bear arms effectively; and his commonly used
name παρασταθέυς or παραστατής--the "stand-by" or "stander-by"--is a
good indication of his function and utility. He corresponded in fact, in
many respects, to, the squire who attended on the mediæval knight; and
while such a squire might often be quite youthful, we do not exactly
think of him as a "boy." The difference of age therefore in this
military comradeship might be slight or negligible, or in cases it might
be considerable.

Again, this kind of love was apparently always conceived of as having an
*element* of physical passion in it--though this element might, of
course, be quite slight, or it might be dominant and engrossing.
Historically speaking, too, and in different periods and connections,
the meaning of the term varied; if it indicated originally the rather
heroic devotion of comrades to each other in campaign and warfare, it
branched out later into other fields of life, and was adapted to the
more spiritual relationship commended by Plato--the *philosophia*
combined with *paiderastia* of the ideal man--or again to the frankly
sensual attachment described in passages of the Greek Anthology. The
word consequently has a rather extensive connotation.

In the present paper I incline to use both words, "comrade-love" and
"paiderastia," to denote the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dorian relation,
bearing in mind, of course, that a difference of age is generally
understood, and using the latter term rather more for the physical and
ceremonial side of the attachment, and the former rather more for the
emotional and social bond--but without pressing this distinction too
closely or persistently. And it might be helpful here to remind the
reader, who is troubled as to "where to draw the line" in estimating
this kind of love--and in order to help him towards an understanding of
the whole subject--that the painful rending-asunder and divorce of the
"spiritual" from the "physical," which so vexes the modern mind, had
probably but small place in the minds of many earlier peoples, like the
Dorians, whom we are now considering.

I cannot perhaps do better by way of description of this institution
than to quote the careful account of it both in Sparta and in Crete
given by C. O. Müller in his great work. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) He says:--"At Sparta the party loving was
called εἰσπνήλας and his affection was termed a *breathing-in* or
*inspiring* (ἐισπνε̃ιν); which expresses the pure and mental connection
between the two persons, and corresponds with the name of the other,
*viz.*, ἀίτας *i.e.*, *listener* or *hearer*. Now it appears to have
been the practice

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

for every youth of good character to have his lover; and on the other
hand, every well educated man was bound by custom to be the lover of
some youth. Instances of this connection are furnished by several of the
royal family of Sparta; thus Agesilaus, while he still belonged to the
herd (ἀγέλη) of youths, was the hearer (ἀίτας) of Lysander, and himself
had in his time also a hearer; his son Archidamus was the lover of the
son of Sphodrias, the noble Cleonymus; Cleomenes III. was, when a young
man, the hearer of Xenares, and later in life the lover of the brave
Panteus. The connection usually originated from the proposal of the
lover; yet it was necessary that the listener should regard him with
real affection, as a regard to the riches of the proposer was considered
very disgraceful; sometimes, however, it happened that the proposal
originated from the other party. The connection appears to have been
very intimate and faithful; and was recognised by the State. If his
relations were absent, the youth might be represented in the public
assembly by his lover; in battle, too, they stood near one another,
where their fidelity and affection were often shown till death, while at
home the youth was constantly under the eyes of his lover, who was to
him as it were a model and pattern of life; which explains why, for many
faults, particularly for want of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

ambition, the lover could be punished instead of the listener . . . ."

"This ancient national custom prevailed with still greater force in
Crete, which island was hence by many persons considered as the original
seat of the connection in question. Here, too, it was disgraceful for a
well-educated youth to be without a lover; and hence the party loved was
termed κλεινὸς, the *praised*; the lover being simply called φιλήτωρ."

Of the institution in Crete--of which the tradition still existed in his
time--Strabo, in his *Geographica*, gives a detailed account. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) And his account is particularly
interesting on account of the similarity of the uses which he describes
to the custom of ordinary marriage-by-capture, with which all students
of primitive society are familiar. Quoting from Ephorus, who wrote about
340 B.C., Strabo says:--"They have a peculiar custom with respect to
their attachments. They do not influence the objects of their love by
persuasion, but have recourse to violent abduction. The lover apprises
the friends of the youth, three or more days beforehand, of his
intention to carry off the object of his affection. It is reckoned a
most base act to conceal the youth, or not to permit him to walk

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

about as usual, since it would be an acknowledgment that the youth was
unworthy of such lover. But if they are informed that the ravisher is
equal or superior in rank or other circumstances to the youth, they
pursue and oppose the former slightly, merely in conformity with the
custom. They then willingly allow him to carry off the youth. If,
however, he is an unworthy person, they take the youth from him. This
show of resistance does not end till the youth is received into the
Andreium (men's quarters), to which the ravisher belongs. They do not
regard as an object of affection a youth exceedingly handsome, but him
who is distinguished for courage and modesty (decorum). The lover makes
the youth presents, and takes him away to whatever place he likes. The
persons present at the abduction accompany them, and, having passed two
months in feasting and the chase (for it is not permitted to detain the
youth longer), they return to the city. The youth is dismissed with
presents, which consist of a military dress, an ox, and a drinking-cup;
the last are prescribed by law; and besides there are many other very
costly gifts, so that the friends contribute each their share in order
to diminish the expense.

"The youth sacrifices the ox to Jupiter, and entertains at a feast those
who came down with him from the mountains. He then declares concerning

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

the intercourse with the lover whether it took place with his consent or
not, since the law allows him, if any violence is used in the abduction,
to insist upon redress, and sets him free from his engagement to the
lover But for the beautiful and high-born not to have lovers is
disgraceful, since the neglect would be attributed to a bad disposition.

"The *Parastathentes*, for this is the name which they give to those
youths who have been carried away, enjoy certain honors. At races and at
festivals they have the principal places. They are permitted to wear the
stole, which distinguishes them from other persons, and which has been
presented to them by their lovers; and not only at that time, but in
mature age, they appear in distinctive dress, by which each individual
is recognised as *Kleinos*, for this name is given to the object of
their attachment, and that of *Philetor* to the lover. These, then are
the usages concerning attachments."

And C. O. Müller, continuing the passage I cited before,
says:--"Institutions so systematic and regular as these did not exist in
any Doric State except Crete and Sparta; but the feelings on which they
were founded seem to have been common to all the Dorians. The loves of
Philolaus, a Corinthian of the family of the Bacchiadæ, and the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

law-giver of Thebes, and of Diocles, the Olympic conqueror, lasted until
death; and even their graves were turned toward each other in token of
their affection; and another person of the same name was honored in
Megara as a noble instance of self-devotion for the object of his love."

With regard to the genesis of the institution, J. Addington Symonds, in
his *Problem in Greek Ethics* (original edition, 1883, p. 23),
says:--"It has frequently occurred to my mind that the mixed type of
παιδεραστία which I have named Greek Love, took its origin in Doris.
Homer, who knew nothing about the passion as it afterwards existed, drew
a striking picture of masculine affection in Achilles. Friendship
occupies the first place in the hero's heart, while only the second is
reserved for sexual emotion. Now Achilles came from Phthia, itself a
portion of that mountain region to which Doris belonged. Is it unnatural
to conjecture that the Dorians in their migration to Lacedaemon and
Crete, the recognised headquarters of the custom, carried a tradition of
heroic παιδεραστία along with them? If so, the circumstances of their
invasion would have fostered the transformation into a tribal
institution. They went forth, a band of warriors and pirates, to cross
the sea in boats, and to fight their way along the hills and plains of
Southern Greece. The dominions they had conquered with

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

their swords they occupied like soldiers. The camp became their country,
and for a long time they literally lived upon the bivouac. . . .
Fighting and foraging in company, sharing the same wayside board and
heath-strewn bed, rallying to the comrade's voice in onset, relying on
the comrade's shield when fallen, these men learned the meanings of the
words Φιλήτωρ and παραστάτης. To be loved was honorable, for it implied
being worthy to be died for. To love was glorious, since it pledged the
lover to self-sacrifice in case of need."

Professor Bethe, in his article on *Die Dorische Knabenliebe*, to which
I have already alluded, says (p. 447):--"Among the Dorians, although the
practice was no doubt sensual, <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59)
*paiderastia* was not by any means a crime; on the contrary, it was, or
could be, or aspired to be, the most complete imaginable union and
mutual devotion of two tribesmen, out of which sprung abundant noble
impulses towards the perfection of each individual in rivalry with the
other, and the most absolute

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

surrender for the sake of the loved one in every danger, and even to
death in the very bloom of life. So that the true ideal of military
comradeship and high endeavor was realised in these lover-pairs, Who
cherished these ideas and sealed them with their blood. And the number
of such has certainly been anything but small. Is it not the most
wonderful phenomenon in the history of human culture?"

The closeness of the alliance, moreover, is indicated in the foregoing
quotation from Strabo, which shows, as we have seen, that certain
formalities attending it precisely resembled the primitive rites of
ordinary marriage, in the well-known form of "Marriage by capture." And
this fact--as Bethe and others have observed--suggests the great
antiquity of the institution and also its wide ramification. Professor
Bethe indeed says:--"Consequently the custom must date from a high
antiquity, and since certain traces of it in Corinth and Boeotia
coincide with the practice in Crete, I think the conclusion is not too
rash that not only there but among all the Dorians these same forms once
prevailed, and that therefore they date back even to the time before the
Dorian immigration, or at any rate before their dispersal."

The remarks of Strabo above refer especially to Crete, but we have just
seen that some indications

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of a marriage-ceremonial were to be found in Corinth and Boeotia; and it
is interesting to note that in Albania--which is the very land from
which the Dorians probably came--a marriage-ceremonial still lingers on
to-day and is perfectly recognised as customary between a man and a
youth who are attached to each other. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) Anyhow, whether the formalities of
marriage were observed or not, the general institution of military
comradeship, as we have described it, spread far and wide among the
Greek peoples, and immense importance was attached to it. It became a
sort of foundational element in their life, a publicly recognised source
of political and social activity, an incentive to soldierly valour, and
a bulwark of security to the state, an inspiration to art and
literature, and a custom consecrated by religion and divine approval.
Innumerable stories and legends--whether of "Harmodius and Aristogeiton
who slew the despot Hipparchus at Athens; of Diocles and Philoläus, who
gave laws to Thebes; of Chariton and Melanippus, who resisted the sway
of Phalaris in Sicily; or of Cratinus and Aristodemus, who devoted their
lives to propitiate offended deities when a plague had fallen on

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Athens," <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) testify to the profound interest felt in
the subject. And similar stories <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62)
from Sparta, from Chalkis, from Elis, Eubœa, and other places, show how
wide and universal was the impression. As far back as the time of Solon
at Athens, the inspiration of *paiderastia* had taken such hold, and was
felt to be so thoroughly honorable, that even he, Athens' great and wise
law-giver, wrote poems in praise of it, and in his laws placed the
pursuit of it and of athletics on a par, as worthy of, and to be
encouraged in free men, but as forbidden to slaves. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63) Aeschylus and Sophocles did not disdain to
make comrade-love the theme of two of their tragedies--the Myrmidones
and Niobe respectively--nor is evidence wanting that they personally
favored it themselves; and Plato, of course, makes it the corner-stone
of much of his philosophy and of more than one of his dialogues. Plato's
Strong and weighty verdict on the value of this bond--a verdict which
was apparently a reflection of a good deal of current opinion--is given
in the speech of Pausanias in the *Symposium*, in the form of a rebuke
against those peoples who did not honor the love:--"In Ionia and other
places, and generally

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

in countries which are subject to the Barbarians, the custom is held to
be dishonorable; loves of youths share the evil repute of philosophy and
gymnastics, because they are inimical to tyranny; for the interests of
rulers require that their subjects should be poor in spirit, and that
there should be no strong bond of friendship or society among
them,--which Love above all other motives is likely to inspire, as our
Athenian tyrants learned by experience."

Finally, the splendid heroism of the Theban band, composed solely of
lovers--which perished to a man at Chaeronaea, B.C. 338, in the last
battle of Greek Independence, against the huge army of Philip of
Macedon--set a kind of seal to the great tradition of Greek military
comradeship, and marked it with an ineffaceable impression of grandeur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[88:1](itp08.htm#fr_55) 2 vols., translated from
the German by G. Cornewall Lewis (John Murray, 1830).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[88:2](itp08.htm#fr_56) In the Rheinisches
Museum, vol. lxii., pp. 438-475.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[91:1](itp08.htm#fr_57) *History and Antiquities
of the Doric Race*, Book iv., ch. 4, p. 6; see also E. Carpenter's
*Ioläus*, pp. 16-19.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[93:1](itp08.htm#fr_58) Strabo, Book x., ch. 4,
p. 21 (Bohn's edition of the classics).

<span id="fn_59"></span>[97:1](itp08.htm#fr_59) Müller maintains the
general chastity of the institution, quoting Xenophon and others; but
Bethe contests this, referring to Plato (*The Laws*) and Aristotle (vol.
ii. 10), where it is suggested that one of its objects was the
prevention of overpopulation. Probably in this, as in other such cases,
it is impossible to make any very definite statement. Whatever general
theories there might be, practice would vary widely from place to place
and from people to people, and public opinion would do the same.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[99:1](itp08.htm#fr_60) See Hahn's *Albanesische
Studien*, vol. i., p. 166, where considerable light altogether is thrown
on the Dorian comradeship.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[100:1](itp08.htm#fr_61) See *Studies of the
Greek Poets*, by J. A. Symonds, vol. i., p. 97.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[100:2](itp08.htm#fr_62) See Plutarch's
*Eroticus*, his Lives, etc.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[100:3](itp08.htm#fr_63) See Plutarch's *Solon*,
ch. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Dorian Comradeship in Relation to the Status of
Woman](itp09)
