[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](itp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO6SI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk*, by Edward Carpenter,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### Conclusion.

IT may seem rather too late--at the close of a book--to criticise its
title! But in the present case perhaps this is the best place for the
purpose. It may have occurred to readers of the foregoing pages that the
word "Intermediate" hardly covers all the human types dealt with or
spoken of. Between the quite normal man and the quite normal woman there
are certainly a number of intermediate grades. There are men who
approach women more or less in their sex-temperament and other
respects--who are feminine or even effeminate in their various degrees;
and there are women who approach men--who are somewhat masculine or even
virile; and specimens of all these degrees have passed before us. But
there are other types which can hardly be called "intermediate." If
there are men who vary from the normal man-type in the feminine
direction-and who may perhaps be termed "subvirile"--there are also men
who vary in the opposite direction, and may be called

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "supervirile." If
there are women who are less feminine than the normal woman, there are
also other women who are "ultra-feminine." These types--these
superviriles and ultra-feminines--are not between but beyond the normal
boundaries. And not only should we theoretically conclude on the
existence of such types, but practically we discover them, both around
us to-day, and among the various peoples of the past.

There are certainly some men of amazing virility--great fighters,
organisers, thinkers--powerful both in muscle and brain--who seem in
their love-relations to stand to the ordinary man much as the latter
does to the woman. Prof. Gustav Jaeger <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) said, in 1884:--"What struck me most at
first, but now appears to be perfectly explicable and natural, is that
among the homosexuals are to be found the most remarkable specimens of
men, namely those that I call *supervirile*. Such men stand by virtue of
a special variation of their soul-stuff as much above the man as the
normally sexual man does above the woman. Such a man is able by virtue
of his soul-aroma to bewitch men, just as they, in the passive way,
bewitch him. And as he lives almost always in the society of men, and
men cast themselves at his feet, it often

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

happens that such a supervirile mounts to the highest grades of mental
and spiritual development, of social position, and of masculine
ability." Dr. Jaeger then gives a strong list of generals, sovereigns,
philosophers, artists, etc. as examples.

Allowing something for a kind of enthusiastic exaggeration in this
passage, and something also for the use of the invidious word "above"
when "beyond" perhaps would have been more to the point, we may say that
Dr. Jaeger's remarks of thirty years ago have, on the whole, been
corroborated and accepted by modern thought; and refering to the present
volume we may fairly suppose that the Dorian Greeks or the Japanese
Samurai must have counted among them men of such a "supervirile" quality
as he describes.

Similarly among the women alluded to here and there in the first chapter
above, there would doubtless be some ultra-feminine--who would stand in
their love-relation to the ordinary woman much as the latter does to the
normal man. In both these cases the term "intermediate" is not quite the
fitting one; and I can only ask the reader to excuse its use in
consideration of the difficulty of finding a term which really covers
all the ground. I must also acknowledge a similar deficiency in the use
of the expression "Primitive Folk" in the title. The expression is
somewhat too narrow,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and requires a good deal of stretching in order to include the early
Greek and Japanese civilisations; but I failed to find a better one to
hand.

There is another point which may be mentioned here. As we have seen that
the varieties of human type, intermediate and other, are very numerous,
almost endless, so we shall do well to keep in mind that the varieties
of love and sex-relation between individuals of these types are almost
endless, and cannot be dispatched in sweeping generalisations--whether
such relations be normal or homosexual.

The British mind, curiously enough, if the latter are mentioned as
occurring among men, immediately flies to one only conclusion--the same
in fact as that indicated by the translators of the Bible in dealing
with the word "Kedeshim" (*supra*, [p. 29](itp04.htm#page_29)) and the
common repugnance to the idea of masculine love in this country is no
doubt largely due to this view--since no great repugnance seems to be
felt to the idea of feminine amours. Now it would be absurd and
insincere to say that this mode of familiarity does not occur; but it is
certain that in love-relations between men in the Western world, it is
comparatively rare and only to be found in a small percentage of cases;
and there is plenty of evidence to show that even in the primitive world
of which we have been speaking it was by no means always implied. If one
reads Xenophon,

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

for instance, speaking as a contemporary of the Dorian customs in
Sparta, one finds that he expressly denies the implication. Nor in
foreign countries to-day does the British view hold.

In Germany and Italy a quite devoted or passionate love between men is
recognised without people necessarily assuming this particular
expression of it. And the common view here affords a strange glimpse
into the working of the British mind, and has even led some foreigners
to form a quite unfavorable, and probably false, conclusion as to our
actual habits.

However this may be, I think the facts put forward in the preceding
papers about the early social life of the world will never be understood
in their right light, and their real import recognised, until it is
perceived that love in a very true and deep human sense lay at the root
of most of the institutions described, and became through them the
source of vital developments to humanity. Sex, of course, has its
perfect rights to expression and consideration--and no sensible person
would wish to deny these; but we feel that love is the real thing on
which human nobility rests. When we once clearly see: and understand
*that*--as for example through the Dorian or the Samurai
institutions--it will doubtless become easier to understand some of the
more remote and primitive institutions dealt with in the first chapter,
on divination, etc.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

One common cause of misunderstanding in these matters is that in most
cases where the modern mind has to deal with ancient customs, of peoples
far back and alien from ourselves, we may indeed know the outer forms,
but we are profoundly ignorant of the real feelings and emotions which
underlay and inspired them; and we easily fall into a way, on the one
hand, of falsely interpreting the forms, and on the other hand, of
ignoring their inner meaning altogether.

There has been a tendency for instance--and that no doubt derived
largely from the Jewish Bible--to dismiss the more or less sexual
worships of Syria and Babylonia as mere unadulterated wickedness and
licentiousness; but is this not largely because we have so little means
of seeing from within what they really meant to those who took part in
them? The rite of Venus Mylitta, as described by Herodotus (Book i.
199), by which every woman was "obliged, once in her life, to sit in the
temple of Venus and have intercourse with some stranger," sounds at a
first reading like a mere glorification of prostitution, and has led to
much horrified holding up of hands; but when one turns to the further
account by the same author (Book i. 131, 132), one sees that the worship
must have had great and admirable elements in it. It was associated with
sacrifice to the sun and moon and

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the great powers of Nature, and "he that sacrifices is not permitted to
pray for blessings for himself alone; but is obliged to offer prayers
for the prosperity of all." Richard Burton, referring to this custom in
*The Thousand Nights and a Night* (1886, Vol. x., p. 231), says "It was
a mere consecration of a tribal rite. Everywhere girls before marriage
belong either to the father or the clan, and thus the maiden paid the
debt due to the public before becoming private property as a wife. The
same usage prevailed in ancient Armenia, and in parts of Ethiopia. . . .
It is noticed by Justin (xviii., c. 5), and it probably explains the
*Succoth Benoth*, or damsels' booths, which the Babylonians transplanted
to the cities of Samaria."

Or one may refer in the same connection to the well-known passage in
Captain Cook's *First Voyage* (Hawkesworth ii. 128), where he describes
the rites of Venus performed as a religious ceremony in Otaheite between
a young man and a girl, in public "before several of our people and a
great number of the natives; but, as appeared, in perfect conformity to
the custom of the place. Among the spectators were several women of
superior rank, who may properly be said to have assisted at the
ceremony, for they gave instruction to the girl how to perform her
part." Here evidently a ceremony indecent in the eyes of white folk
excited respect and reverence in the natives themselves.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

Or again, we have quoted the Father Lafitau (ch. i., *supra*) on the
extraordinary customs of the American Indians and their connection with
religion, which he compares with similar features in the old worships of
Cybele or Venus Urania; and anyone might superficially suppose that he
dismisses all these customs as examples of mere license. Yet in another
passage of his book (vol. 1, p. 607) he compares the friendships of the
Indians to the heroic friendships of Greece, and after mentioning some
of these latter, he continues:--"The Brazilians call friends of this
kind *Atour-assap*, *i.e.*, the perfect ally ("le parfait allié"). The
Sieur de Léri (Léri, Hist. du Brésil, ch. xx.) assures us that the
alliance which is formed between them by this sort of union is so strong
that all their possessions become absolutely in common,
[as](errata.htm#2) if they really were but one person; and that the one
cannot after that marry into the family of the other, within the
prohibited degrees, any more than if they were blood relations of the
first degree."

"Among the Indians of North America," Lafitau further says: "these
friendship-relations do not exhibit any appearance of vice, although
there is--or may be--a good deal of this in fact. They are very ancient
in their origin, very marked and constant in their form, sacred almost,
if I may say

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

so, in respect of the union which they compose, and of which the bonds
are as closely knit as those of blood and of nature. Nor can they be
dissolved unless indeed one of the two, rendering himself unworthy by
such cowardices as would dishonour his friend, should force the latter
to renounce the alliance--a thing which some missionaries have assured
me they have witnessed examples of. The relatives of the friends are the
first to encourage these alliances, and to respect their rights and
duties; and the selections are honorable in character, being founded on
mutual merit according to their idea, on conformity of customs, and on a
kind of rivalry which makes each one wish to be the friend of those who
are well thought of and justly honoured."

"These friendships are gained by presents made by the one to such other
as he desires to have as friend; they are maintained by mutual tokens of
good will; and the friends remain companions of the chase, of war, and
of fortune; and have the right to food and hospitality each in the cabin
of the other. The warmest compliments indeed that one can make to the
other is to give him this name of friend; and these friendships mature
with advancing age, and are so closely connected that one often finds
among them a heroism similar to that of Orestes and Pylades." (Lafitau
concludes

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

this passage by quoting stories, told him by the missionaries, of such
Indian friends refusing to be separated and insisting on dying
together.)

Such evidence as this does not point to a state of unadulterated
wickedness! And in fact may we not say that it is extremely improbable
that any great people that has left an abiding mark upon the world has
had its institutions and religion built upon mere sexual licence? Would
it not argue indeed a great want of perception in anyone to suppose such
a thing? We may, however, say this, that probably for these earlier folk
who lived so much more out in the great open of Nature than we do, and
who also lived, mentally speaking, in the great open of the tribal life
of their fellows, their outlook on the world was in many respects far
saner than ours. There was probably less disease both of body and mind,
and many things were clean to them which for us have become soiled and
unclean. There was a religion of the body, and a belief in the essential
sacredness of all its processes, which we somehow have lost--and which
we shall not probably socially regain until we once more adopt the free
life of the open air and restore the healing and gracious sense of human
community and solidarity.

Bearing this in mind it becomes possible to see that a great many of the
customs we have mentioned,

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

whether in Syria or Babylonia, or in Greece or in Africa, or in North
and South America, had a value quite other than that which appears at
first sight--a profound and human value--and that they represented
necessary contributions towards the evolution of mankind and the
expression of its latent powers. And as regards the present volume, I
think we may say that the general result of the enquiries contained in
it is to show that among primitive folk variations of sex-temperament
from the normal have not been negligible freaks, but have played an
important part in the evolution and expansion of human society--that in
a certain sense variations of social activity have run parallel with and
been provoked by variations in sex-temperament.

We have seen that among early peoples the quite normal man is warrior
and hunter, and the quite normal woman house-wife and
worker-round-the-house; and it is quite conceivable that if no
intermediate types had arisen, human society might have remained
stationary in these simple occupations. But when types of men began to
appear who had no taste for war and slaughter--men, perhaps, of a more
gentle or feminine disposition; or when types of women arose who chafed
at the slavery of the house, and longed for the open field of adventure
and activity--women, in fact, of

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

a more masculine tendency-then necessarily and quite naturally these
new-comers had to find, and found, for themselves new occupations and
new activities. The intermediate types of human beings created
intermediate spheres of social life and work. And we have seen that
there is abundant evidence to show (what, of course, all physiology and
modern thought would lead us to expect) that these variations of the
general human type commonly sprang from, or at least were most
intimately associated with, variations of the sex-temperament itself; or
perhaps we should say of the germ-plasm which lies at the back of the
sex-temperament. We have seen over and over again in the preceding pages
that peculiar classes of men and women, diverging from the normal in
their sex-customs and habits, became the repositories and foci of new
kinds of learning and skill, of new activities and accomplishments. Thus
the foundational occupations of human life--such as fighting, hunting,
child-rearing, and agriculture--having been laid down by the normal sex
types, it was largely the intermediate types who developed the
superstructure. The priest or medicine-man or shaman was at first the
sole representative of this new class, and we have seen that he was
almost invariably, in some degree or other, of Uranian temperament.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

His work, to begin with, was prophetic or divinatory; but this soon
branched out on the one hand into rude poetry, drama, dance and
song--what we should call Art--and on the other into elementary
observation of the stars and the seasons, medicine and the herbs--what
we should call Science. The temples became centres of learning and of
the development of the arts and crafts. And a god who combined in some
degree the attributes of both male and female was commonly worshipped in
their courts.

So far with regard to the sex-types that may be called truly
intermediate. But we have touched on the existence also of types quite
beyond the normal at either end of the scale--namely the *supervirile*
man and the *ultra-feminine* woman. We have seen that the facts now
accessible suggest that the supervirile type of man has done great
service to the world in furnishing it not only with superb
individuals--generals, organisers, and leaders of men; but also with
powerful and noble races and classes like the Dorians or the Samurai.
There is a certain *a priori* probability in this theory, but it waits
for further study and development. Finally we have the ultra-feminine
woman whose special mission to society may perhaps turn out to reside in
works of charity and mercy; but this type has at present been but little
studied or

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[162:1](itp12.htm#fr_104) In the third part of
his *Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Zoologie*.

considered, and before pronouncing any opinion it would be wise to wait
and see what the actual facts may indicate.
