[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi01)  [Next](twi03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRL0Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In Tune With the Infinite*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### PREFACE.

There is a golden thread that runs through every religion in the world.
There is a golden thread that runs through the lives and the teachings
of all the prophets, seers, sages, and saviours in the world's history,
through the lives of all men and women of truly great and lasting power.
All that they have ever done or attained to has been done in full
accordance with law. What one has done, all may do.

This same golden thread must enter into the lives of all who today, in
this busy work-a-day world of ours, would exchange impotence for power,
weakness and suffering for abounding health and strength, pain and
unrest for perfect peace, poverty of whatever nature for fullness and
plenty.

Each is building his own world. We both build from within and we attract
from without. Thought is the force with which we build, for thoughts are
forces. Like builds like and like attracts like. In the degree that
thought is spiritualized does it become more subtle and powerful in its
workings. This spiritualizing is in accordance with law and is within
the power of all.

Everything is first worked out in the unseen before it is manifested in
the seen, in the ideal before it is realized in the real, in the
spiritual before it shows forth in the material. The realm of the unseen
is the realm of cause. The realm of the seen is the realm of effect. The
nature of effect is always determined and conditioned by the nature of
its cause.

To point out the great facts in connection with, and the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

great laws underlying the workings of the interior, spiritual, thought
forces, to point them out so simply and so clearly that even a child can
understand, is the author's aim. To point them out so simply and so
clearly that all can grasp them, that all can take them and infuse them
into every-day life, so as to mould it in all its details in accordance
with what they would have it, is his purpose. That life can be thus
moulded by them is not a matter of mere speculation or theory with him,
but a matter of positive knowledge.

There is a divine sequence running throughout the universe. Within and
above and below the human will incessantly works the Divine will. To
come into harmony with it and thereby with all the higher laws and
forces, to come then into league and to work in conjunction with them,
in order that they can work in league and in conjunction with as, is to
come into the chain of this wonderful sequence. This is the secret of
all success. This is to come into the possession of unknown riches, into
the realization of undreamed-of powers.

R. W. T.

Sunnybrae Farm  
Croton-on-the-Hudson  
New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](twi03.md)
