[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi09)  [Next](twi11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Tune With the Infinite*, by Ralph Waldo Trine, \[1910\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### THE REALIZATION OF PERFECT PEACE.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Peace, and the moment we come into
harmony with it there comes to us an inflowing tide of peace, for peace
is harmony. A deep interior meaning underlies the great truth, "To be
spiritually minded is life and peace." To recognize the fact that we are
spirit, and to live in this thought, is to be spiritually minded, and so
to be in harmony and peace. Oh, the thousands of men and women all about
us weary with care, troubled and ill at ease, running hither and thither
to find peace, weary in body, soul, and mind; going to other countries,
traveling the world over, coming back, and still not finding it. Of
course they have not found it and they never will find it in this way,
because they are looking for it where it is not. They are looking for it
without when they should look within. Peace is to be found only within,
and unless one find it there he will never find it at all.

Peace lies not in the external world. It lies within one's own soul. We
may travel over

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

many different avenues in pursuit of it, we may seek it through the
channels of the bodily appetites and passions, we may seek it through
all the channels of the external, we may chase for it hither and
thither, but it will always be just beyond our grasp, because we are
searching for it where it is not. In the degree, however, that we order
the bodily appetites and passions in accordance with the promptings of
the soul within will the higher forms of happiness and peace enter our
lives; but in the degree that we fail in doing this will disease,
suffering, and discontent enter in.

To be at one with God is to be at peace. The child simplicity is the
greatest agency in bringing this full and complete realization, the
child simplicity that recognizes its true relations with the Father's
life. There are people I know who have come into such a conscious
realization of their oneness with this Infinite Life, this Spirit of
Infinite Peace, that their lives are fairly bubbling over with joy. I
have particularly in mind at this moment a comparatively young man who
was an invalid for several years, his health completely broken with
nervous exhaustion, who thought there was nothing in life worth living
for, to whom everything and everybody presented a gloomy aspect, and he
in turn presented

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

a gloomy aspect to all with whom he came in contact. Not long ago he
came into such a vital realization of his oneness with this Infinite
Power, he opened himself so completely to its divine inflow, that today
he is in perfect health, and frequently as I meet him now he cannot
resist the impulse to cry out, "Oh, it is a joy to be alive."

I know an officer on our police force who has told me that many times
when off duty and on his way home in the evening, there comes to him
such a vivid and vital realization of his oneness with this Infinite
Power, and this Spirit of Infinite Peace so takes hold of and so fills
him, that it seems as if his feet could scarcely keep to the pavement,
so buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by reason of this inflowing
tide.

He who comes into this higher realization never has any fear, for he has
always with him a sense of protection, and the very realization of this
makes his protection complete. Of him it is true,—"No weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper;" There shall no ill come nigh thy
dwelling;" "Thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field, and
the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee."

These are the men and the women who seem to live charmed lives. The
moment we feat

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

anything we open the door for the entrance of the actualization of the
very thing we fear. An animal will never harm a person who is absolutely
fearless in regard to it. The instant he fears he opens himself to
danger; and some animals, the dog for example, can instantly detect the
element of fear, and this gives them the courage to do harm. In the
degree that we come into a full realization of our oneness with this
Infinite Power do we become calm and quiet, undisturbed by the little
occurrences that before so vex and annoy us. We are no longer
disappointed in people, for we always read them aright. We have the
power of penetrating into their very souls and seeing the underlying
motives that are at work there.

A gentleman approached a friend the other day, and with great show of
cordiality grasped him by the hand and said, "Why, Mr. ------, I am so
glad to see you." Quick as a flash my friend read him, and looking him
steadily in the eye, replied, "No, you are mistaken, you are not glad to
see me; but you are very much disconcerted, so much so that you are now
blushing in evidence of it." The gentleman replied, "Well, you know in
this day and age of conventionality and form we have to put on the show
and sometimes make believe what we

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

do not really feel." My friend once more looked him in the face and
said, "Again you are mistaken. Let me give you one little word of
advice: You will always fare better and will think far more of yourself,
always to recognize and to tell the truth rather than to give yourself
to any semblance of it."

As soon as we are able to read people aright we will then cease to be
disappointed in them, we will cease to place them on pedestals, for this
can never be done without some attendant disappointment. The fall will
necessarily come, sooner or later, and moreover, we are thus many times
unfair to our friends. When we come into harmony with this Spirit of
Peace, evil reports and apparent bad treatment, either at the hands of
friends or of enemies, will no longer disturb us. When we are conscious
of the fact that in our life and our work we are true to that eternal
principle of right, of truth, of justice that runs through all the
universe, that unites and governs all, that always eventually prevails,
then nothing of this kind can come nigh us, and come what may we will
always be tranquil and undisturbed.

The things that cause sorrow, and pain, and bereavement will not be able
to take the hold of us they now take, for true wisdom will enable us

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

to see the proper place and know the right relations of all things. The
loss of friends by the transition we call death will not cause sorrow to
the soul that has come into this higher realization, for he knows that
there is no such thing as death, for each one is not only a partaker,
but an eternal partaker, of this Infinite Life. He knows that the mere
falling away of the physical body by no means affects the real soul
life. With a tranquil spirit born of a higher faith he can realize for
himself, and to those less strong he can say—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Loving friends! be wise and dry  
 Straightway every weeping eye;  
 What you left upon the bier  
 Is not worth a single tear;  
 ’Tis a simple sea-shell, one  
 Out of which the pearl has gone.  
 The shell was nothing, leave it there;  
 The pearl—the soul—was all, is here."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And so far as the
element of separation is concerned, he realizes that to spirit there are
no bounds, and that spiritual communion, whether between two persons in
the body, or two persons, one in the body and one out of the body, is
within the reach of all. In the degree that the higher spiritual life is
realized can there be this higher spiritual communion.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

The things that we open ourselves to always come to us. People in the
olden times expected to see angels and they saw them; but there is no
more reason why they should have seen them than that we should see them
now; no more reason why they should come and dwell with them than that
they should come and dwell with us, for the great laws governing all
things are the same today as they were then. If angels come not to
minister unto us it is because we do not invite them, it is because we
keep the door closed through which they otherwise might enter.

In the degree that we are filled with this Spirit of Peace by thus
opening ourselves to its inflow does it pour through us, so that we
carry it with us wherever we go. In the degree that we thus open
ourselves do we become magnets to attract peace from all sources; and in
the degree that we attract and embody it in ourselves are we able to
give it forth to others. We can in this way become such perfect
embodiments of peace that wherever we go we are continually shedding
benedictions. But a day or two ago I saw a woman grasp the hand of a man
(his face showed the indwelling God), saying, "Oh, it does me so much
good to see you. I have been in anxiety and almost in

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

despair during the past few hours, but the very sight of you has rolled
the burden entirely away." There are people all around us who are
continually giving out blessings and comfort, persons whose mere
presence seems to change sorrow into joy, fear into courage, despair
into hope, weakness into power.

It is the one who has come into the realization of his own true self who
carries this power with him and who radiates it wherever he goes,—the
one who, as we say, has found his centre. And in all the great universe
there is but one centre,—the Infinite Power that is working in and
through all. The one who then has found his centre is the one who has
come into the realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power, the
one who recognizes himself as a spiritual being, for God is spirit.

Such is the man of power. Centred in the Infinite, he has thereby, so to
speak, connected himself with, he has attached his belts to, the great
power-house of the universe. He is constantly drawing power to himself
from all sources. For, thus centred, knowing himself, conscious of his
own power, the thoughts that go from his mind are thoughts of strength;
and by virtue of the law that like attracts like, he by his thoughts is
continually attracting to himself

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

from all quarters the aid of all whose thoughts are thoughts of
strength, and in this way he is linking himself with this order of
thought in the universe.

And so to him that hath, to him shall be given. This is simply the
working of a natural law. His strong, positive, and hence constructive
thought is continually working success for him along all lines, and
continually bringing to him help from all directions. The things that he
sees, that he creates in the ideal, are through the agency of this
strong constructive thought continually clothing themselves, taking
form, manifesting themselves in the material. Silent, unseen forces are
at work which will sooner or later be made manifest in the visible.

Fear and all thoughts of failure never suggest themselves to such a man;
or if they do, they are immediately sent out of his mind, and so he is
not influenced by this order of thought from without. He does not
attract it to him. He is in another current of thought. Consequently the
weakening, failure-bringing thoughts of the fearing, the
[vacillating](errata.htm#1), the pessimistic about him, have no
influence upon him. The one who is of the negative, fearing kind not
only has his energies and his physical agents weakened, or even
paralyzed through the influence of this

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

kind of thought that is born within him, but he also in this way
connects himself with this order of thought in the world about him. And
in the degree that he does this does he become a victim to the weak,
fearing, negative minds all around him. Instead of growing in power, he
increases in weakness. He is in the same order of thought with those of
whom it is true,—and even that which they have shall he taken away from
them. This again is simply the working of a natural law, the same as is
its opposite. Fearing lest I lose even what I have I hide it away in a
napkin. Very well. I must then pay the price of my "fearing lest I
lose."

Thoughts of strength both build strength from within and attract it from
without, Thoughts of weakness actualize weakness from within and attract
it from without. Courage begets strength, fear begets weakness. And so
courage begets success, fear begets failure. It is the man or the woman
of faith, and hence of courage, who is the master of circumstances, and
who makes his or her power felt in the world. It is the man or the woman
who lacks faith and who as a consequence is weakened and crippled by
fears and forebodings, who is the creature of all passing occurrences.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Within each one lies the cause of whatever comes to him. Each has it in
his own hands to determine what comes. Everything in the visible,
material world has its origin in the unseen, the spiritual, the thought
world. This is the world of cause, the former is the world of effect.
The nature of the effect is always in accordance with the nature of the
cause. What one lives in his invisible, thought world, he is continually
actualizing in his visible, material world. If he would have any
conditions different in the latter he must make the necessary change in
the former. A clear realization of this great fact would bring success
to thousands of men and women who all about us are now in the depths of
despair. It would bring health, abounding health and strength to
thousands now diseased and suffering. It would bring peace and joy to
thousands now unhappy and ill at ease.

And oh, the thousands all about us who are continually living in the
slavery of fear. The spirits within that should be strong and powerful,
are rendered weak and impotent. Their energies are crippled, their
efforts are paralyzed. "Fear is everywhere,—fear of want, fear of
starvation, fear of public opinion, fear of private opinion, fear that
what we own today may not be ours

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

tomorrow, fear of sickness, fear of death. Feat has become with millions
a fixed habit. The thought is everywhere. The thought is thrown upon us
from every direction. . . . To live in continual dread, continual
cringing, continual fear of anything, be it loss of love, loss of money,
loss of position or situation, is to take the readiest means to lose
what we fear we shall."

By fear nothing is to be gained, but on the contrary, everything is to
be lost. "I know this is true," says one, "but I am given to fear; it's
natural to me and I can't help it." Can't help it! In saying this you
indicate one great reason of your fear by showing that you do not even
know yourself as yet. You must know yourself in order to know your
powers, and not until you know them can you use them wisely and fully.
Don't say you can't help it. If you think you can't, the chances are
that you can't. If you think you can, and act in accordance with this
thought, then not only are the chances that you can, but if you act
fully in accordance with it, that you can and that you will is an
absolute certainty. It was Virgil who in describing the crew which in
his mind would win the race, said of them,—They can because they think
they can. In other words, this very attitude cf mind on their part will
infuse a

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

spiritual power into their bodies that will give them the strength and
endurance which will enable them to win.

Then take the thought that you *can;* take it merely as a seed-thought,
if need be, plant it in your consciousness, tend it, cultivate it, and
it will gradually reach out and gather strength from all quarters. It
will focus and make positive and active the spiritual force within you
that is now scattered and of little avail. It will draw to itself force
from without. It will draw to your aid the influence of other minds of
its own nature, minds that are fearless, strong, courageous. You will
thus draw to yourself and connect yourself with this order of thought.
If earnest and faithful, the time will soon come when all fear will
loose its hold; and instead of being an embodiment of weakness and a
creature of circumstances, you will find yourself a tower of strength
and a master of circumstances.

We need more faith in every-day life,—faith in the power that works for
good, faith in the Infinite God, and hence faith in ourselves created in
His image. And however things at times may seem to go, however dark at
times appearances may be, the knowledge of the fact that "the Supreme
Power has us in its charge as it has the suns and endless systems of
worlds in

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

space," will give us the supreme faith that all is well with us, the
same as all is well with the world. "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed on Thee."

There is nothing firmer, and safer, and surer than Deity. Then, as we
recognize the fact that we have it in our own hands to open ourselves
ever more fully to this Infinite Power, and call upon it to manifest
itself in and through us, we will find in ourselves an ever increasing
sense of power. For in this way we are working in conjunction with it,
and it in turn is working in conjunction with us. We are then led into
the full realization of the fact that all things work together for good
to those that love the good. Then the fears and forebodings that have
dominated us in the past will be transmuted into faith, and faith when
rightly understood and rightly used is a force before which nothing can
stand.

Materialism leads naturally to pessimism. And how could it do otherwise?
A knowledge of the Spiritual Power working in and through us as well as
in and through all things, a power that works for righteousness, leads
to optimism. Pessimism leads to weakness. Optimism leads to power. The
one who is centred in Deity is the one who not only outrides every
storm, but

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

who through the faith, and so, the conscious power that is in him, faces
storm with the same calmness and serenity that he faces fair weather;
for he knows well beforehand what the outcome will be. He knows that
underneath are the everlasting arms. He it is who realizes the truth of
the injunction, "Rest in the Lord, wait patiently for Him and He shall
give thee thy heart's desire." All shall be given, simply given, to him
who is ready to accept it. Can anything be clearer than this?

In the degree, then, that we work in conjunction with the Supreme Power
do we need the less to concern ourselves about results. To live in the
full realization of this fact and all that attends it brings peace, a
full, rich, abiding peace,—a peace that makes the present complete, and
that, going on before, brings back the assurance that as our days, so
shall our strength be. The one who is thus centred, even in the face of
all the unrest and the turmoil about us, can realize and say—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

    \*   \*   \*   \*   \*   \*   \*

"I stay my haste, I make delays,  
  For what avails this eager pace?  
 I stand amid eternal ways,  
  And what is mine shall know my face.

</div>

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Asleep, awake, by night or day,  
  The friends I seek are seeking me;  
 No wind can drive my bark astray,  
  Nor change the tide of destiny.

    \*   \*   \*   \*   \*   \*   \*

"The waters know their own, and draw  
  The brooks that spring in yonder heights  
 So flows the good with equal law  
  Unto the soul of pure delight.

"The stars come nightly to the sky;  
  The tidal wave unto the sea;  
 Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high.,  
  Can keep my own away from me."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Coming into Fullness of Power](twi11)
