[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby08)  [Next](piby10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### CHAPTER 4

### THE LAW PREACHED

Now in the year of 1917 A.D., Shepherd Athlyi first went about the City
of Newark, New Jersey, U.S.A., telling of the Law and preaching
concretation saying, I come not only to baptize but to concretize for
the rescue of suffering humanity, for verily I say unto you, first seek
ye righteousness toward men and all things will be added unto you, even
the kingdom of God.

There came to him many to be concretized and he concretized them with
water, men and women. And the names of his stars were: Rev. J.H. Harris,
Sister R.J. Hamilton, Brother J. Reid, Rev. and Mrs. J. Barber, Brother
C.C. Harris, Sister Leila Best, Sister Thurston, Brother H. Pope, Rev.
and Mrs. Flanagan, Brother Charles McLaurin, Sister Letica Johnson,
Brother and Sister Adam Costly, Brother and Sister W.D. Sullivan, Sister
Sarah Johnson, Brother G.W. Roberts, Rev. J.J. Derricks, Rev. A.J.
Green, Rev. W. Barclift, Sister Bertha Johnson, Her holiness, the
Shepherdess Miriam <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) , Her Holiness the
<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> Shepherdmiss Muriel <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md), Brother F.L. Redd. These are those who
followed the shepherd from place to place.

And it came to pass that his holiness, the shepherd, traveled to
Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.A., there he concretized with water, and
the names of his stars who followed him around were: Sister Sylvie
Randall, Brother and Sister Eugene Kitchen, Brother and Sister Joseph
Rutherford, Rev. R.G. Gaines, Brother J. When, Sister Ellen Frazier,
Sister Minnieolo Walker, Sister M.A. Bryant, Irene Chambers, E. Dempsey.
From there he traveled all around South America and the West Indies,
preaching of the law and concretation by water for the sake of suffering
humanity.

Moreover, in the year of 1919 Athlyi, after he was anointed shepherd,
paraded the streets of Newark with a host of Negroes, protected by
riding officers of the city and accompanied by a Salvation Army carrying
banners, proclaiming a universal holiday for Negroes and foretelling of
their industrial and national independence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[40:1](piby09.htm#fr_0.md) The wife of the author.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[40:2](piby09.htm#fr_1.md) The daughter of the
author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Athlicanity Preached](piby10.md)
