[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby11)  [Next](piby13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### CHAPTER 7

### MARCUS GARVEY

Now in the year of nineteen hundred and nineteen on the thirtieth day of
the seventh month, when the Athlyians were celebrating concord in the
City of Newark, New Jersey, U.S.A., and on the third day of the period a
paper was read by the Rev. Bonfield telling of Marcus Garvey in New York
City.

And the Shepherd hesitated, then spake, saying: "I almost believe this
is one of the apostles of the twentieth century, but where is the other?
For I look for two, however by the map of life I shall know him.

"Raise not the weight of your finger on Marcus Garvey, neither speak ye
against him."

In the year of 1921 Garvey spake saying: "I have no time to teach
religion."

Because of this saying Athlyi took up his pen and was about to declare
him not an apostle of the twentieth century.

And it came to pass that the word of the Lord came to Athlyi saying,
"Blame not this man for I the Lord God hath sent him to prepare the
<span id="page_55">p. 55</span> minds of Ethiopia's generations, verily
he shall straighten up upon the map."

Nevertheless in the year nineteen hundred and twenty two, Apostle Garvey
issued a religious call throughout the world which fulfilled the last
item upon the map of life.

Therefore, Athlyi yielded him a copy of the map, and declared Marcus
Garvey an apostle of the Lord God for the redemption of Ethiopia and her
suffering posterities.

And the word of the Lord came to Athlyi saying, "I am the Lord God of
Ethiopia, three apostles of the twentieth century have I sent forth unto
Ethiopia's generations to administer the Law and the Gospel which I have
commanded for their salvation, let not the hands of men ordain them. For
I, the Lord, hath anointed mine apostles that they may ordain and give
authority to ordain."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. Athlyi Sent Abroad](piby13.md)
