[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby07)  [Next](piby09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CHAPTER 3

### GOD'S HOLY LAW TO THE CHILDREN OF ETHIOPIA

Great and manifold are the blessings bestowed upon us the oppressed
children of Ethiopia, by His Divine Majesty, Lord God Almighty, King of
all mercies, when by his most holy command His divine highness, Christ,
Prince of the Heavenly Kingdom, descended and anointed us that we may be
prepared to receive these noble men, servants of God and redeemers of
Ethiopia's posterities. His honor, Marcus Garvey and colleague, his
holiness the shepherd Athlyi, supreme minister of God's Holy Law to the
children of Ethiopia, may we show gratitude to our God by being
submissive to his teachings through these his humble servants, and
submitting ourselves in obedience to his Holy Law that we a suffering
people may reap the fruit thereof.

When as it was the intention of others to keep us forever in darkness,
by our faithfulness to the Law we shall in time prove to the nations
that God has not forsaken Ethiopia.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### The Holy Commandments

I

Love ye one another, O children of Ethiopia, for by no other way can ye
love the Lord your God.

II

Be thou industrious, thrifty and fruitful, O offsprings of Ethiopia, for
by no other way can ye show gratitude to the Lord your God, for the many
blessings he has bestowed upon earth free to all mankind.

III

Be ye [concretized](errata.htm#1) and ever united, for by the power of
unity ye shall demand respect of the nations.

IV

Work ye willingly with all thy heart with all thy soul and with all thy
strength to relieve suffering and oppressed humanity, for by no other
way can ye render integral service to the Lord your God.

V

Be thou clean and pleasant, O generation of Ethiopia, for thou art
anointed, moreover the angels of the Lord dwelleth with thee.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

VI

Be thou punctual, honest and truthful that ye gain flavor in the sight
of the Lord your God, and that your pathway be prosperous.

VII

Let no people take away that which the Lord thy God giveth thee, for the
Lord shall inquire of it and if ye shall say some one hath taken it, ye
shall in no wise escape punishment, for he that dieth in retreat of his
enemy the Lord shall not hold him guiltless, but a people who dieth in
pursuit of their enemy for the protection of that which the Lord God
giveth them, shall receive a reward in the kingdom of their Father.

VIII

Thou shalt first bind up the wound of thy brother and correct the
mistakes in thine own household before ye can see the sore on the body
of your friend, or the error in the household of thy neighbour.

IX

O generation of Ethiopia, shed not the blood of thine own for the
welfare of others for such is the pathway to destruction and contempt.

X

Be ye not contented in the vineyard or household of others, for ye know
not the day or the hour when denial shall appear, prepare ye <span
id="page_38">p. 38</span> rather for yourselves a foundation, for by no
other way can man manifest love for the offsprings of the womb.

XI

Athlyi, Athlyi, thou shepherd of the holy law and of the children of
Ethiopia, establish ye upon the Law a Holy temple for the Lord according
to thy name and there shall all the children of Ethiopia worship the
Lord their God, and there shall the apostles of the shepherd administer
the law and receive pledges thereto and concretize within the Law.
Verily he that is concretized within the Law shall be a follower and a
defender thereof, more-over the generations born of him that is
concretize within the law are also of the law.

XII

O generation of Ethiopia, thou shalt have no other God but the Creator
of Heaven and Earth and the things thereof. Sing ye praises and shout
Hosanna to the Lord your God, while for a foundation ye sacrifice on
earth for His Divine Majesty the Lord our Lord in six days created. the
heaven and earth and rested the seventh; ye also shall hallow the
seventh day, for it is blessed by the Lord, therefore on this day thou
shall do no manner of work or any within thy gates.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### The Shepherd's Prayer By Athlyi

O God of Ethiopia, thy divine majesty; thy spirit come in our hearts to
dwell in the path of righteousness, lead us, help us to forgive that we
may be forgiven, teach us love and loyalty on earth as in Heaven, endow
us with wisdom and understanding to do thy will, thy blessing to us that
the hungry be fed, the naked clothed, the sick nourished, the aged
protected and the infants cared for. Deliver us from the hands of our
enemies that we prove fruitful, then in the last day when life is o'er,
our bodies in the clay, or in the depths of the sea, or in the belly of
a beast, O give our souls a place in thy kingdom forever and forever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4. The Law Preached](piby09)
