[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby21)  [Next](piby23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### CHAPTER 2

### GOD SPOKE TO HIS APOSTLES

Now in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-three, the word of the Lord
God of Ethiopia came to apostle Marcus Garvey saying, where is thy
colleague?

And he answered, "Father, behold he is with me."

"Call together the children of Ethiopia, saith the Lord, that they may
know my request, and send forth a mission unto the land of Ethiopia
which I hath given to her children from the beginning of the world, that
they prepare a foundation for all the posterities of Ethiopia, even unto
the end.

"For I, the Lord God, shall come to judge between the three races of
men; woe be unto the empty handed, the slothful and the coward. I shall
bring judgement upon them with fire and with brimestone, even the baby
at the mother's breast shall not escape," saith the Lord. "Prepare ye a
bill of arrangement," saith the Lord, "and give it in the hands of thy
colleague that he go to the land of Ethiopia (Africa) and to the nations
at the entrance <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> of the land and request
then to open the door for the return of thy children.

"And I, the Lord, shall go with him, and I will touch the hearts of the
nations and they shall yield to the request.

"Then shall the children of Ethiopia return to their own land and there
establish a light with no nation shall compare, nor will there be any
power sufficient to douse it.

"For I am the Lord God of Ethiopia and I shall dwell with mine a
anointed and they shall be my people as long as they follow the
teachings of my apostles.

"Moreover, behold at thy side is the noble woman Henrietta <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) in whom the whole heaven adore because of
her greatness of faith and the loyal way in which she fights to save
Ethiopia and her generations from everlasting downfall. Place her at the
side of thy colleague, for great is her wisdom, saith the Lord, and send
ye also another t at they go and prepare a home for mine anointed."

And it came to pass that apostle Garvey obeyed the Lord, and he called
the children of Ethiopia and there gathered a great host in the City of
New York.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

And when the apostle put before them the Lord's request they leapt for
joy and confirmed the will of the Lord God of Ethiopia.

Then were a delegation of three sent forth according to the words of the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[83:5](piby22.htm#fr_4.md) Henrietta Vinton Davis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. Standing Before Elijah](piby23.md)
