[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby15)  [Next](piby17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### CHAPTER 11

### RETURNED TO NEWARK

And it came to pass that the word of the Lord, God of Ethiopia, came to
Athlyi saying:

"Arise in the morning, break not your fast, neither say ye a word to
anyone. And thou shall return to Newark and I will go with thee and thou
shall see me."

"When thou shall have come to Newark prepare there a house, subsidiary
to the House of Athlyi, where the children of Ethiopia shall assemble
before me in united worship. I shall reach out my hands and bless them
with increased blessings and they shall go forth as Athlyians with light
and power, modeling all men according to my righteous principles," saith
the Lord.

The Lord spake saying, "I will march with the Athlyians, I will pilot
them, and stear them. I will recharge them and I, through their
Shepherd, shall command them. Verily, there shall be no halting until
they have conquered the Devil, banished His Hell and reconstruct the
earth upon my righteous and clean principles."

"Then shall there be no prejudices, no illmosity among men, but peace
tranquility and good will upon the earth, recognizing the divine <span
id="page_64">p. 64</span> fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of man and
the rights of each and every one to enjoy equally the blessings of the
Father."

And the Lord, God of Ethiopia, charged Athlyi saying, "Call not my Holy
house 'Church' neither shall thou permit unjust literature which teaches
that God has Commanded Israel to oppress, rob and destroy the offsprings
of Ham in Canaan to rest upon my altar, for I have no part in such
Deuteronomies. They are an abomination in my sight, and a disgrace upon
the earth."

And the Lord continued, "I shall bring to an end the oppressors of Ham.
I shall tear down the walls which I have Permitted to hold Ethiopia in
bondage, that she may know the devil and his unrighteousness."

"Never-the-less, the children of Ethiopia, even unto this day, walketh
upright before me, save those whom I the Lord God, have suffered to be
spoiled by the enemies, that they might know the evil against the
posterities of Ham."

"Now I shall send forth an army of Athlyians who shall redeem my
children and deliver them again to my arms."

"I shall nourish them. Their chest shall be as unbreakable steel. Their
legs as giant reinforced concrete. Hearts of understanding and heads
matchlessly wise. They shall be my masons, <span id="page_65">p.
65</span> builders of a righteous kingdom and the source of salvation
for all," saith the Lord. "For I am God, the creator of all. All things
I hold in my hands and giveth freely unto him that walketh in me."

"Whosoever seeth an Athlyian, seeth me, for I am in him and he is of me.
Whosoever followeth an Athlyian followeth me also," saith the Lord.

And when the Lord had spoke these things Athlyi turned and asked,
"Father, what shall I call thy holy house?" And the Lord spoke to Athlyi
saying, "Go and do as I have commanded you. The mouth of a child shall
reveal the name; moreover, I shall write it upon the wall and you shall
see it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12. The Guiding Light](piby17.md)
