[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby14)  [Next](piby16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### CHAPTER 10

### REJOICING IN THE LIGHT

And it came to pass on the following day the Lord called Athlyi; and
when Athlyi appeared before the Lord, the light of his eyes connected
with the light that surrounded the Divine Personality.

And there appeared a light matchless in its beauty. Straightway the
whole celestial host shouted and there appeared millions of Angels
dancing in the light singing, "Behold! Behold Ethiopia! the bride of the
master. Her day has come at last! The Lord has received her hand. Her
night has forever passed."

The Lord stretched forth his hands over the earth and there appeared
millions of black men, women and children, who joined with the angels in
dancing, singing and rejoicing in the light.

Again did the Lord stretch forth his hands over Ethiopia and Canaan and
the offsprings of Ham became mighty and the lands became prosperous in
animals, fruits and grains. Great cities sprang up among them and the
women as well as men mastered ships upon the waters.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

And Athlyi looked and beheld great industries sprung up among the
children of Ethiopia and he saw men kissing the women and praising them
because of their mighty task in the struggle. He beheld women worshiping
men because they had made them great.

And the Lord, our God, spoke unto the children, his voice echoed from
Ethiopia to Canaan saying:

"Blessed are the mighty in righteousness for they shall be respected."
Blessed are the wealthy in love for I am rich and whosoever believeth in
Athlyi and in the gospel which I have commended through him seeketh
after these things which are in me."

"And I the Lord shall fill him to the brim and make his a power over
which no hell shall prevail."

"But he that is contented in poverty and weakness shall be weaker and
poorer, a foot stool of the nations; for he represents the devil, in him
there is no God."

"The fool impoverishes himself to find me. Verily I say unto you, he
shall not find me," saith the Lord, "for I am rich. But whosoever
believeth in Athlyi seeketh my principle, therefore I shall reach out my
hand and help him to be as I am."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. Returned to Newark](piby16.md)
