[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby18)  [Next](piby20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER 14

### HEAVEN AND HELL

And it came to pass that the spirit moved in Athlyi and he became full
with the holy ghost.

And he cried out saying, "Hear me O children of Ethiopia. There is not a
heaven nor a hell but that which ye make of yourselves and for
yourselves.

"In heaven there are few while in hell there are many. But those who are
in heaven are the Champions of time who have conquered over sin and
slothfulness."

"The fool slights the things in life and seeketh heaven after death.

"Verily, Verily I say unto you, he shall not find it. But the spirit of
him that establishes a heaven on earth shall dwell in heaven
everlasting.

"Unto him that is empty in love, faith, righteousness and industry there
is no heaven."

"Heaven is a splendor. A source of peace and happiness where the spirit
of God is visible in its appearance."

"He that passeth from this heaven is exalted into heaven eternal. Beyond
strife and death, where pain and sorrows are unknown."

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

"Hell is a dark and shabby place; a den of thieves, murderers, gamblers,
drunkards, liars, blasphemers, hypocrites, underminers, vooders, fortune
tellers, begrudgers, raggedmen, yellers, backsliders, lazymen,
deceivers, loafers, jormandizers, leppydoes, hoers, hoerlets, poverty,
lice and diseases."

"Consequently the victims of the devil eat the fruit of the tree they
have sown and therefore live in disgrace among men."

Woe be unto the spirit of him that passeth from this hell. He shall be
lowered into eternal hell where peace and happiness are unknown.

He that is of the devil shall be [segregated](errata.htm#7) from the
children of God; but he that is of God weareth the badge of the master,
and the doors of heaven shall be opened unto him."

"Lo, I heard a cry in hell," saith Athlyi, "calling upon me in God. And
I looked and beheld a man striving to conquer hell and escape from his
horrible condition."

And Athlyi spoke unto him saying, "Who art thou?"

I am Amos who persecuted thee and lied about you. Now I would rather be
a sweeper in the Gaathly than to be a prince in the palace of kings who
believeth not in thee."

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

And Athlyi spoke unto him saying, "Thou doeth thyself this harm for
there is no hell for him who believeth in me."

And Amos reached out crying, "Forgive me, O Athlyi and redeem me from
this misery. For I believe that thou art a man of God with power to
save."

Then Athlyi reached down and lifted him up saying, "Arise and stand
above the devil and his hell. Thy faith in me shall bear thee up, but he
that is weak in faith shall fall through his faith.

"For I am not of myself but of God, the Father, who is in me. He that
gives himself up to me wholeheartedly, I shall nurse him at my breast
and he shall be strong.

"There shall be no devil to conquer him, neither shall there be any hell
to hold him; for they that are of me, shall help him that is in me. They
that helpeth not their brother in me are not of me; likewise he who is
not in harmony with the Law of this gospel is not of me.

"He that cometh unto me halfway, I shall not receive him," saith Athlyi,
"for he is weak in himself in me and shall therefore fall in himself."

"He that withholds from me, that which he is able to give, shall lose it
without compensation; but he that soweth in me wholeheartedly shall reap
a reward ten fold. For I am of good soil, and God <span id="page_75">p.
75</span> the Father in me, shall water that which is sown in me."

"In the lives of those that are in me," saith Athlyi, "there is but one
God, one Shepherd, and one Gaathly. The Holy law is of God and is God
with those in me."

"They that are of me shall help those that are in me. They shall march
together to defend their dignity and create projects to supply their
necessities in life.

"At the sound of the bugle of war all Athlyians shall gather around
their Rulers. Then, at the Shepherd's command go forward to defend their
rights.

"Knowing that our reward is Heaven everlasting if our enemy we shall
conquer, it is therefore the sole spirit of the Athlyians to die in
honor rather than to live as dependable dogs in disgrace, subject to the
dictation of others who are not in me."

Then Athlyi called his Cledgers around him and placed his hands upon the
right shoulder of each saying, "Blessed are the creators in me. They
shall sit with me in heaven eternal and return with me to inspect the
earth and crown the worthy.

"He that is not clean, industrious and thrifty is not in me, for I am a
lover of cleanness, Lord of <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> industry and
a builder of commerce, that men may be happy in me.

"For he that liveth a productive life in me, seeketh and shall obtain
heaven terrestrial and heaven eternal.

"Go ye out upon the earth, beneath the earth, upon the waters, beneath
the waters and upon the trees Gather in the blessings of God and develop
them in me that ye prove yourself worthy of compensation. For weakness
and poverty is of the devil but richness and power is of God.

"But where there is no love, righteousness, and faith in your
transactions the glory of heaven shall vanish and the misery of hell
shall occupy the soul."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15. The Beggar](piby20)
