[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby05)  [Next](piby07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# THE SECOND BOOK OF ATHLYI CALLED AGGREGATION

### CHAPTER 1

### HEAVEN GRIEVED

For as much as the children of Ethiopia, God's favorite people of old,
have turned away from his divine Majesty, neglecting life economic,
believing they could on spiritual wings fly to the kingdom of God,
consequently became a dependent for the welfare of others.

Therefore the whole heaven was grieved and there was a great lamentation
in the Kingdom of God. Ethiopian mothers whose bodies have been dead for
a thousand years, weeping for their suffering generations and shall not
be comforted.

And behold two angels of the Lord resembling two saints of Ethiopia
appeared before Athlyi and he inquired of them what is the cry?

And they answered him saying, Ethiopian mothers who have been dead a
thousand years pleading before Elijah for the redemption of suffering
Ethiopia and her posterities who by the feet of the nations are trodden.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### Convention in Heaven

There is a great convention in heaven, saith the angels of the Lord,
unto you this day we are sent by the Lord to felicitate. For thou art
appointed the shepherd to lead Ethiopia's generations from the
oppressive feet of the nations, and there are appointed also prophets to
prepare the way before thee.

And it came to pass when Athlyi heard these sayings he feared with great
astonishment and turned his face from the angels of the Lord. And there
appeared unto him his divine highness Jesus Christ, Prince of the
Kingdom of God, and said quickly behold the messengers of my Father.

At this saying Athlyi turned again to the angels of the Lord and said,
thy will be done, O God of Ethiopia, but how can I be the shepherd, to
lead millions of millions even from the end of the earth when as I am
but a twig before the eyes of men?

### The Heavens Open

And the angels of the Lord answered him saying, a twig that is made by
the Holy Spirit, an instrument to lead men, is great in the sight of
<span id="page_27">p. 27</span> God, over which the armies of the earth
or the hosts of hell shall not prevail.

And it came to pass that the angel who had the less to say lifted her
eyes to heaven and stretched forth her arms over the earth and cried,
blessed be thou Ethiopia, glory be the Father, thou Elijah, Hosanna,
Hosanna to Jehovah, praise ye Douglas the convention have triumph.

There appeared a beautiful light on earth and when the light flashed
Athlyi looked toward the heaven, and behold the heaven was -open and
there was a great host of saints robed in blue, millions of millions as
far as his eyes could see there was a mighty host.

When Athlyi sought the angels of the Lord they were not and he heard a
voice say "Athlyi" and another "Athlyi" and he looked up and saw two
angels ascending towards the celestial host.

### Ethiopia Anointed

And when the two messengers of the Lord were midways they cried out unto
the earth saying, blessed be thou Ethiopia for this day thou art
anointed, thou are blest with a blessing, be ye forever united and stand
up, let the world know your God.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

And when the two angels of the Lord neared the multitude the whole host
roared with a thunder of joy that shook the earth like a mighty
earthquake.

And it came to pass that an angel robed in four colours came forward to
receive them and the whole celestial multitude stood and quietly formed
an aisle.

And when the two messengers appeared before the heavenly host they bowed
to the multitude and turned themselves around and bowed also to the
earth.

Then came forward the mighty Angel robed in four colors and placed a
gold ring upon their heads, and came forward also two mothers of
Ethiopia, each with a star in their right hand, and pinned them on the
left breast of the two messengers of the Lord.

And it came to pass that heaven and earth shook three times and the two
angels marched up the aisle and joined with the multitude.

### Rejoicing in Heaven

There was great rejoicing in Heaven and singing hosanna to Elijah;
praise ye Douglas; blessed be thou Ethiopia forever and forever; the
people at the end of the known world, and world <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> unknown, shall look for the coming of thy children with food
and with rainment.

And when the two angels had joined the multitude and the mighty angel
had finished his performance the said angel who was robed in colors
turned to the heavenly host and said:

"Mothers of Ethiopia, the convention has triumphed, your sorrows have
brought joy to Ethiopia, your tears have anointed her soil with a
blessing, your cries have awakened her children throughout the earth,
yea in the corners of the unknown world are they aroused, and is
prophesying, saying prepare ye the way for a redeemer."

### Shepherd Anointed

For unto Ethiopia this day a Shepherd is anointed, yea, as a shepherd
gathers his sheep so shall he gather unto God, the generation of
Ethiopia even from the end of the earth and lead them high, a nation
among nations.

Then shall the inhabitants of the earth know that the Lord our God has
not forsaken Ethiopia, and that the mighty is weak against his command,
and unto no nation has he given power forever.

Verily I say unto you, woe be unto the persecutors of the shepherd for
he is anointed by <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> the Lord our God,
therefore one drop of his blood or the least of his apostles whom he has
anointed to administer the law to the generations of Ethiopia, or the
blood of a prophet within the law, shall break to pieces the oppressors
of Ethiopia.

### The Mighty Angel

When the mighty angel had finished speaking to the heavenly host he then
turned to the earth and said: "Children of Ethiopia, stand," and there
flashed upon the earth a great multitude of Negroes knowing not from
whence they came; then shouted instantly the whole heavenly host,
"Behold, behold Ethiopia has triumphed."

And it came to pass that the mighty angel spoke to the multitude of
Negroes, saying, "Woe be unto those who say to the shepherd, thou fool,
or to the least of an apostle anointed to administer the law, for it is
not the desire of the shepherd but the will of the Lord who is God."

### Dominion Over the Shepherd

"For as much as the Lord has dominion over the shepherd and the shepherd
over his apostles and the apostles over all the generations of Ethiopia;
then shall the Lord our God administer <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>
to the shepherd and the shepherd to his apostles and the apostles to all
the children of Ethiopia.

"Woe be unto an apostle who is anointed to administer the law and
neglect or deny it. Verily he shall be cast out and the hand of the Lord
shall come upon him with sorrow and disgrace.

"Woe be unto those who saith I will not be united, neither will I follow
the shepherd, they shall be as sheep without a shepherd only to be
destroyed by the wolf of the field.

"Woe be unto those who saith I hearken not to the voice of the shepherd
but go the way of the majority, for in the majority the spirit of the
lord will not be found.

"Woe be unto those who saith I will not worship in the house of the Lord
subsidiary to the house of Athlyi."

### Purification

"For as much as the house of Athlyi is founded by the holy spirit to
purify the children of Ethiopia and to administer the holy law commanded
to them by the Lord God of all mercies, that they in the end shall be
ushered in the kingdom of his Divine Majesty by faith through
consecration in love, justice and by the <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
pledging of life's loyalty to a prolific and defensive cause for the
welfare of mankind.

"Let not the least or the greatest of the children give a deaf ear to
the saying of the shepherd thereof, for through the mouth of the
shepherd cometh the word of the Lord to the adherents of the Holy Law."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2: Presentation of the Law](piby07.md)
