[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](piby13)  [Next](piby15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### CHAPTER 9

### THE WORD OF THE LORD

And it came to pass in the year of nineteen hundred and twenty four and
the twelfth day of the ninth month, the word of the Lord, God of
Ethiopia came to Athlyi saying:

"I am God, the Creator, Father of Ham, Canaan, Nimrod and
Ethiopia." <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

"Why calleth thou my Holy Temple, Church?" sayeth the Lord unto Athlyi.

"Will thou also destroy the righteousness of my holy name?"

"Will thou even so teach that I am a God who confers honor upon the
envious in mind, the lying, inhuman, murdering, plunderous, oppressive
and adulterous characters in my name?"

And the Lord continued to say, "Athlyi! Oh Athlyi! I say unto you again.
Why calleth my holy temple, 'Church'? Will thou also teach that I have
<span id="page_59">p. 59</span> commanded to destroy the offsprings of
Ham in Canaan?" <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

Athlyi answered saying, "Father, behold the house of Athlyi."

"This I have created," saith the Lord, "Verily I shall dwell in the High
place at the House of Athlyi and shall give light to the Shepherd and
the Shepherd to his Apostles and his Apostles to all people who shall
constitute the auxiliaries of my most Holy house of Athlyi.

"But why calleth thou these auxiliaries, 'Church'?" he continued.

Athlyi hesitated and the Lord our God, who stood in the midst of a
brilliant light, like unto a circle pointed to Athlyi and said: "I have
commanded thee but thou art carried away by those who polluted the
righteousness of my name."

At this saying Athlyi advanced towards the Lord with open arms and cried
out, "O God of Ethiopia, I pray, redeem me, wash me clean and separate
me from all gospels that pollute the righteousness of thy name that
those in me unto thee may be clean and free from all things abominable
in thy sight."

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

"Thou art the supreme sage; pray! give me to nurse at thy breast the
milk of wisdom that I may know and understand thee."

And it came to pass that the Lord, our God of Ethiopia, spoke saying,
"Reach out and touch me."

Athlyi reached out and with the first finger of his right hand touched
the personality in the light, straightway his heart became in motion and
the eyes of Athlyi lit up like a torch. Evidently he had increased in
wisdom, a man matchless in spirit.

And the Lord, God of Ethiopia, spoke unto Athlyi saying, "Thou art a
star in my crown. Go ye through the lands that men may dwell in thee and
see clear the impediments in the paths of their lives."

Now when the Lord had commanded Athlyi to carry the light unto others he
departed and the light of his eyes lit up the near and distant darkness,
and the word of his mouth brought freedom to the enslaved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[58:3](piby14.htm#fr_2) Cf. Gen. 10:6-7: "By
these were the borders of the nations divided in their lands; every one
after his tongue, after their families, in their nations. And the sons
of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[59:4](piby14.htm#fr_3) Gen. 10:24-27: "And Noah
awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son \[Ham\] had done unto
him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. Rejoicing in the Light](piby15)
