[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ktm04)  [Next](ktm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

# The Voice of the Mother.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

ARISE, My child, and go forth a man! Bear manfully what is thy lot to
bear; that which comes to thy hand to be done, do with full strength and
fear not. Forget not that I, the giver of manhood, the giver of
womanhood, the holder of victory, am thy Mother.

Think not life is serious! What is destiny but thy Mother's play? Come,
be My playfellow awhile,--meet all happenings merrily.

Murmurest thou of need of purpose? Think’st thou the ball is
purposeless, with which the Mother plays? Know’st thou not that Her toy
is a thunderbolt, charged with power to shatter the worlds, at the turn
of Her wrist? Ask not of plans. Needs the arrow any plan when it is
loosed from the bow? Such art thou. When the life is lived, the plan
will stand revealed. Till then, O child of time, know nothing!

My sport is unerring. For that alone set forth on the day's journey.
Think it was for *My* pleasure thou

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

camest forth into the world, and for that again, when night falls, and
My desire is accomplished, I shall withdraw thee to My rest. Ask
nothing. See nothing. Plan nothing. Let My will flow through thee, as
the ocean through an empty shell.

But this thing understand. Not one movement shall be in vain. Not one
effort shall fail at last. The dream shall be less, not greater, than
the deed. Thou shalt go here or there for some petty reason, and thy
going shall subserve great ends. Thou shalt meet and speak with many,
but some few shall be Mine from the beginning. With these thou shall
exchange a secret sign, and they shall follow with thee.

 

And that sign?

 

Deep in the heart of hearts of Mine own flashes the sacrificial knife of
Kali. Worshippers of the Mother are they from their birth in Her
incarnation of the sword.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lovers of death
are they,--not lovers of life--and of storm and stress.

Such shall come to thee with torch unlit, for fire. My voice cries out
over the teeming earth for lives, for the lives and blood of the crowned
kings of men. Remember that I Who cry have shown also the way to answer.
For of every kind has the mother been the first, for
[protection](errata.htm#4) of her flock, to leap to death.

Religion, called by whatever name; has been ever the love of death. But
to-day the flame of renunciation shall be lighted in My lands and
consume men with a [passion](errata.htm#5) beyond control of thought.
Then shall My people thirst for self-sacrifice as others for enjoyment.
Then shall labour and suffering and service be counted sweet instead of
bitter. For this age is great in time, and I, even I, Kali, am the
Mother of the nations.

Shrink not from defeat, embrace despair. Pain is not different from
pleasure, if I will both. Rejoice

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

therefore, when thou comest to the place of tears, and see Me smile. At
such spots do I keep My tryst with men, and fold them deep into My
heart.

Uproot every interest that would conflict with Mine. Neither love, nor
friendship, nor comfort, nor home, may make its voice heard when I
speak. Pass from a palace to plunge into the ocean of terror,--from the
chamber of ease to stand guard in a burning city. Know that as the one
is unreal, so also is the other. Meet fate with a smile.

Look for no mercy for thyself, and I shall make thee bearer of great
vessels of mercy to others. Accept bravely thine own darkness and thy
lamp shall cheer many. Fulfil gladly the meanest service, and leave high
places unsought.

Be steadfast in the toil I set thee. Weave well the warp into the woof.
Shrink from no demand that the task makes on thee. Feel no
responsibility. Ask for no reward.

Strong, fearless, resolute,--when the sun sets, and the game is clone,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

thou shalt know well, little one, that I, Kali, the giver of manhood,
the giver of womanhood, and the withholder of victory, am thy Mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Visit to Dukineshwar](ktm06)
