[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku03)  [Next](ku05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER TWO

#### Rank in Hawaii

POSITION in old Hawaii, both social and political, depended in the first
instance upon rank, and rank upon blood descent-hence the importance of
genealogy as proof of high ancestry. Grades of rank were distinguished
and divine honors paid to those chiefs alone who could show such an
accumulation of inherited sacredness as to class with the gods among
men. Since a child inherited from both parents, he might claim higher
rank than either one. The stories of usurping chiefs show how a
successful inferior might seek intermarriage with a chiefess of rank in
order that his heir might be in a better position to succeed his parent
as ruling chief. In any case, a virgin wife must be taken in order to be
sure of her child's paternity, hence the careful guarding of a highborn
girl's virginity until her first child was born. Laxness in enforcing
taboo rights lowered rank. Political power also had its bearing upon
rank, perhaps because a ruling chief was in a position to enforce the
taboos. Nevertheless, a chief might be himself dispossessed of lands and
followers and forced to live like a commoner and yet claim the right of
rank for his posterity.\[1\]

The system by which closeness of blood relationship between parents of
high birth was reckoned in determining the rank inherited by their
offspring is described in four published sources.\[2\] David Malo's
account must date before 1853. Judge Fornander died in 1887, and his
notes on the subject

\[1. Fornander, *Polynesian Race*, I, 113-14, II, 28-30; Kepelino, pp.
130-42, 143.

2\. Malo, pp. 80-84; Kepelino, Appendix, pp. 195-98; Fornander,
*Collection* ("Memoirs," No. 6), pp. 307-11; Rivers, I, 380-82.\]

{p. 12}

may belong to Kalakaua's time. The Hon. E. K. Lilikalani was court
genealogist during the last period of the monarchy, and his manuscript,
prepared "for the information of Liliuokalani" and published in 1932 by
the Bishop Museum as an Appendix to Kepelino, must fall within the
queen's reign. He dictated its contents to me in substantially the same
form in 1914. Rivers must have obtained his similar information from
Poepoe at about the same time.

David Malo is our earliest and probably best authority of the four on
the system of reckoning rank in Hawaii before the intrusion of Western
culture, since he lived at a time when the taboos were still in
practice. Malo came from Keauhou, North Kona, on the island of Hawaii,
where he was associated with the high chief Kuakini, acquired Hawaiian
learning under Auwae, the favorite genealogist of Kamehameha, and took
an active part as master of ceremonies at court entertainments. About
1820 he came to Lahaina on the island of Maui. There he became the
friend of the Rev. William Richards of the American mission. Abandoning
the old faith, he studied for the ministry in the Lahainaluna mission
school and occupied a parish on West Maui until his death in 1853. \[3\]

As Malo is our most reliable native source for ancient practice, so
Fornander is the leading foreign authority. Son of a distinguished
Swedish clergyman and himself a man of education, he was a resident of
the Hawaiian Islands from 1842 until his death in 1887. Much of the time
he was engaged in government service. He was married to a Hawaiian
chiefess, spoke the language fluently, and was able to claim personal
acquaintance with all classes "from the King to the poorest fisherman of
the remotest hamlet." He thus won the respect and confidence of native
and foreigner alike.\[4\]

\[3. N. B. Emerson, "Biographical Sketch," in Malo, pp. 5-14-

4\. W. D. Alexander, "A Brief Memoir of Abraham Fornander," in Stokes,
Index to "The Polynesian Race," pp. v-vi.\]

{p. 13}

Malo, Lilikalani, and Poepoe do not differ essentially in their grading
of the ranking system. All would give highest rank to the child of own
brother and sister, the grades descending according to distance in
kinship blood between the two parents, provided these are themselves of
high chief, that is, of *niaupi'o* rank. The union of brother and
sister, says Malo, is a *pi'o* ("arching") union symbolized by the
figure of a bow. That between children of younger or elder brothers and
sisters (first cousins) is a *ho'i* ("return") union. Less desirable is
the union between half-brother and sister, called a *naha*, probably
correctly a *nahá* ("broken") union. The child in all three cases would
be of the *niaupi'o* class but entitled to different degrees of
veneration in the form of taboos. The child of a *pi'o* union was an
*akua*, a god. So sacred is the child of such a union that he is spoken
of as "a fire, a blaze, a raging heat, only at night is it possible for
such children to speak with men," this lest the shadow of the god
falling upon a house render it sacred, hence uninhabitable. A person
even accidentally profaning thus the sacred taboo chief was in danger of
death. A chief of divine rank therefore went abroad at night, and the
most sacred chiefs were always carried about in a litter (manele) lest
their very footsteps make the ground forbidden. Offspring of both *pi'o*
and *ho'i* unions were entitled to the prostrating taboo, *tapu-moe*,
but the child of a *naka* union had only the crouching taboo,
*tapu-a-noho*.

Judge Fornander understands the system slightly differently. He would
give the *tapu-moe* to all three of these unions. Under the highest or
*pi'o* grade he would include children of a half- as well as own brother
and sister. By a *naha* union he understands the child of parents of the
same family but of different generations and instances the union of
father and daughter or of a girl with her mother's brother. As example
of the *pi'o* rank he cites the child of Keawe by his half-sister
Kaulele. Ka-'I-'i-mamao, child of Keawe by a

{p. 14}

niaupi'o chiefess of different parents, has only the niaupi'o rank. A
girl born to Keawe by his own daughter was reckoned of naha rank.

Judge Fornander does not mention marriages between first cousins; Malo
makes no reference to marriages in different generations. Since the
whole ranking system seems to consist in an effort to distinguish the
prerogatives of chiefs from those of commoners, it would not be
surprising if unions considered favorable among chiefs were exactly
those not practiced or even held to be incestuous among commoners.
Rivers was told that marriages between first cousins were not permitted
by Hawaiians and that their tolerance by the mission at first stood in
the way of Hawaiian acceptance of the new teaching.\[5\]

From these informants we gain only a partial view of family
relationships and attitudes as they affected rank among chiefs in
ancient days, only such as were preserved up to the time of the last
days of the monarchy. Certain it is that there existed a developed
system of rank based primarily upon blood descent but also dependent to
some extent upon political power and marked by a severe etiquette
designed to mark off the chief class from that of commoners through the
claim of direct descent from ancestral gods. Hence the preservation of
such a genealogical chant of beginnings as the Kumulipo was of the
highest importance in establishing the rank of a ruling family.

\[5. Rivers, I, 382; Cf. Firth, We the Tikopia, pp. 330-33.\]

{p. 15}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First-born Son and the Taboo](ku05)
