[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku06)  [Next](ku08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER FIVE

#### Captain Cook as Lono

WE KNOW that once, indeed, in historic times, the god Lono's looked-for
return seemed to have become a reality. The British officer Captain
James Cook, sailing north under orders to explore the Pacific Coast of
North America for a northwest passage to the Atlantic, touched upon a
hitherto uncharted island, northernmost of the Hawaiian group, and on,
his return, on January 17, 1779, anchored off Kealakekua,
"Pathway-of-the-gods," on the larger island of Hawaii. The wondering
multitude crowding the shore to witness this marvel were easily
persuaded by their priests of the Lono cult that the prophesied day was
at hand.

The story is told circumstantially by Cook's underofficer, Captain James
King, who often accompanied Cook on his visits to shore and was taken by
the natives for his son.\[1\] Upon first landing, King writes that they
"were received by four men, who carried wands tipped with dog's hair,
and marched before us, pronouncing with a loud voice a short sentence,
in which we could only distinguish the word Orono.... The crowd, which
had been collected on the shore, retired at our approach; and not a
person was to be seen, except a few lying prostrate on the ground, near
the huts of the adjoining village."\[2\] The account tallies well with
what we know of the prostrating taboo in the presence of deity and of
the identification of the visitor with the god of the Makahiki, about
the time of which festival Cook's arrival

\[1. King, III, 4 ff.; Fornander, Polynesian Race, II, 157-65, 167-79.

2\. King, III, 5-6.\]

{p. 23}

took place. Hence the invocation to "O Rono" (Lono), as a note adds:
"Captain Cook generally went by this name among the natives of Owhyee
\[Hawaii\]; but we could never learn its direct meaning. Sometimes they
applied it to an in visible being, who, they said, lived in the heavens.
We also found that it was a title belonging to a person of great rank
and power in the island, who resembles pretty much the Delai Lama of the
Tartars, and the celestial emperor of Japan."

The stone platform is still standing that marks the site of the heiau to
which the priests of Lono conducted Cook and his companion for the
ceremony of chanting and offerings appropriate to the welcome of a god.
The prose note asserts that at this time the Kumulipo prayer chant was
recited, with "Puou" as the officiating priest. Unfortunately King's
full description of the occasion neither confirms nor disproves the
tradition. Puou is easily to be identified with the old chief called
"Koah" in King's account, who seems to have taken the lead throughout in
the reception of the visitors. He had been a great warrior but at this
time is described as "a little old man, of an emaciated figure; his eyes
exceedingly sore and red, and his body covered with a white leprous
scurf." Another priest, described by King as "a tall young man with a
long beard," also took part in the chanting. King writes the name as
"Kairekeekeea," possibly to be identified with Pailili or Pailiki, who,
according to Fornander, substituted at this time for his absent
father.\[3\]

This younger priest chanted "a kind of hymn ... in which he was joined
by Koah." Of their manner of chanting King writes: "Their speeches, or
prayers, were delivered ... with a readiness and volubility that
indicated them to be according to some formulary." At the presentation
of a dressed hog to the captain, Koah "addressed him in a long speech,
pronounced with much vehemence and rapidity." With Cook

\[3. Fornander, *Polynesian Race*, II, 173 n.\]

{p. 24}

perched on a kind of scaffolding, the two priests further delivered a
chant "sometimes in concert, and sometimes alternately" and lasting "a
considerable time." Finally, before the guests were fed, the younger
priest "began the same kind of chant as before, his companion making
regular responses." These diminished to a single "Orono," an invocation
plainly addressed to the god Lono, believed to be there present in the
person of the distinguished stranger.

It is not surprising that during the days that followed the successful
attack against a god who had proved fallible to weapons, the old warrior
advised putting to rout the whole expedition, while the young chief, who
had acted as political head during the absence of his superior, remained
friendly. The matter-of-fact way in which the multitude regarded the
death of a god has curious confirmation in King's statement that after
Cook's death the people inquired anxiously of King when "the Orono"
would come again.'

\[4. King, p. 69.\]

{p. 25}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Two Dynasties](ku08)
