[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku14)  [Next](ku16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER THIRTEEN

#### The Crawlers

IN THE fourth ode the birth of amphibious creatures is celebrated as
"those of the sea take to the land." Translators tend to read the lines
according to their own theory of the relation of the passage to the
history of life on earth. The queen and the translator for *Aloha* are
faithful to a generalized picture of amphibious creatures swarming up
along the coast onto the land, prototype of the growth and spread of man
over earth as human history emerges out of the dim past. Bastian sees
these as a succession ascending in scale from lower to higher in the
animal and vegetable world. Kupihea believes we should relate the series
to specific families of settlers belonging to the migration period.
Pokini refers them to a stage in the life of a child as it begins to
crawl about and meet the rough and tumble of life. In every case it is
the particular interpretation each gives to the whole meaning of the
chant that has decided the value given to any doubtful phrase. In
general I have followed Kupihea's fairly coherent interpretation because
it seems to hang together, although this is not essential to Hawaiian
poetic art, and to leave to each reader his own evaluation of the
symbolism involved. If actually intended as a portrayal of conditions
under a historic migration, it makes a pretty sorry indictment of the
past.

Pokini, on the other hand, would explain each name of the species born
under Popanopano, the male, and Polalowehi, the female, generative
agents at this stage of life, as a play upon the characteristics of the
developing infant. They show him "clinging" (*pilipili*) to his parents
and "roughly"

{p. 76}

(*kalakala*) separated; "chidden" (*ka'uka'u*), "forgetful" (*palaka*),
gaining "independence" (*kaihukunini*), "fed" (*kupelepele*), growing
"plump" (*kele*). Under Pokini's interpretation the general condition of
filth and sluggishness in which the half-land, half-sea creatures of
this new era live, summed up in the concluding lines--

Reeling they go  
Go in the land of crawlers  
Born is the family of crawlers in the dim past--

gives rather a humorous than a sordid turn to the whole picture.

It is to be noticed that, although an internal rhyme scheme links verses
closely for sound effect, generally into couplets, each verse is read as
if complete in itself, the second verse of the couplet a balance, not a
completion, to the first. This piling-up of suggestive observations
appropriate to the theme gives to the whole passage a cumulative effect
rather than one of connected sequences. Kupihea's free translation of
the Prologue shows what may be done to read into such poetic word-play a
sustained development of thought based upon his idea of the inner
meaning intended by the poet under the figure of the "family of
crawlers," in this case, according to his version, a consistent
description of a historic immigration.

The opening lines of the ode, which I have given literally after the
text, have been variously read. Translators generally refer the lines to
the coming of La'a, presumably the La'a-from-Kahiki of traditional fame.

Build up the fire of La'a there  
The great chief from over the ocean

is the most picturesque rendering offered me, the "dusky black 'ape
plant" being thus with much probability referred to a specific
immigration, but I am unable to bring the fire building into line with
this reading. The queen writes vaguely: {p. 77} "Established in the dawn
of La'a's light," but falls to make use of the allusion. It would be
interesting to connect the ode with the introduction of the taboos, the
crouching, or even the "burning taboo."

It has seemed worth while to dwell at this point once more upon the
possibility of variations in translation based upon the text itself, in
order to drive home the ease with which the language of poetry may be
twisted to fit a particular interpretation, and hence the caution with
which any such reading is to be accepted without certain knowledge of
the composer's original intention. Only a contemporary audience
acquainted with the facts in each case can be sure of this, nor can one
be certain that the meaning for Kalakaua's day was the same as that at
the time of composition, or that Kalakaua or another has not manipulated
the text to suit his own purposes, as Kupihea thinks; or, even so, just
what he and not Kupihea has read into particular passages.

### <span id="chant04">CHANT FOUR</span>

Plant the *'ahi'a* and cause it to propagate  
The dusky black *'ape* plant  
380. The sea creeps up to the land  
Creeps backward, creeps forward  
Producing the family of crawlers  
Crawling behind, crawling in front  
Advancing the front, settling down at the back  
385. The front of my cherished one \[?\]  
He is dark, splendid,  
Popanopano is born as a male \[?\]  
Popanopano, the male  
Po-lalo-wehi, the female  
390. Gave birth to those who produce eggs  
Produce and multiply in the passing night  
Here they are laid  
Here they roll about  
The children roll about, play in the sand  
395. Child of the night of black darkness is born  
    The night gives birth

{p. 78}

The night gives birth to prolific ones  
The night is swollen with plump creatures  
The night gives birth to rough-backed turtles  
400. The night produces horn-billed turtles  
The night gives birth to dark-red turtles  
The night is pregnant with the small lobster  
The night gives birth to sluggish-moving geckos  
Slippery is the night with sleek-skinned geckos  
405. The night gives birth to clinging creatures  
The night proclaims rough ones  
The night gives birth to deliberate creatures  
The night shrinks from the ineffective  
The night gives birth to sharp-nosed creatures  
410. Hollowed is the night for great fat ones  
The night gives birth to mud dwellers  
The night lingers for track leavers  
413. Born is the male for the narrow stream, the female for the  
broad stream  
Born is the turtle \[*Honu*\] living in the sea  
Guarded by the *Maile* seedling \[*Kubonua*\] living on land

Refrain

419\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the sea-borer \[*Wili*\] living in the sea  
Guarded by the Wiliwili tree living on land

Refrain

425\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the sea-worm living in the sea  
Guarded by the bastard-sandalwood living on land

Refrain

431\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the Okea living in the sea  
Guarded by the Ahakea tree living on land

Refrain

437\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the sea-urchin \[*Wana*\] living in the sea  
Guarded by the thorny Wanawana plant living on land

Refrain

{p. 79}

443\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the Nene shellfish living in the sea  
Guarded by the Manene grass living on land

Refrain

449\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the Liko living in the sea  
Guarded by the Piko tree living on land

Refrain

455\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the Opeope jellyfish living in the sea  
Guarded by the Oheohe \[bamboo\] living on land

Refrain

461\. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream  
Born is the Nanana \[sea spider\] living in the sea  
Guarded by the Nonanona living on land

Refrain

467\. With a dancing motion they go creeping and crawling  
The tail swinging its length  
Sullenly, sullenly  
470. They go poking about the dunghill  
Filth is their food, they devour it  
Eat and rest, eat and belch it up  
Eating like common people  
Distressful is their eating  
475. They move about and become heated  
Act as if exhausted  
They stagger as they go  
Go in the land of crawlers  
The family of crawlers born in the night  
480.    Still it is night

{p. 80}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Night-Digger](ku16.md)
