[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku18)  [Next](ku20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

#### The Dawn of Day

WITH the eighth chant begins the period of living men called the "Day"
or *Ao*. There appears now the "well-formed child" in the "time when men
multiplied" and the "time when men came from afar," as the Po-kinikini
and Po-he'enalu-mamao, generative agents of the period, have been
paraphrased. Men multiply "by hundreds," and the function of sex is once
more emphasized in the familiar antithesis

Man born for the narrow stream  
Woman for the broad stream.

The time of the gods, *po akua*, is here; a time long ago, *po mamao*.
Wave after wave come the new race, one following after another, the
"gods" distinguished by ruddy faces and "white chins" or beards, the men
of undetermined ancestry, the kanaka, dark in color.

There follows a play upon the words *ho'omalino* and *ho'ola'ila'i*, the
word *malino* synonymous with *malie* meaning "peaceful," used here with
la'ila'i, "calm, still," to express the moment of suspense in nature
preceding the birth of gods and men. The juxtaposition of the two words
has passed into classic use. An old mele ascribed to the wife of
Kalaniopu'u begins

O Kona kai opua i ka la'i  
O pua hinano i ka malie

Kona of tranquil seas  
Pandanus blossom in the calm,

where the flower named, the pungent-scented pandanus

{p. 95}

blossom regarded by Hawaiians as an aphrodisiac, gives an erotic turn to
the couplet. Compare the similar pause in nature preliminary to a new
birth reported from New Zealand at the moment when the Wide Sky above,
Rangi-nui, seeks Earth in the person of Papa-tu-a-nuku: "In that period
the amount of light was nil; absolute and complete darkness (pokutikuti
kakarauri) prevailed; there was no sun, no moon, no stars, no clouds, no
light, no mist-no ripples stirred the surface of the ocean; no breath of
air, a complete and absolute stillness." There follows the "planting"
(*hikaia*) of land growths corresponding to the "births" recorded in the
first seven chants of the Kumulipo.\[1\]

In the Kumulipo this stillness in nature prepares for the emergence of
gods and men. There are born the woman La'ila'i and three males, Ki'i a
man, Kane a god, Kanaloa "the hot-striking octopus." With them comes
Day, the *Ao*. There follow a trio of more generalized concepts. "The
wombs \[?\] give birth." "Ocean-edge" (Moana-liha) and "The-damp-forest"
(Ka-wao-ma'aukele) possibly refer to the land and sea forms born into
the night world in the preceding sections but more naturally to the
economic divisions based upon the two sources of food supply, fish and
vegetable food, *i'a* and *'ai*, upon which life was regulated for
island dwellers. Last, in the lines sometimes paraphrased

The first chief of the dim past dwelling in cold uplands  
The man of long life and hundreds upon hundreds of chiefs

is summed up the whole generation of the earliest stock from the
beginning, whose genealogy, set down as man and wife in the eleventh
section, occupies about one-third of the whole Kumulipo chant.

The lines undoubtedly have historical significance. We know from old
sources that remote valleys inland were the preferred homes of the
ancient chief stock. The gods Kane

\[1. Smith, *Lore of the Whare-wananga*, p. 117\]

{p. 96}

and Kanaloa are associated in chant and story with such habitations.
Homes "in the heavens" may denote other islands left behind in
migration. At some time the old line was superseded by a new branch who
became the chief stock on the family genealogy. There came a split
between gods and men, and this split is laid at the door of the woman
La'ila'i who left her divine husband in the sacred place of the gods to
live "as a woman" (*i kanaka*) and people the earth with mankind. "The
woman sat sideways" is an old saying for a wife who takes another
husband; *keke'e ka noho a ka wahine*, says the text.

The affair took place at a time of unfathomable antiquity, referred to
in the two phrases *ka po he'e mamao* and *ka po kinikini; Kanaka wai ka
po mai*, that is, "from the far past," is the modern expression. It took
place in "the land of Lua." The word means "cave" or "pit," and we at
once connect the place with stories of the 'Olohe or pit-dwellers
already alluded to. Pokini Robinson knew of a place on the island of
Oahu, "a little pool up somewhere in Wahiawa" called "Ka lua a Ahu," of
which the native-born say, "If you bathe in that pool you have seen
Oahu."\[2\] The three children born of this adventure are named in the
text according to some obscure connection with the dim story of the
past. "Clothed-in-leaves," *Lo-palapala*, is a name given today to a
class of chiefs who, owing to some unlucky turn of fortune, are obliged
to retire to the back country and live obscurely until fortune favors
them once more, often in the shape of a child who gives promise of
superior qualities. This last birth is thus definitely connected with
the half-mythical 'Olohe people. Their pairing as male and female in the
lines following plays once more upon the dominant theme of sex. The
story seems to point to a debasement of rank through intermarriage of
the "gods" with an inferior stock. But whether the newcomers or the old
were the "gods" is not

\[2. Beckwith, Hawaiian Mythology, pp. 287-88.\]

{p. 97}

made clear. Nor is it clear whether the part played in the spread of
mankind over earth in line 635 is to be referred to La'ila'i herself or
to the daughter Maila ("Beautiful"), as some would amend the text *Noho
mai la*. The series of births which follow, after the first, which seems
to be suggested as a play upon the name of the mother, must be taken as
a purely figurative approach to the coming of Day and is not to be found
listed among the genealogies of the Kamokuiki book, as is that born to
La'ila'i in a later chant, assigned by Kamokuiki to the man Ki'i. A new
race spreads over the land as a result of La'ila'i's affair in the land
of the pit-dwellers. They cover earth like the creeping ti plant, the
*Cordyline terminalis* of the botanist, to be found everywhere in damp
growth of the low uplands. The night world presses on toward the dawn
until day finally comes forth, "opening wide."

### <span id="chant08">CHANT EIGHT</span>

595\. Well-formed is the child, well-formed now  
Child in the time when men multiplied  
Child in the time when men came from afar  
Born were men by the hundreds  
Born was man for the narrow stream  
600. Born was woman for the broad stream  
Born the night of the gods  
Men stood together  
Men slept together  
They two slept together in the time long ago  
605. Wave after wave of men moving in company  
Ruddy the forehead of the god  
Dark that of man  
White-\[bearded\] the chin  
Tranquil was the time when men multiplied  
620. Calm like the time when men came from afar  
It was called Calmness \[La'ila'i\] then  
Born was La'ila'i a woman  
Born was Ki'i a man  
Born was Kane a god

{p. 98}

615\. Born was Kanaloa the hot-striking octopus  
    It was day  
The wombs gave birth \[?\]  
Ocean-edge  
The-damp-forest, latter of the two  
The first chief of the dim past dwelling in cold uplands, their
younger  
620. The man of long life and hundreds upon hundreds of chiefs  
Scoop out, scoop out,  
Hollow out, hollow out, keep hollowing  
Hollow out, hollow out, "the woman sat sideways"  
La'ila'i, a woman in the time when men came from afar  
625. La'ila'i, a woman in the time when men multiplied  
Lived as a woman of the time when men multiplied  
Born was Groping-one \[Hahapo'ele\], a girl  
Born was Dim-sighted \[Ha-popo\], a girl  
Born was Beautiful \[Maila\] called Clothed-in-leaves \[Lopalapala\]  
630. Naked \['Olohe\] was another name  
\[She\] lived in the land of Lua \[pit\]  
\[At\] that place called "pit of the 'Olohe"  
Naked was man born in the day  
Naked the woman born in the upland  
\[She\] lived here with man \[?\]  
Born was Creeping-ti-plant \[La'i'olo\] to man  
Born was Expected-day \[Kapopo\], a female  
Born was Midnight \[Po'ele-i\], born First-light \[Po'ele-a\]  
Opening-wide \[Wehi-loa\] was their youngest  
These were those who gave birth  
The little ones, the older ones  
Ever increasing in number  
Man spread abroad, man was here now  
    It was Day

{p. 99}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Woman Who Sat Sideways](ku20)
