[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku20)  [Next](ku22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER NINETEEN

#### The Flood

IN THE eleventh section a poetical prologue repeats the theme of the
last three chants. The marriage union most approved in Hawaiian taboo
chief families was that between brother and sister, called a *pi'o* or
"arching over." The child of such a union had the highest possible rank,
that of a "god," *akua*. The opening lines of the eleventh chant show
La'ila'i "living among chiefs and married to her brother" (*noho lani a
Pi'olani no*). From her high position she comes "bending down over
Ki'i," that is, she takes a mere man as a husband, and from this union
mankind is born, "the earth swarms with her offspring." The enumeration
of some eight hundred pairs, man and wife, descended from Kamaha'ina,
"first-born" son of La'ila'i and Ki'i, and Hali'a, La'ila'i's daughter
by Kane, sufficiently testifies to the fertility of the match.

At the close of the genealogical listing comes an eloquent passage
depicting, on the face of it, a flood of waters rising silently over the
land to the inhabited places. These lines offer an excellent and
thoroughly characteristic example of poetic symbolism. "The whole means
that Ki'i slept with her," summarized Ho'olapa, thus bringing the entire
declamatory effusion down to a most explicit conclusion. Expressions
such as *Kaui-ka-wa*, explained as the position of the legs in a bow as
in swimming, *Lele ka ihe* and *Kaui-ka-hoe*, whose exact meaning
Ho'olapa passed over, are recognized terms for positions taken in the
act of mating, hence are capitalized in the text.

There follows a reference to "the cock born on the back

{p. 108}

of Wakea," an event which spells the end of the genealogy of the
long-lived man of the eighth chant. His genealogy becomes extinct with
the name of Po-la'a, "Sacred-night." The allusion to the "cock," to be
met more than once in the course of the Kumulipo chant, is to a great
chief born into the family from an alien source, whose branch becomes
itself the main stock from which subsequent ruling chiefs on the family
line count descent. Further trace of the old stock who count descent
from the "first chief dwelling in cold uplands" is lost, "vanished into
the passing night."

The translation of the poetic passages in this section must necessarily
be idiomatic. *Noho lani* means "living among chiefs," as *noho kanaka*
implies "living as a woman" among the people. Legend is full of such
romantic situations enjoyed by both chiefs and chiefesses when the
restrictions of court life became irksome. The closing lines are
particularly difficult; some must go untranslated as I was unable to
keep the flood motive, where double meanings were involved, consistent
with the text. Bastian (p. 154) struggled with the same difficulty,
although probably unaware of the inner meaning. The *kua* is the woman's
house of a family setup. *Naneue* may imply "withdrawing to a private
place." Both *konikoni* and *hi'a* refer to "ardent desire" as applied
to the emotions, and *hi'a* to the art of fire-making, a well known sex
symbol.

### <span id="chant11">CHANT ELEVEN</span>

She was a woman living among chiefs and married to her brother  
She was a restless woman living among chiefs  
710. She lived above and came bending down over Ki'i  
The earth swarmed with her offspring  
Born was Kamaha'ina \[First-born\], a male  
Born was Kamamule, her younger born  
Born was Kamamainau, her middle one  
715. Born was Kamakulua her little one, a girl  
Kamaha'ina lived as husband to Hali\['a\]  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

{p. 109}

\[There follow some four hundred pairs, man and wife, to lines 1332-33,
where a pair of brothers are named, Ali'ihonupu'u the elder, Opu'upu'u
the younger. They seem to have a common wife named Ka-ea-honu, a name
connecting her with the species of turtle from which the precious
tortoise shell for ornament is obtained. From this point four hundred
more pairs carry the genealogy of the elder line to Po-la'a. That of the
younger appears in the next section.\]

1530\. Born was Pola'a  
Born was rough weather, born the current  
Born the booming of the sea, the breaking of foam  
Born the roaring, advancing, and receding of waves, the  
rumbling sound, the earthquake  
The sea rages, rises over the beach  
1534. Rises silently to the inhabited places  
Rises gradually up over the land . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Born is Po-elua \[Second-night\] on the lineage of Wakea  
1540. Born is the stormy night  
Born the night of plenty  
Born is the cock on the back of Wakea  
Ended is \[the line of\] the first chief of the dim past dwelling in
cold uplands  
Dead is the current sweeping in from the navel of the earth: that was a
warrior wave  
1545. Many who came vanished, lost in the passing night

{p. 110}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Woman Who Bore Children through the Brain](ku22)
