[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku25)  [Next](ku27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

#### The Genealogies

UP TO a certain point names listed on this latest genealogical branch of
the Kumulipo chant, begun in the fifteenth section and completed in the
sixteenth, not only appear on accepted genealogies of Hawaiian chief
families but bear a striking similarity to some of those reported from
southern Polynesia. Fornander may be right when he argues that these
likenesses are due to the introduction by a new immigrant stock of its
own ancestral line from the south. He fixes upon the settling of Oahu by
the powerful Maweke family from North Tahiti as the source of this
displacement, since the similarities cease about the time that their
names appear upon the Hawaiian genealogical line.\[1\]

One would like to explain upon this basis the curious introduction on
the genealogy of the twelfth section, at lines 1713 to 1715, of a trio
of males corresponding to that named in the eighth section at the
opening of the period of the Ao. The trio in both cases includes the
names of Kane and Kanaloa, in this second case listed as "twins,"
*mahoe*, and a third name, the man Ki'i in the eighth section, Ahuka'i,
"much younger" (*muli loa*), in the twelfth, where the trio follow the
name of Kumuhonua. In the Moikeha saga Kumuhonua is the eldest of three
sons descended from the migrating Maweke family, who, at his father's
death, inherits the family lands on Oahu. Olopana and Moikeha are his
younger brothers. With the rise to power of the Moikeha

\[1. Fornander, *Collection* ("Memoirs," No. 6), p. 250.\]

{p. 141}

ruling line, that of Kumuhonua dies out.\[2\] The name of Ahuka'i
appears on the 'Ulu-Puna line as grandparent of Moikeha's young relative
La'a-mai-kahiki, whom he summons from Tahiti to look after his bones,
hence supposedly a relative of the migrating Maweke family.\[3\]
According to custom, a chief takes the name of a distinguished ancestor.

Ahuka'i, La'a, La'a-mai-kahiki, ke li'i

begins the young chief's name song. La'a's story has already been told
and the part he played in peopling the Hawaiian group.

The Moikeha saga further states that the two younger brothers live for a
time at Waipi'o on the island of Hawaii until they are driven out by a
freshet and return to Tahiti. There they quarrel over Olopana's wife
Lu'ukia, and Moikeha sails back to Hawaii, and eventually his line
succeeds to the ruling power on the two islands of Kauai and Oahu. A
quite unrelated legend states that "the gods Kane and Kanaloa"
accompanied by "Haumea" once came to Hawaii "in the shape of human
beings," landing first at Keei in South Kona on the island of Hawaii and
then living for a time at Waipi'o, where Kanaloa is described as "tall
and fair," Kane as dark with thick lips and curly hair.\[4\] May not the
brothers Olopana and Moikeha, coming with their superior culture to the
simpler islanders on Hawaii, have been taken for the gods Kane and
Kanaloa as was Captain Cook for the god Lono? The beneficent activities
of the two gods, sung in chant and told in story and commemorated in
local legend, may belong to this early period before the quarrel took
place which separated the two brothers, so that Olopana, alias Kanaloa,
remained in the south when Moikeha, or

\[2. Fornander, Polynesian Race, II, 48-58; Beckwith, *Hawaiian
Mythology*, chap. xxv.

3\. Fornander, Polynesian Race, I, 194.

4\. Thrum, More Hawaiian Folk Tales, pp. 259-60; Lyons, *Journal of the
Polynesian Society*, II, 56; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, March 31, 1869.\]

{p. 142}

Kane, returned and became a great chief in the Hawaiian group,
dominating the western islands. Such a hypothesis would give meaning to
the association of the name of Ahuka'i in the trio with Kane and Kanaloa
and all three with that of Kumuhonua on the genealogy of the twelfth
section.

Not that we should even attempt to identify historically the long lists
of names that make up the genealogical portions of the Kumulipo. Such
lists, paired as man and wife, cover approximately eleven hundred of the
fourteen hundred lines that make up the second period of the chant. They
pretend to trace the family genealogy from its beginning. They claim for
it descent from a single stock represented by the approximately eight
hundred pairs listed on the long-lived man's genealogy of the eleventh
section and on the much shorter branches of succeeding sections stemming
from it. How are we to interpret such an ancestral series handed down by
word of mouth alone, even if carried back before the migration to
Hawaii, as later genealogists declare? Are these actual genealogies in
our sense of the term? Are they intended to represent direct descent
from father to son?

Many have so regarded them. The Kamokuiki book arranges the names in
genealogical succession as man, wife, and child, but this may be the
late recorder's idea rather than that of the genealogist from whom he
learned them. The length of time they would represent on this basis must
strike even an enthusiast's mind as unthinkable. Allowing only half the
usual twenty years to a generation, the eleventh section would reach
back some eight thousand years. Thereafter comes "the cock on the back
of Wakea" whose genealogy of the sixteenth section has some traditional
authority.

Most explain the series as purely rhetorical, a mere stuffing of the
past for the sake of family prestige. There is

{p. 143}

some evidence for such a conclusion. We know that such verbal feats of
memory were a delight to both audience and reciter from the fact that
the early missionaries were urged not to omit in the translation of the
Hebrew Scriptures those genealogical portions over which the tongue
might linger as a fresh incentive to rhythmic syllabication. Moreover,
names on the last half of the eleventh section follow a pattern of
repeated syllables making up the name of the long-lived man as it
appears in the eighth section and again at the close of the eleventh.
This must be essentially a mnemonic device and can hardly be other than
artificial.\[5\]

Designed also it would seem as an aid to memory is the listing by
numerical count of the first two sections into groups of four hundred.
The eleventh section breaks into two parts of approximately four hundred
pairs each. An even closer count to four hundred is to be had by adding
to the hundred and eighty-eight pairs of the younger brother's branch
listed in the twelfth section the two hundred and fifteen pairs in the
eleventh before the twelfth branches from it. Thus, as the fingers of
the reciter slipped over the knotted cord on which he kept the sacred
count, he must have held his memory in check by means of the "count by
four hundred" upon which was woven the ancestral pattern. The whole
meticulous structure of these early genealogies must have served to
elaborate the symbolism inherent in the content, that of the unbroken
inheritance of an entire people from a common ancestral stock. This was
the main idea, the kaona once more, of such a sacred intertwining of the
lives of the living with the fabric of a long, deified past, with "the
forty thousand gods, the four hundred thousand gods, the four thousand
gods" of temple prayers.\[6\]

But I believe there was something more than mere invention

\[5. Beckwith, *La'ieikawai*, pp. 313-14; Stokes, *Journal of the
Polynesian Society*, XXXIX, 1 ff.

6\. N. B. Emerson, *Unwritten Literature of Hawaii*, p. 24, note d.\]

{p. 144}

as the basis of the listing. The first four hundred names are short,
often monosyllabic. So are, on the whole, the names of the twelfth
section. Even the second four hundred of the eleventh, shorn of their
word play, have monosyllabic values. This agrees with what is said today
of the early preference for short family names before elaborate com
pounds became the fashion. It is hence possible to read these names, not
as representing vertical descent in time from father to son but as the
horizontal spread, so to speak, of a kinship group under a single ruling
lord or his direct successors, those heads of households whose reckoning
would be important for land distribution or conscription for war. When
Kepelino writes, "All the days of Kumuhonua's life were almost four
hundred hanauna or more," although he is obviously under the influence
of biblical phrasing and uses the word as if in its ordinary sense of
"generation," he probably thinks of it in its meaning of "kinsfolk," and
the statement becomes literally acceptable. It is possible, that is,
that the lists once had relevance. When the line died out and a new
stock took its place, the ancient numbering became memorialized among
the deified dead, and their names were passed down by oral transmission
in behalf of the family honor and glory by those who knew the "pathway
of chiefs."

Nevertheless, it is not to be denied that the case for a straight
genealogical descent from father to son for these Kumulipo listings is
strong. Hawaiians certainly consider this their intent. The extremely
tenacious memories of trained reciters in Hawaii and their special
fondness for catalogues of names make a traditional record possible,
even though at some point along the line invention filled in the
numerical count. One must not forget the analogous testimony of
Herodotus, to whom the priests at Thebes declared the count of 341
priest-kings who had succeeded from father to son from the beginning of
the race, to prove

{p. 145}

which they showed him rows of wooden images of these kings coresponding
{*sic*} in number to that claimed for them. It is true that the
Egyptians were a literate people, but the fact remains that both peoples
felt the importance of keeping a record of descent from the
beginning--the Kumu-lipo of the race.

Another feature, common not only to the Kumulipo chant but to all
similar prayer chants to the ancestral gods handed down from Hawaiian
sources, is the variety of names used for these deities as expressive of
their function in the process of generation, so that a single deity may
appear under different titles according to the particular aspect under
which he or she is worshiped by a given family branch. "Each island had
a separate tree," notes Fornander\[7\] and the attempt to synchronize
genealogies on a historical basis alone without reference to this
possessive urge to poetic invention would be barren of results. Such
names are preserved in a family as titles of honor. Thus the child of a
chief owned a sacred name bestowed by a god in a dream and not to be
revealed beyond the immediate family. He might also take the name of a
famous ancestor. He was given nicknames to mark important events in his
career or traits of character that he developed. How much more readily,
then, might a common ancestral deity be marked off for worship under a
particular attribute according to the function he was called upon to
fulfil or the special relation that he held to the family of the
petitioner.

The Kumulipo is full of such instances. The name Li'aikuhonua which
opens the genealogy of the fourteenth section replaces that of
Huli-honua in the more common version and explains a puzzling invocation
quoted by Emerson, "E Ku, e Li," opening a prayer for fertility on land,
in the sea, and in offspring to man, developed along quite similar lines
to the Kumulipo and probably possessing, although in

\[7. *Collection* ("Memoirs," No. 4), p. 406.\]

{p. 146}

little, like incantational value.\[8\] Li's wife Ke-aka-huli-honua, on
the other hand, may most certainly be equated with Ata-(huli-ho)nua,
wife of Tagaroa in Mangareva, and of 'Atea in the Marquesas.
Wela-ahi-lani, named just at the close of the twelfth section with his
wife Owe, a contraction of Owehewehe meaning "to open," is Malo's
W(ela-)ahi-lani who "opens" the heavens and comes down to the beautiful
La'ila'i on earth,\[9\] she here synonomous {*sic*} with Owe and both
with Wakea and Papa under special family titles, perhaps those played
upon in the two opening lines of the ninth section. Again, 'Ipo'i, wife
of Mulinaha on the genealogical branch of the thirteenth section, just
before the birth of Haumea, may be identical with Uhiuhi-ka-'ipo-i-wai
born with the gods Kane, Lono, and Kanaloa in the "Genealogy of the
First from Intense Darkness" reported by the Committee of 1904, from
whom, through her union with the god Kanaloa, were descended "the
generations of Hawaii from the beginning of Heaven and Earth."\[10\]
Such elaborations upon the functions of a deity are honorific and no
more imply plurality than the epithets attached to the supreme deity of
the Hebrews.

The unique place given to Haumea on the genealogy of the fifteenth and
sixteenth sections of the chant in place of Papa, commonly named on the
same genealogy, has already been noticed. The birth from this union of
the god Kaua-kahi, "First-strife," or Ku-kaua-kahi,
"Arising-of-first-strife," and of Kaua-huli-honua,
"Strife-overturning-earth," seems to imply some kind of revolutionary
movement as a result of Haumea's match with Kanaloa. It is in Mangareva.
alone that Haumea occupies the place of wife to Tagaroa comparable to
that given her here in the Hawaiian Kumulipo.

\[8. Fornander, *Polynesian Race*, I, 184; J. S. Emerson, *The Lesser
Hawaiian Gods*, pp. 17-20.

9\. Malo, p. 23.

10\. Kepelino, Appendix, p. 182.\]

{p. 147} In Mangarevan myths of beginning Tagaroa holds the leading
place among "primary gods without a known origin" belonging to "the long
period of darkness." Some call him creator, "a god who made all the
things in the world," but Dr. Buck, whose report on Mangarevan ethnology
I am following, thinks this a late rationalization influenced from
Tahiti.\[11\]

The Mangarevan myth gives to Haumea eight children by Tagaroa. Tu, the
first-born, is god of breadfruit and "principal functioning god of
Mangareva." She then leaves Tagaroa, and he takes to wife the daughter
of the "fisherman" Tine. The girl hesitates to bear a child because it
is the custom to cut open the mother at childbirth, but Tagaroa teaches
her natural delivery. Haumea takes a husband named Pia and has eight
more sons. Her story then turns upon the familiar theme of the cannibal
wife. She becomes a maneater and attempts to kill Pia. Her sons flee
with their father by boat, and when she follows they slay her and leave
her body to be broken to pieces by the sea. Tagaroa desires her again
and recovers her broken parts. Out of her body he forms "Atanua," who
seems to be the same lady whom we have equated with Ke-aka-hull-honua,
wife of Li'a-i-ku-honua of the Kumulipo. From the blood and afterbirth
born of the union with the reincarnated goddess come the spawn of fish
in March and the jellyfish of the sea. From members of her body he forms
wives for other Tagaroa gods.

Several elements in this Mangarevan myth bear a striking likeness to the
Kumulipo story. Not only is Haumea mated with Tagaroa, who is Kanaloa in
Hawaii, and bears to him "Ku" as her eldest son, but she also leaves her
husband to become mated with one who seems to be no god but a human
being. In changed form she takes many husbands, in the Kumulipo by
changing from age to youth, in Mangareva

\[11. Buck, Ethnology of Mangareva, pp. 419-22, 508-9.\]

through the fertilizing power of the parts of her body; in both cases
she becomes wife and mother to the family of the god. After the
distribution of her fertile members, however, the likeness passes to the
Wakea myth, where the parent of mankind, deserted by Papa, takes into
his canoe the shape-shifting bailing gourd, and from the beautiful woman
who emerges from it are born strange sea creatures. Certainly the
composer of this portion of the Kumulipo chant and the Mangarevan
mythmaker must have drawn from a common source.

There is no suggestion in the Mangarevan myth that the function of
warrior was attached to Ku, god of breadfruit and child of Haumea, nor
is Haumea concerned with a popular folk tale told in Hawaii of the god
Ku's change into a breadfruit tree, although her own conversion into
such a tree must not be forgotten. Ku-kauakahi as god of war has no
place on other Hawaiian genealogies of beginning, nor is he named in
either Malo's or Fornander's rather full description of ceremonies
attending the consecration of a luakini or heiau erected to the war god
Ku for the purpose of petitioning for success in war. His may have been
a sacred name forbidden to common usage, hence replaced on the Hawaiian
theocracy by the all-embracing Ku.

In popular romance, however, the name is kept alive in the person of the
high taboo chief Kaua-kahi-ali'i ("Kaua-kahi-the-chief") who lives in a
sacred pleasure garden of the gods on the island of Kauai high up near
the source of the north fork of the Wailua River and lures to him by his
pipe-playing a pretty chiefess from the seacoast. Complications follow,
notably in some versions a fight with the girl's former suitor. The
story has much in common with the Kumulipo theme of Wakea's affair with
Hina-kawe'o-a, especially the euphemistic version told in a note to Malo
of Kauakahi's wooing of a water maiden by means of an image of a girl
behind which he hides, pretending it is she who

{p. 149}

invites companionship. After winning the water nymph's favor he
disappears, and the girl is obliged to follow him to his home and pick
out from a number of identical images (*ki'i*) the particular one in
which he is hidden.\[12\]

Is Wakea an equivalent, then, not of Kanaloa but of Kauakahi, who
introduces war through an alien alliance, or of Kaua-huli-honua, who
overthrows an old divine hierarchy and sets up a new? The answer is that
he is all three. I think the idea must be abandoned that these earlier
genealogies represent a succession of generations rather than of events
arranged under whatever symbolic titles belong by tradition to the
family who are memorializing those events in the name of divinities
believed concerned in their achievement. Names thus become
interchangeable. Relationships disappear. Parents become telescoped into
sons or brothers or into descendants, and each takes on any one of a
number of honorific family titles appropriate to the place assigned in
the succession. Especially in storytelling, deeds once related of a
parent shift into the name song of son or grandson or are transferred to
a popular figure belonging to a quite unrelated period. Historical
accuracy just does not exist as we understand the term, and the
painstaking toil of our own scholars in calculating dates far into the
past from these oratorical recitations must certainly be abandoned as a
case of virtue its own and only reward. It was enough that the family
understood and applauded each allusion. Never may we outsiders rob them
of their "sole treasure."

\[12. Malo, pp. 117-19; Beckwith, Hawaiian Mythology, pp. 538-42.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hawaiian Accounts of Creation](ku27)
