[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku27)  [Next](ku29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

### Other Polynesian Accounts of Creation

THE last chapter has made it clear that Hawaiians in formed in the old
culture believed the Kumulipo chant to be certainly at base a genuine
native prayer of beginnings handed down from ancient times. Is such a
chant unique to Hawaiian culture, or do a similar cosmic philosophy and
similar traditions of beginning prove for it a common Polynesian
heritage? Since there is general agreement that there was
intercommunicatiorn with Tahiti during the migration period, we may look
first to Tahitian chants for such like nesses. Tahitian texts recorded
by John Orsmond before 1848 and edited by his daughter Teuira Henry for
the Bishop Museum publications do contain quite similar concepts based
upon a like nature philosophy in their treatment of cosmic forces. From
a creation story given to Orsmond in 1822 and repeated later by another
reciter with but slight variation I quote from Miss Henry's translation:

Ta'aroa was the ancestor of all the gods; he made everything....

He was his own parent, having no father or mother....

Ta'aroa sat in his shell (*pa'a*) in darkness (*te po*) for millions of
ages....

The shell was like an egg revolving in endless space, with no sky, no
land, no sea, no moon, no sun, no stars.

All was darkness, it was continuous thick darkness (*po tinitini ia e te
ta'ota'o*)....

But at last Ta'aroa gave his shell a filip which caused a crack
resembling an opening for ants. Then he slipped out and stood upon his
shell ... he took his new shell for the great foundation of the world,
for stratum rock and for soil for the world. And the shell ... that he
opened first, became his house, the dome of the god's

{p. 161}

sky, which was a confined sky, enclosing the world (*ao*) then
forming...

Ta'aroa made the great foundation of the earth (*te tumu nui o te
fenua*) to be the husband, and the stratum rock (*te papa fenua*) to be
the wife ... and he put his spirit into it, which was the essence of
himself, and named it Ta'aroa-nui-tumu-tahi,
Great-Ta'aroa-the-first-beginning.

Ta'aroa dwelt on for ages within the close sky ... he conjured forth
(*rahu*) gods (*atua*), and they were born to him in darkness (*i fanau
i te po*)....

. . . It was much later that man (*ta'ata*) was conjured \[forth\] when
Tu was with him.\[1\]

Another chant given to Orsmond in 1822 in Borabora and again in Tahiti
describes a "chaotic period" after a condition of nothingness in which
all was originally confined in a state of balance between such opposites
as darkness (*po*) and light (*ao*), rapid and slow movement (*huru
mau-mau, huru mahaha*), thinness (*tahi rairai*) and thickness (*tahi
a'ana*). Pairs of rocks having "affinity between them" (*e tau'a ta
raua*) are the first elements of growth. Tu ("Stability") is conjured
forth as artisan. "Roots (*a'a*) were born for growth in the world."
Ta'aroa fixes the dome of the earth upon pillars (*pou*) brought forth
by Tumu-nui as male, Papa-raharaha as female parent. This allows
widening of the sky "upon the pillars of the land of Havai'i." The *po*
is extended, mountains grow, water rushes forth, ocean grows, rocks
increase, skies increase to ten in number, rain falls, moss and slime
appear, forests, food, the paper mulberry plant, creeping plants, weeds,
all living things. Atea is above in space--"Earth had become land and it
was filled with living creatures. Fresh water flowed throughout the
land, sea filled the ocean, and they \[land and ocean\] were filled with
living creatures. But still all was in thick darkness (*poiri
ta'ota'o*). . . ." All this is still taking place within

\[1. Henry, pp. 336-38; see also Emory, *Journal of the Polynesian
Society*, XLVII, 52-63.\]

{p. 162}

the original shell (*'apu*) out of which Great Ta'aroa had formed the
sky of the gods, the shell called *Rumia*, translated "upset" in the
text.\[2\]

Compare these Tahitian chants with the Kumulipo. The idea of a first
cause in the person of an anthropomorphic deity presiding over creation
is absent from the Hawaiian story. In the Tahitian the concept is quite
fully developed. Ta'aroa (Kanaloa in Hawaii) "gives a filip and cracks
the shell" in which he is confined. He crawls out and stands upon its
outer edge. He grows to be a lad, still within the "shell" out of which
he has formed a sky for the new land. Ta'aroa feels weariness and
delight. At one time he is a conjuror molding earth in his hands or
uttering an incantation to stabilize the forms he has molded, at another
time a god bending his essence into the rock Tumu-nui that it may unite
with Papa-raharaha and upset the condition of equilibrium that has
prevented growth and change. Everything is Ta'aroa's. He has created
everything. All this is foreign to the Kumulipo. But the Tahitian chants
stress, like the Hawaiian Kumulipo, the idea of affinity (*tau'a*)
between pairs of natural forms. They stress the period of darkness
during which the shaping of earth and sea took place and their filling
with living forms before man appeared.

In Maori myth one cosmogonic account takes the form of a family group
like that in the Hawaiian "Chief-who-opened-heaven" to come down to
earth and make the beautiful La'ila'i his wife. Here it is the Wide-sky
itself, Ranginui, who takes Papa-tu-a-nuku to wife, "sets" (*hikaia*)
vegetation to cover her and "places" (*makaia*) small creatures "to
animate the earth and the waters thereof." Gods are created, seventy of
whom are named. All are confined within the embrace of their parents,
unable to move or stand upright. A glimmer of light shows and gradually
they come forth into the outer world. Eventually they separate

\[2. Henry, pp. 340-44.\]

{p. 163}

their parents to enlarge space for living, and raise the sky upward, a
story fully elaborated also in Tahiti but hardly recognized in the
Kumulipo. The New Zealand teaching goes on to organize the world, giving
to each god his special function and classifying forms according to
their order of creation as in Tahiti; first ocean out of which grew
land, then small plants, trees, reptiles and insects, animals, birds,
the heavenly bodies; finally woman, "from whom mankind in this world
sprang," an arrangement scarcely differing from that of the Kumulipo
except for its neglect of sea life, so important in the structural plan
of the Hawaiian creation chant.\[3\]

In Mangaia, myths collected by the missionary W. Wyatt Gill describe
under a different symbol the change from life within the *Po* to that of
the world of the *Ao*, the world of living men on this earth. One myth
tells how the primal generator, the female spirit Vari-ma-te-takere,
dwells in darkness at the base of the dark underworld of Avaiki, "the
Mangaian equivalent of Po." Avaiki is conceived like the inside of a
coconut shell. It is divided into spaces or lands to each of which one
of Vari's children is assigned. Buck thinks such a structural conception
is foreign to the Polynesian mind and was probably suggested by the
questioner, but such imaginary divisions are applied by Hawaiians to the
arch of the sky as it rises from the horizon, and to the spaces of air
as one looks toward the zenith--certainly not a foreign
interpolation.\[4\] Uppermost, in the thin land next to the outer shell,
dwells Vatea, the Wakea or 'Atea or Rangi of other groups. He climbs
into the light and lures "Papa" to him. Gods are born of the two, and
eventually Mangaia is pulled up from the depths and peopled by men,

\[3. Smith, *The Lore of the Whare-wananga*, pp. 117-22, 136-37; Grey,
pp. 1-3; White, Vol. I, chaps. ii, ix-xi; Henry, pp. 409-13.

4\. Malo, pp. 30-31.\]

{p. 164}

offspring of the primal gods. Stories of chiefs succeed those of primal
gods.\[5\]

Here again the poet shapes his story of beginnings upon similar basic
conceptions. In a line from a song dated about 1790 the primal goddess
Vari-ma-te-takere is addressed as "a goddess feeding on raw taro" (*E
tuarangi kai taro mata*), a reference recalling the children of Haloa
born on the Hawaiian genealogy to Wakea and Papa. The word *wari*
(*wali*) occurs in various Polynesian groups and always with reference
to a softened substance: "mud" or "muddy" in Tahiti and Rarotonga;
"pulp" or "pap" in Mangareva; "a marsh" in the Tuamotus; "potato grown
watery with age" in New Zealand. It is equivalent to the *walewale* out
of which life springs in the first lines of the Kumulipo. The epithet
*ma-te-takere* is translated "at-the-beginning." *Takere* is applied
ordinarily in Polynesia to the keel of a canoe, in Maori to "the bottom
of deep water." Perhaps just "at the bottom" would be a fair rendering
as applied to Vari. The taro plant propagated by budding, sending up
stalk and leaf into the light out of the mud of its underwater or
underground rooting, may well be the symbolic form in which the poet of
Mangaia, where taro culture is, as in Hawaii, the basic vegetable food,
conceives the story of the parent-stock of mankind.

From the Takaroa atoll of the Tuamotus Dr. Kenneth Emory of the Bishop
Museum collected a cosmic chant in which "the earth's origins" or
"roots," as Gessler reads *te tumu henua*, are similarly compared to the
growth of a plant. Emory translates as follows:

Life appears in the world,  
Life springs up in Havaiki.  
The Source-of-night sleeps below  
  in the void of the world,  
  in the taking form of the world,

 

\[5. Gill, chap. i.\]

{p. 165}

  in the growth of the world,  
  the life of the world,  
  the leafing of the world,  
  the unfolding of the world,  
  the darkening of the world,  
  the branching of the world,  
  the bending down of the world.\[6\]

Hawaiians use a similar incantation in approaching certain forms of
plant life imagined to have originated in the under world of the Po or
'Avaiki, referred to here as "Kahiki," whose spirits are supposed to
show themselves on earth in the body of the plant. A species of kava
plant called *'ava nene* is prescribed to quiet a fretting (*nene*)
child, and Kawena Pukui gives the following invocation to be used in its
plucking:

O great kava that sprouted in Kahiki  
  grew taproot in Kahiki  
  spread rootlets in Kahiki  
  grew stalk in Kahiki  
  branched in Kahiki  
  leafed in Kahiki  
  blossomed in Kahiki  
  bore leafbuds in Kahiki  
I have come to get your leafbuds  
  for medicine for--  
  for long life for--

In a "family story" from the same informant a similar chant is addressed
to an ancestral coconut called upon to provide a bridge for passing over
seas. Here the lines conclude with the maturing of the plant which has

  fruited in Kahiki,  
  ripened in Kahiki,

and the coconut sprouts above ground, puts forth leaves and fruit and
shoots upward as in all good fairy stories. The coconut tree is, of
course, to be understood here as a phallic

\[6. Journal of the Polynesian Society, XLVII, 50.\]

{p. 166}

symbol of generation from a single stock which allows the young
adventurer to approach his kin over seas.\[7\]

The process of creation as Emory finds it described in the Tuamotus
reads much like the Hawaiian.\[8\] Development proceeds by "pairing of
matter, phenomena of nature, or of abstractions such as 'source of Night
and Emory calls this "a wide-spread and ancient Tuamotuan teaching ...
confirmed by cosmogonic genealogies and chants which have survived" and
not the result of "missionary teaching." In schematic charts
illustrating the progress of development of the world in its making, a
primal pair represented by male and female phallic symbols lies at the
base of the egg shaped shell out of which, as in Mangaia and Tahiti,
life is thought of as emerging. These are named on the chart Te Tumu and
Te Papa. They are the source of generation. Above them lies the land of
Tumu-po:

Tumu-Po, source of the night world  
  sleeps below in the non-existence of the earth,  
  the slime of the earth  
  the limpidity of the earth, etc....  
Source whence human beings spring,  
Source whence 'Atea sprang.

The shell representing the night world, the Po, is divided in the chart
into layers filled with easily recognizable outlines of plants, animals,
and men, these last in prostrate position. Above each layer arches a
sky; to the summit of the highest sky reaches a ladder of men, one on
the shoulder of another. The men seem to be climbing out of the
underworld of the Po into a succession of outer worlds, taking with them
the plants and animals of the night world as they go. The drawing looks
like an adaptation to a migration legend rather than to one of
development culminating in the intellectual faculties of adulthood such
as some see in

\[7. Green and Pukui, *Legend of Kawelo*, p. 180.

8\. *Journal of the Polynesian Society*, XLVIII, 1-29.\]

{p. 167}

the Kumulipo. As in the Kumulipo, there is no single pre siding deity.
Birth proceeds by the pairing of earth, the female, with sky, the male.
Above the first land, Tumu-Po, arches Tumu-Ao; above the last land,
Fakahotu-henua, arches the sky 'Atea. The two are translated by Emory,
"Fruitfulness-of-earth" and "Space." They are the parents of mankind:

'Atea produces above,  
Fakahotu produces below.

There is much in common here with other creation stories, both Tahitian
and Hawaiian. In Tahiti Ta'aroa made "the great foundation of the earth"
(*te tumu nui o te fenua*) to be the husband and "the stratum rock" (*te
papa fenua*) to be the wife. Although the generation of rocks does not
enter into the Kumulipo story as we have it, rocks of phallic shape are
worshiped in Hawaii as ancestral fertility gods. Tumu-po as source of
the night world is no other than Kumu-(\[u\]li-)po of the Hawaiian
prayer chant. "This is the genealogy of the Hawaiian people, from
Kumu-lipo-ka-po to Wakea and Papa," concludes the report of the
Committee of 1904. Both areas represent a succession of generative
pairs, in the Tuamotus of "lands" and "skies," in Hawaii of "nights"
(*Po*) advancing toward day (*Ao*), with some identical names between
the two. Both lead up to 'Atea (Wakea), parent of mankind and apex of
the arching spaces of sky.

Emory sees a tendency to multiplication of these divisions in the
Tuamotus, and this may well have happened also in Hawaii. Original
drawings show but three instead of ten, and an early Tuamotuan text
reads:

The universe was \[first\] like an egg.... It at last burst and produced
three layers superimposed one below propping two above.

This threefold pattern is perhaps reflected in the trio of males
regularly named on Hawaiian genealogies of beginning

{p. 168}

and active in creation stories relating to the ordering of the universe
and the origin of mankind. The appearance of this pattern in Hawaii is
generally laid to missionary influence. Although the Christian
trinitarian doctrine may have strengthened its use, I see no reason for
supposing it to have originated under missionary teaching.

The gods Kane and Kanaloa are rather regularly named in this trio with a
third figure representing man. Ki'i as this third member occurs but
once, and that quite naturally at the moment of dawning from the night
world, the Po, into the light of day, the Ao. Similarly a Tahitian chant
called "Creation of Man" given to Orsmond by three different reciters
between 1822 and 1833 shows Ta'aroa, after land, sky, and ocean have
been filled with living things, consulting "Tu, the sacred one, Tu, the
great artisan of Ta'aroa," about filling "the room for man." He
"conjures up from below" (*rahu ra i raro*) the man Ti'i. Ti'i takes to
wife the "Woman who ate before and behind," and between the two the
different classes emerge: "the high chiefs of the royal girdle" (*ari'i
nui maro 'ura*) begotten of the first pair; the lesser nobility (*hu'i
ra'atira* and *ari'iri'i*) from the union of these with their inferiors;
the commoners (*te ta'ata ri'i and te manabune*) who are not "born"
(fanau) but "conjured forth" (*i rahua*) by Ti'i and his wife.\[9\]

Ti'i, Tiki, or Ki'i, traditional first man throughout eastern Polynesia,
thus personifies the procreative power of mankind or specifically the
male sex organ. In New Zealand the progenitor of man is Tane (Kane) son
of the sky god, hence called Tane-nui-a-Rangi. To him is attached the
story, absent in Tahiti but present in fringing groups of the eastern
Pacific, of the father-daughter marriage ascribed to Tiki in

\[9. Henry, pp. 402-3.\]

{p. 169}

Mangareva and the Tuamotus, in Hawaii to Wakea.\[10\] Allowing a shift
from Tu to Kane in Hawaii, both gods of artisans in Tahiti, the Tahitian
story of man's origin corresponds in time, place, and function with the
first Kumulipo trilogy. Three males join in the task of peopling earth
with mankind, Ta'aroa, Tu, Ti'i in Tahiti and an equivalent trio of
Kane, Kanaloa, and Ki'i in Hawaii. The "Woman who ate before and behind"
in Tahiti becomes La'ila'i, the "Woman who sat sideways" of the
Kumulipo.

Another common element with South Sea mythical conceptions in the
Kumulipo trio is the octopus form taken by Kanaloa in this chant of the
first dawn of day. Exactly in agreement is the Tahitian myth of the
cutting away of the arms of the octopus Tumu-ra'i-fenua,
"Beginning-of-Heaven-and-Earth," into which Ta'aroa has placed his
essence, and the consequent dawn of light (*ao*) after "the long
wearisome night" (*po*).\[11\] Hitherto gods have been called into being
in darkness; now light dawns over earth. In the Kumulipo, spirits of
darkness have generated animal and plant life of land and sea; now,
generations of mankind people the land. In the Kumulipo manuscript the
first line of the refrain accompanying the births of the first four
sections reads, not *Ka po uhe'e i ka wawa* with its suggestion of the
"slipping away" (*uhe'e*) of night, but *Ka pou he'e i ka wawa*, thus
picturing the god in the form of an octopus (*he'e*) supporting (*pou*)
in darkness the first heaven and earth exactly as in the Tahitian chant.
This is not darkness in the physical sense but applies to the supremacy
of the spirit world, the Po, as compared with the world of living men,
the Ao.

The eight-armed octopus, called in the Kumulipo the

\[10. Smith, *The Lore of the Whare-wananga*, pp. 138-43, 144-45; Buck,
*Ethnology of Mangareva*, pp. 307-10; White, I, 130-64; J. Frank
Stimson, "Legend of Tiki." MS in Bishop Museum; Beckwith, *Hawaiian
Mythology*, pp. 294, 296-98.

11\. Henry, pp. 338, 356, 390, 404-12.\]

{p. 170}

"hot-striking" (*hauna-wela*), is the manifestation or body in which
Kanaloa may appear in some Polynesian groups as god of the sea and sea
creatures in contrast to Kane, god of land forms. In Hawaii, a prayer at
the launching of a canoe names both gods, Kane as god of the forest from
which the tree was cut, Kanaloa as god of the element over which the
canoe must travel. A sorcerer's prayer for the healing of the sick
invokes Kanaloa "god of the octopus"-- *ke akua o ka he'e*.\[12\] The
Samoan demigod Tae-o-Tagaloa is born of a woman part human and part
*fe'e* ("octopus"), hence he is part god and part human.\[13\] Magic
connected with the number eight throughout southern Polynesia may derive
from the eight-armed octopus. The Maui figure, sometimes represented as
a son of the Tagaroa family, is "eight-headed" in Tahiti, "eighth born"
in Samoa.\[14\] In the Marquesas, according to Handy, "an octopus, or if
one could not be obtained, a taro root with eight rootlets was used
ceremonially in certain rites."

A further factor entering into the position of Kanaloa in Hawaiian
accounts of creation, but not apparent in the Kumulipo, shows strife to
have arisen at some time either before or after the migration into the
Hawaiian group between followers of the Kanaloa priesthood and that of
Kane, with Kane eventually triumphant, Kanaloa repudiated, and god Ku
set up in his stead as agent with Kane in the creation story. Fornander
notes:

"In the mo'olelo of Moi the prophet ... of Molokai; in the prophecies
and sayings of Nuakea, the prophetess ...; of Maihea and Naulu-a-Maihea,
the prophet race of Oahu ...; of the prophet Hua of Maui--in all these
prophesies--it is said that the gods (*na akua*) created heaven and
earth. The gods who created heaven and earth were three, Kane, Ku, and
Lono. Kanaloa was a great enemy of these three gods. Before this
creation of heaven and earth, etc.,

\[12. Malo, pp. 171-73, 149-50.

13\. Kramer, I, 45, 392-93, 409.

14\. Beckwith, *Hawaiian Mythology*, pp. 209-10; Kramer, I, 393, note.\]

{p. 171}

everything was shaky, trembling and destitute, bare (*naka,
'olohelohe*); nothing could be distinguished, everything was tossing
about, and the spirits of the gods were fixed to no bodies, only the
three above gods had power to create heaven and earth. Of these three
Kane was the greatest in power, and Ku and Lono were inferior to him.
The powers of the three joined together were sufficient to create and
fix heaven and earth \[from *Ke Au Okoa*, October 14, 1869\].15

Since neither Ku nor Lono is named in the Kumulipo chant, it looks as if
the displacement of Kanaloa in national worship took place after its
composition. Certainly by the time of the American mission in 1820 the
idea prevailed that Kanaloa was rebellious against Kane and worked
against him. The missionaries compared Kanaloa with the biblical Satan.
Best says, quoting Fornander, "Kanaloa is in Hawaii a personified spirit
of evil, the origin of death, the prince of Po ... a revolted,
disobedient spirit who was conquered and punished by Kane (Tine) ...."

A similar character is given to Tangaroa in the Tuamotus. There a
Tangaroa god "who delighted in doing evil" set fire in the highest
heaven "seeking thus to destroy everything." "Tangaroa-i-te-po" he is
called and "supreme ruler of the underworld In New Zealand a quarrel is
said to have arisen between Tane and Tangaroa when reptiles took to the
land and Tangaroa resented this encroachment upon his preserves." In the
Tahitian octopus myth it is Tine who cuts away the clinging arms of the
octopus body of Ta'aroa and fills earth and sky with beauty. Again, in a
composition called "Strife and reconciliation between heaven and earth,"
Tumu-nui, the rock foundation in which Ta'aroa has placed his essence,
is pitted against Tine, the two plying their enchantments: Tumu-nui
sending heavy mists and rain, famine,

\[15. From Kamakau in Fornander, *Collection* ("Memoirs," No. 6), pp.
322-23.

16\. Emory, *Journal of the Polynesian Society*, XLVIII, 12, 13.

17\. Grey, pp. 4-5.\]

{p. 172}

night; Tane matching him with clear weather, abundance, the sun by
day.\[18\]

In Hawaii, a contest over the right of the kava drink seems to be
connected with Kanaloa's overthrow. In the prayer quoted above he is
distinguished as "Kanaloa the kava drinker" (*inu 'awa*). It is as if an
upstart priesthood had overthrown the exclusive prerogative of a ruling
priesthood to the kava bowl.\[19\] The situation may reflect a historic
conflict. A Fornander note equates Lihau'ula, "a priest of greater
renown than any other," with Kanaloa. Tradition tells also of war
between Lihau'ula the elder and Wakea the younger son, after the death
of their father has left Wakea landless, and of the eventual success of
the younger.\[20\]

But may not the idea of opposition between the gods depend upon a more
basic symbolism in the universal facts of human birth? The embryo lying
surrounded by the sac of fluid within the mother's womb belongs to the
spirit world, to Kanaloa; with birth it emerges into the world of living
men and becomes the child of Kane. Again, Kanaloa, god of darkness and
the underworld, takes over man at death. The father-daughter marriage is
in some groups said to usher in man's mortality. In New Zealand it is
Tane son of Rangi by Papa-tu-a-nuku, originally Tangaroa's wife, who
takes his own daughter to wife, and it is she who, learning of her
relationship to him, escapes to the lower world "to drag our offspring
down." "And now," says one version of the tale, "from this time onward
the flow of the 'current of death' of mankind to the 'everlasting night'
became permanent."\[21\] In Mangaia Tangaroa is the first-born son of
'Atea and Papa, but Rongo (Lono) not only secures for himself the main
food supply but also takes Tangaroa's

\[18. Henry, pp. 353-54.

19\. Fornander, Collection ("Memoirs," No. 6), p. 268.

20\. Ibid., p. 272; Malo, pp. 312-13.

21\. White, I, 131-3 2, 144-46; Smith, The Lore of the Whare-wananga,
pp. 144-45.\]

{p. 173}

wife Taka and has by her a daughter Tavake by whom he has children, and
"with the birth of Tavake's children the lineage of the main stock of
Mangaia became definitely human."\[22\] In Hawaii a story tells how the
two gods each make a figure of a man and Kanaloa's dies while Kane's
lives. Perhaps because Kanaloa made his figure first, all men must
eventually die. That is the way the mind works under a deterministic
priesthood: "In Adam's fall, We sinned all." It may be that death became
inevitable when the first child born to Wakea by his daughter came into
the world a foetus. The gods are immortal, renewing their youth as a
crab its skin. Once man had this power, say old Hawaiians, and a number
of stories are told throughout the Pacific of some trivial failure of
the culture-bringer that determined death for mankind.\[23\] If the
connection with man's ultimate fate suggested above for the drawing
contest between Kanaloa and Kane is correct, is it possible that late
reciters of the Kumulipo chant have obscured the part played by Kanaloa
in the story of Ki'i and La'ila'i, and "Ki'i the man" was originally
Kanaloa's figure drawn after the form of god Kane, into which Kanaloa
has "placed his essence" to deceive the woman, just as Wakea in the
later story enters the image (*ki'i*) set up to lure Ka-we'o-a? It may
be that the quarrel over the precedence of the first-born to Ki'i rather
than to Kane had originally for the priestly composer an eschatological
rather than a political implication.

Changes and substitutions in cult practice must lie back of these
variations upon the common theme of world beginnings. Adaptation of
traditional elements depends in each case upon the special migration
history of the group, its fresh contacts and their resulting influence
upon family and cult history. We cannot tell whether a historical
struggle

\[22. Buck, *Mangaian Society*, pp. 17-18.

23\. Kepelino, p. 48; Beckwith, *Journal of the Polynesian Society*,
LV,  
191-92.\]

{p. 174}

between leaders of different factions with their rival deities has given
rise to the symbolism of conflict in creation stories or whether the
cosmic conflict was itself a symbol of the universal facts of birth and
death. Certainly fancy personifies and plays with such cosmic elements.
The hero's search after the sun hidden by a god in the under world or to
recover a bright lady from an underseas ravisher, and his famous fishing
after a robber sea god, are all variations upon the theme of daybreak
translated into popular fiction. On the other hand, the cosmic story is
itself a symbol of the coming into life, out of the sea of water within
the mother's womb, of the child born, as we say, "to the purple," or as
the Hawaiian puts it, "hot with fiercest taboo," the child who must,
however, eventually die because of some misdoing of the primary deity
from whom man sprang.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ceremonial Birth Chants in Polynesia](ku29)
