[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Chant Index](chant)  [Previous](ku29)  [Next](ku31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Conclusion

THE Kumulipo chant in its present form is evidently a composite, recast
from time to time as intermarriage brought in new branches and a fresh
traditional heritage. It seems to have belonged in Keawe's time to the
Lono priesthood, perhaps brought from Oahu, where Lono worship was
particularly active, to Maui, the genealogy of whose ruling chiefs down
to Pi'ilani occupies the last section; thence brought into the island of
Hawaii through the marriage of Pi'ilani's daughter Pi'ikea with 'Umi,
usurping chief over that island after Liloa, with which marriage and its
offspring the reckoning ends.

We have no proof that, as in the Marquesas and the Tuamotus, the birth
of a son and heir to the ruling chief was celebrated in Hawaii by the
recitation of the story of creation together with genealogies and songs
of honor belonging to different branches along the family line, and that
the Kumulipo chant served this function within the family to whom it
belonged. Hawaiian accounts of ceremonies :at the birth of a royal child
do not mention the chanting of a Kumulipo at a great tribal gathering as
part of the rites on such an occasion, nor does the prose note offer
evidence of such a recitation. But from its likeness to chants so used
in the Tuamotus and the Marquesas and the queen's association of its
composition with the birth of Keawe's first-born son, we may perhaps
infer some connection with the ceremony.

Every birth of a *niaupi'o* child was in fact regarded as a repetition
of the first human birth, that of the son Ha-loa to Wakea through his
own daughter, from whom the whole race counted descent. So the Hawaiian
*Naua Society* writes,

{p. 182}

after telling the story of the "Lauloa taro" that grew from the buried
foetus of Wakea's first child, after which the living child was named:
"Now you must understand that the children born to Haloa these are
yourselves. . . ." Every first-born of a ruling chief took, to quote
Fornander, the name Wakea: *O Wakea ka inoa, o ke kumu ali'i keia o
Waloa*, reads the text.\[1\] The word *Wa-loa* I take to be a
contraction of *Wa'a-loa*, "Long-canoe," and the whole phrase, left
untranslated in Fornander, to mean that he is " male of the chief
stock." The canoe is, like the plant stalk, a symbol in riddling speech
of the male procreative organ. The epithet "long" in both cases
emphasizes by means of a concrete symbol the long continuance of the
stock down the ages from the first divine procreator, here memorialized
under the name Wakea. In the child is born again an image of the divine
parent, to insure continuance of the family line.

Not that the cosmic conception has no place in the poet's imagery. The
rebirth of light each day, the annual return of the sun from the south
to revivify earth, serve not only as symbols of this human birth but as
that birth's direct pattern or even its determining factor in the
perpetuation of the race. The priest celebrates the rebirth of day, the
Ao, with the story of the emergence of plant and animal forms in
perpetual continuity, calling each by name. He celebrates the birth of
man with the history of the lineage of which the child is offshoot,
rehearsing the names of ancestors by whom the perpetuation of the family
line has been secured. The dawn of day, the annual turn of the sun, are
not only symbols but the event itself to which the birth of mankind
succeeds and upon the acknowledgment of which man depends for his own
high claim to ancestry from the gods. As Wakea, the sky world, bursts
the bonds of night and rises out of the womb of waters where it has lain
in

\[1. Fornander, *Collection* ("Memoirs," No. 6), p. 5.\]

{p. 183}

darkness, so the child bursts the sheath where it lay within its
mother's womb and emerges into the light of reasoning human life.

Kupihea reasoned from the flow of water preceding childbirth that water
must be the medium through which the god of generation "works." Whether
this idea of water as the original fructifying element was traditional
or was Kupihea's own idea I do not know. It is, however, clear that his
thinking started with observed facts of human birth and proceeded by
analogy to cosmic beginnings. In the same way the Polynesian creation
story as a successive appearance of plant and animal forms leading up to
man must be referred to some such factual observation. This was easily
to be found in the life of the embryo from conception up to the time of
birth, a course of development which must have been perfectly known to a
people skilled in agriculture, expert also in the art of abortion, upon
which also depend so many beliefs and practices connected with embryonic
deities in animal form, and out of which the picture of an evolving
cosmos might easily serve as prototype. The poet gave it expression in
the two worlds of the Po and the Ao. Hawaiian tradition passed down the
teaching in the story of the buried foetus out of which sprang the taro
plant, to be followed by the birth of mankind, to whose genealogy is
thus attached the creature world born not to man but to the gods, whose
spirits inhabit the Po and manifest themselves on earth for man's harm
or protection. "To what shall I apply my procreative power?" asks the
first parent in a Maori birth chant. It was not by the dawn of light
that the generative god made himself known but by the organ of
procreation itself, through which was intrusted to the newborn male the
preservation of the family stock on earth and its continued functioning
in the spirit world of the gods. Not speculative philosophy about how
the world came to be must have inspired the poetic symbolism,

{p. 184}

but care for the sacred spark in man from its inception to its maturity
into a divinity born as a human being on earth to carry on the family
ruling line. The cosmos is thus the symbol, the sexual life and its
fulfilment in the child the inner meaning, the *kaona*, of the Hawaiian
creation chant.

We must read this ancient prayer chant in the light of Polynesian
thought. Certainly it includes much that is ancient and pre-Christian.
Additions may have been made from time to time, even up to that of its
late transcription. Parts are undoubtedly omitted or altered from their
original form. Old symbols may be applied in new directions. Such
changes however cannot destroy the value of the text as a genuine
example of the sacred creation story of a Polynesian people, true as it
is to native poetic style not alone in its composition as a whole but in
particular passages, and reflecting old Hawaiian social life and
philosophy in its treatment of the birth of life on earth and the myths
of the gods.

{p. 187}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Kalakaua Text](ku31.md)
