[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ftb03)  [Next](ftb05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISB18/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk Tales of Brittany*, by Elsie Masson, \[1929\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# THE CASTLE OF COMORRE

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="img_01000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Beware, beware,
lost creature](tn/01000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01000.jpg)  
Beware, beware, lost creature  
</span>

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span id="img_01100"></span> ![The Castle of Comorre](img/01100.jpg)

<span id="img_01101"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![L](img/01101.jpg) |

ONG ago in the town of Vannes there lived a king who had an only
daughter. Her name was Tréphine. She was the loveliest princess in all
of Brittany and all the lands that lay beyond. Moreover, she had never
committed a mortal sin. And so the king, her father, would rather have
lost all his castles, farms, and horses than to have seen Tréphine
unhappy.

One day ambassadors came to the King of Vannes from the country of
Cornouaille, from Count Comorre, a powerful ruler at that time. They
brought with them gifts of honey, linen thread, and a dozen suckling
pigs and gave them to the king, telling him that Count Comorre wished to
marry the Princess Tréphine. They said that their master had visited the
last fair disguised as a soldier, that he had seen the young princess
and had fallen in love with her.

The request for her hand caused the princess and her father the deepest
grief. For you must know that Comorre was a wicked and mighty tyrant. He
loved to do evil. In

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

deed he was so cruel that when he was a mere boy whenever he went forth
from the castle his mother used to rush to the alarm bell in the tower
and ring it to warn the townsfolk that he was coming. As he grew older
he became more wicked every day so that he was feared and hated by all.
But worst of all he had already had four wives whom he had killed.

Therefore the King of Vannes told the ambassadors that his daughter was
too young to marry. But the Northerners declared roughly, as was their
way, that Comorre would not accept any such excuse, and that he had
commanded them to declare war on the King of Vannes if permission were
not granted to take the princess back to the castle of the Count. Let
the king say no at the peril of his crown.

The king was a brave man, and with fury in his heart he declared that
Tréphine should not go. Then quickly he gathered together all his
soldiers and his knights to defend his country. Thus did he defy the
evil Comorre.

Scarcely had three days passed before Count Comorre marched down on
Vannes at the head of his mighty army. The king went forth with his
array of knights and soldiers to meet him.

Now when Saint Gildas saw these armed hosts making ready for a bloody
fray he went to find the princess who was praying in her oratory. The
saint was wearing the mantle that he had used as a boat to sail over the
sea, and he was

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

carrying the staff that had been the mast. A fiery aureole was glowing
around his head.

Gildas entering the oratory petitioned the princess to avert the battle.
He said that the men of Brittany were about to fall upon one another's
throats and that she could prevent the death of many Christians if she
would agree to marry Comorre.

"Alas, why am I not a beggar maid!" exclaimed the princess, wringing her
hands. "Then at least I could marry the beggar of my choice! But if I
must marry this oppressor then say for me the offices of the dead. I
know the Count will slay me as he has slain his other wives."

But Saint Gildas replied, "Fear nothing, Tréphine. Here is a silver ring
as white as silk. It will warn you if Comorre plots villainies against
you, for it will then turn as black as a raven's wing. Take courage and
save the Bretons from death."

And so the young princess consented to marry Comorre.

The saint went at once to the two armies and told them of Tréphine's
decision. The king received the news with sorrow. He did not wish to
give his consent to the marriage, in spite of his daughter's resolve.
But Count Comorre made him so many promises that at last he agreed to
accept him as a son-in-law.

The wedding was celebrated with great festivities. The first day six
thousand guests were feasted, and the next day

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

as many more, and the newly married couple waited on them at table.

At last when all the soup pots were emptied and the barrels drunk down
to the dregs, the guests went home, and Comorre carried off his young
bride as a hawk carries off a little white dove.

Now it happened during the next few months his love for Tréphine made
Comorre gentler than you would have expected from the wickedness of his
nature. The dungeons of the castle were empty and no one was put to
death.

"What has happened to our Count that he no longer revels in tears and
bloodshed?" many of his unhappy subjects asked each other. But those who
knew him better waited and said nothing.

Tréphine was not happy in spite of her husband's kindness. Every day she
went to the chapel of the castle and prayed on the tombs of the four
wives of whom the Count was widower. She prayed to God to preserve her
from death.

At this time there was a gathering from far and wide of Breton princes
at Rennes, and Comorre was compelled to go. On his departure he gave the
princess all his keys, even the cellar keys, and, telling her to do as
she liked, he set out with a retinue of horsemen and men-at-arms.

He did not return for six months, and he came back to the castle eager
to see the princess, who during his absence had

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

been constantly in his thoughts. He went quickly to her room and as he
entered he saw that she was making a baby's satin hood covered with
silver embroidery.

When he beheld her work he grew pale and asked, "For what child are you
making that?"

The princess who thought that it would bring him great happiness
answered, "In a short time, Count, a child will be born to us."

Not a word said Comorre in reply, but his countenance grew dark with
anger and after having darted a terrible look at the princess abruptly
left the room.

Tréphine glanced down and noticed that her little silver ring which the
saint had given her had turned black. She uttered a cry of terror for
she remembered Saint Gildas' words and she knew that grave danger
threatened her.

Night was falling and she fled to the chapel. She remained there as the
hours tolled crouching by one of the tombs of the dead wives. Midnight
struck. As the last note sounded the princess saw four ghostlike figures
slowly moving toward her. All but dead with terror she tried to flee,
but one of the wraiths addressed her in sepulchral voice:

"Beware, beware, lost creature! Comorre is on the watch to kill you!"

"To kill me!" exclaimed the princess. "What have I done to make him wish
me dead?"

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

"He knows that you will soon be the mother of a child and it has been
foretold that his son will be the cause of his destruction," answered
the ghostly creature.

"Heaven help me! What can I do to escape from his cruelty?" cried
Tréphine, wringing her hands.

"Go back to your father in the land of the white corn," said the
spectre.

"But how can I escape?" asked the princess. "Comorre's great dog keeps
watch in the courtyard."

"Give the dog the poison that killed me," said the first ghostly wife.

"And how shall I get over the high wall?" asked Tréphine trembling.

"Use the rope that strangled me," replied the second phantom.

"Who will direct me in the darkness?" the princess asked.

The fire that burnt me," the third spectre answered.

How shall I walk so far?" asked poor Tréphine with anguish in her heart.

"Take this staff that cleft my brow," said the last ghostly wife.

The princess took the staff, the fire, the rope, and the poison, and
thanking the ghostly shades she fled in haste. She prevented the dog
from attacking her, she got over the great wall, the fire lighted her in
the darkness, and leaning

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

on the staff she took the road to Vannes where lived the king, her
father.

When the wicked Comorre could not find the princess the next morning he
sent searchers throughout the castle. All came back reporting that no
trace of the princess could be found.

Then Comorre climbed to the top of the lofty central tower and looked
toward the four winds. Toward the midnight he saw a raven croaking,
toward the sunrise he saw a swallow flying, toward the midday a sea-gull
hovering, but toward the sunset he saw a white dove fleeing.

"That is Tréphine," he said to himself.

And he saddled his horse and set out in pursuit.

The princess by this time was on the outskirts of the forest which
surrounded the castle of Comorre, but she was warned of his approach for
she saw her ring again turn black. She ran across a heath and reached a
shepherd's hut where there was no one but an old magpie in the cage.

There the princess lay all day in hiding. But when night fell she
continued on her way by paths that ran along the flax fields, guided by
the fire and supported by the staff.

For two days Comorre did not find her, then he turned back through the
heath. There, alas, he found the shepherd's hut and heard the magpie
imitating the princess' moans and crying in its rasping voice, "Poor
Tréphine, O Poor Tréphine!"

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

So Comorre knew at once that the princess had passed that way. He called
his hound and put him on the scent, then leaped upon his steed and
followed.

In the meantime, the princess, winged by fear, was fleeing. She was near
Vannes and her father's castle. She came to a bosky wood and feeling she
could go no farther she stopped to rest. And there in the glade a
beautiful child was born to her. It was he who later became the great
king and saint, Trémeur.

As the princess clasped the child in her arms she saw a falcon on a
nearby tree. On his foot was a golden ring, which she recognized as
belonging to her father. She called the falcon by name and he flew down
onto her lap. Then she gave him the saint's silver ring.

"Falcon," she said, "fly to my father and give him this ring. When he
sees it he will know I am in grave danger, and you must direct him and
his soldiers how to come to me."

The bird understood, took the ring, and flew away to Vannes.

But at this very moment Comorre appeared on the road with his hound
which was following Tréphine's scent. Poor Tréphine! She had given her
ring to the falcon and she was not warned of Comorre's approach until
she heard the tyrant's voice urging on the dog.

Quickly the princess wrapped the child in her cloak and

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

hid him in the hollow of a tree. Barely had she done so when Comorre on
his hairy horse rode up beside her.

When he saw Tréphine he uttered a wild cry and drawing his cutlass
quickly struck off her head. Then satisfied that he had destroyed her he
called his hound and cantered back to the castle.

Meantime the falcon had reached the court of the King of Vannes. The
king was dining with Saint Gildas. As the falcon flew over the table he
let the ring fall into the king's drinking cup. The king took it out and
exclaimed:

"Some evil has befallen our daughter, the falcon has brought back her
ring. Saddle the horses at once. Let Gildas come with us. I fear we
shall need his help."

Quickly the horses were made ready and a great company set out with the
king and Saint Gildas to find the princess. They followed the falcon's
flight, galloping till they came to the glade where the princess lay
dead. There they found her, and her child hidden in the tree.

The king got down from his horse weeping bitterly and all within his
retinue were overcome with grief.

But Gildas imposed silence.

"Upon your knees," directed he, "and pray to God with me. The evil may
yet be undone." So saying he knelt with all there present and after
having uttered fervent prayer he addressed the princess. "Rise up,"
commanded he.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

And Tréphine obeyed and taking her head the saint set it on her
shoulders and she was alive again.

"Take thy child," again the saint directed, "and come with us to the
castle of Comorre."

And the princess did as the saint had bidden and with the king and his
terrified attendants sped swiftly to the castle of the Count. But
however swift the horses sped the princess carrying her son was swifter.
Thus they reached the stronghold of Comorre.

Comorre beheld them coming from afar and hastened to pull up the
drawbridge. And when Saint Gildas and the princess drew near the moat
the saint cried in a loud voice:

"Comorre! Comorre! I am bringing back your wife alive, and behold your
son as God gave him unto you! Will you take them under your roof?"

Gildas repeated the same words twice, then thrice, but no voice
answered. He took the baby from his mother's arms and placed him
standing on the ground. Then lo! A miracle was seen. The child walked to
the brink of the moat, and stooping took a handful of sand and threw it
against the castle walls. Lifting his arms toward Heaven he called out
in a ringing voice:

"Justice shall be done!"

Immediately the towers of the castle fell over with the noise of
thunder, the walls split open and in an instant all the mighty
stronghold of Comorre toppled into ruin, burying

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the tyrant and all his wicked followers beneath the stones.

Then the king took the princess and her son and with Gildas and all that
great company returned to Vannes, rejoicing.

<span id="img_02100"></span> ![](img/02100.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Basin of Gold and The Diamond Lance](ftb05)
