[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp08)  [Next](dwp10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART VIII

In the Gallery at Florence is a collossal image of the organ of
generation, mounted on the back parts of a lion, and hung round with
various animals. By this is represented the co-operation of the creating
and destroying powers, which are both blended and united in one figure,
because both are derived from one cause. The animals hung round show
likewise that both act to the same purpose, that of replenishing the
earth, and peopling it with still rising generations of sensitive
beings. The Chimæra of Homer, of which the commentators have given so
many whimsical interpretations, was a symbol of the same kind, which the
poet probably, having seen in Asia, and not knowing its meaning (which
was only revealed to the initiated) supposed to be a monster that had
once infested the country. He describes it as composed of the forms of
the *goat*, the *lion*, and the *serpent*, and breathing *fire* from its
*mouth*. <span id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_202) These are the symbols of
the *creator*, the *destroyer*, and the *preserver*, united and animated
by *fire*, the divine essence of all *three*. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[3](#fn_203) On a gem, published in the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Memoirs of the Academy of Cortona, <span
id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204) this union of the destroying and
preserving attributes is represented by the united forms of the lion and
serpent crowned with rays, the emblems of the cause from which both
proceed. This composition forms the Chnoubis of the Egyptians.

Bacchus is frequently represented by the ancient artists accompanied by
tigers, which appear, in some instances, devouring clusters of grapes,
the fruit peculiarly consecrated to the god, and in others drinking the
liquor pressed from them. The author of the *Recherches sur les Arts*
has in this instance followed the common accounts of the Mythologists,
and asserted that tigers are really fond of grapes; <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_205) which is so far from being true, that
they are incapable of feeding upon them, or upon any fruit whatever,
being both externally and internally formed to feed upon flesh only, and
to procure their food by destroying other animals. Hence I am persuaded,
that in the ancient symbols, tigers, as well as lions, represent the
destroying power of the god. Sometimes his chariot appears drawn by
them; and then they represent the powers of destruction preceding the
powers of generation, and extending their operation, as putrefaction
precedes, and increases vegetation. On

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

a medal of Maronea, published by Gesner, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_206) a goat is coupled with the tiger in
drawing his chariot; by which composition the artist has shown the
*general active* power of the deity, conducted by his two great
attributes of creation and destruction. On the Choragic monument of
Lysicrates at Athens, Bacchus is represented feeding a tiger; which
shows the active power of destruction. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_207) On a beautiful cameo in the collection
of the Duke of Marlborough, the tiger is sucking the breast of a nymph;
which represents the same power of destruction, nourished by the passive
power of generation. <span id="fr_209"></span>[3](#fn_208) In the museum
of Charles Townley, Esq., is a group, in marble, of three figures; <span
id="fr_210"></span>[4](#fn_209) the middle one of which grows out of a
vine in a human form, with leaves and clusters of grapes springing out
of its body. On one side is the Bacchus διφυης, or creator of both
sexes, known by the effeminate mold of his limbs and countenance; and on
the other, a tiger, leaping up, and devouring the grapes which spring
from the body of the personified vine, the hands of which are employed
in receiving

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

another cluster from the Bacchus. This composition represents the vine
between the creating and destroying attributes of god; the one giving it
fruit, and the other devouring it when given. The tiger has a garland of
ivy round his neck, to show that the destroyer was co-essential with the
creator, of whom ivy, as well as all other ever-greens, was an emblem
representing his perpetual youth and viridity. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_210)

The mutual and alternate operation of the two great attributes of
creation and destruction, was not confined by the ancients to plants and
animals, and such transitory productions, but extended to the universe
itself. Fire being the essential cause of both, they believed that the
conflagration and renovation of the world were periodical and regular,
proceeding from each other by the laws of its own constitution,
implanted in it by the creator, who was also the destroyer and
renovator' <span id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_211) for, as Plato says, all
things arise from one, and into one are all things resolved. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_212) It must be observed, that, when the
ancients speak of creation and destruction, they mean only formation

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

and dissolution; it being universally allowed, through all systems of
religion, or sects of philosophy, that *nothing could come from nothing,
and that no power whatever could annihilate that which really existed*.
The bold and magnificent idea of a creation from nothing was reserved
for the more vigorous faith, and more enlightened minds of the
moderns, <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_213) who need seek no
authority to confirm their belief; for, as that which is self-evident
admits of no proof, so that which is in itself impossible admits of no
refutation.

The fable of the serpent Pytho being destroyed by Apollo, probably arose
from an emblematical composition, in which that god was represented as
the destroyer of life, of which the serpent was a symbol. Pliny mentions
a statue of him by Praxiteles, which was much celebrated in his time,
called Σαυροκτων (*the Lizard-killer*). <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_214) The lizard, being supposed to live upon
the dews and moisture of the earth, is employed as the symbol of
humidity in general; so that the god destroying it, signifies the same
as the lion devouring the horse. The title Apollo, I

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

am inclined to believe, meant originally the Destroyer, as well as the
Deliverer; for, as the ancients supposed destruction to be merely
dissolution, the power which delivered the particles of matter from the
bonds of attraction, and broke the δεσμον περι Βριθη ερωτος, was in fact
the destroyer. <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_215) It is, probably,
for this reason, that sudden death, plagues, and epidemic diseases, are
said by the poets to be sent by this god; who is, at the same time,
described as the author of medicine, and all the arts employed to
preserve life. These attributes are not joined merely because the
destroyer and preserver were essentially the same; but because disease
necessarily precedes cure, and is the cause of its being invented. The
God of Health is said to be his son, because the health and vigour of
one being are supported by the decay and dissolution of others which are
appropriated to its nourishment. The bow and arrows are given to him as
symbols of his characteristic attributes, as they are to Diana, who was
the female personification of the destructive, as well as the productive
and preserving powers. Diana is hence called the triple Hecate, and
represented by three female bodies

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

 

<span id="img_pl19"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl19.jpg)  
PLATE XIX  
EGYPTIAN FIGURES AND ORNAMENTS

 

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

joined together. Her attributes were however worshipped separately; and
some nations revered her under one character, and others under another.
Diana of Ephesus was the productive and nutritive power, as the many
breasts and other symbols on her statues imply; <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_216) whilst Βριμω, the Tauric or Scythic
Diana, appears to have been the destructive, and therefore was appeased
with human sacrifices, and other bloody rites. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_217) She is represented sometimes standing on
the back of a bull, <span id="fr_219"></span>[3](#fn_218) and sometimes
in a chariot drawn by bulls; <span id="fr_220"></span>[4](#fn_219)
whence she is called by the poets Ταυροπολα <span
id="fr_221"></span>[5](#fn_220) and Βοων ελατειρα. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[6](#fn_221) Both compositions show the passive power
of nature, whether creative or destructive, sustained and guided by the
general active power of the creator, of which the sun was the centre,
and the bull the symbol.

It was observed by the ancients, that the destructive power of the sun
was exerted most by day, and the creative by night: for it was in the
former season that he dried up the waters, withered the herbs, and

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

produced disease and putrefaction; and in the latter, that he returned
the exhalations in dews, tempered with the genial heat which he had
transfused into the atmosphere, to restore and replenish the waste of
the day. Hence, when they personified the attributes, they revered the
one as the *diurnal*, and the other as the *nocturnal* sun, and in their
mystic worship, as Macrobius says, <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_222)
called the former Apollo, and the latter Dionysus or Bacchus. The
mythological personages of Castor and Pollux, who lived and died
alternately, were allegories of the same dogma; hence the two asteriscs,
by which they are distinguished on the medals of Locri, Argos, and other
cities.

The pæans, or war-songs, which the Greeks chanted at the onset of their
battles <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_223) were originally sung to
Apollo, <span id="fr_225"></span>[3](#fn_224) who was called Pæon; and
Macrobius tells us, <span id="fr_226"></span>[4](#fn_225) that in Spain,
the sun was worshipped as Mars, the god of war and destruction, whose
statue they adorned with rays, like that of the Greek Apollo. On a
Celtiberian or Runic medal found in Spain, of barbarous workmanship, is
a head surrounded by

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

obeliscs or rays, which I take to be of this deity. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_226) The hairs appear erect, to imitate
flames, as they do on many of the Greek medals; and on the reverse is a
bearded head, with a sort of pyramidal cap on, exactly resembling that
by which the Romans conferred freedom on their slaves, and which was
therefore called the cap of liberty. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[2](#fn_227) On other Celtiberian medals is a figure
on horseback, carrying a spear in his hand, and having the same sort of
cap on his head, with the word Helman written under him, <span
id="fr_229"></span>[3](#fn_228) in characters which are something
between the old Runic and Pelasgian; but so near to the latter, that
they are easily understood. <span id="fr_230"></span>[4](#fn_229) This
figure seems to be of the same person as is represented by the head with
the cap on the preceding medal, who can be no other than the angel or
minister of the deity of death, as the name implies; for Hela or Hel,
was, among the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Northern nations, the goddess of death, <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_230) in the same manner as Persiphoneia or
Brimo was among the Greeks. The same figure appears on many ancient
British medals, and also on those of several Greek cities, particularly
those of Gela, which have the Taurine Bacchus or Creator on the
reverse. <span id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_231) The head which I have
supposed to be the Celtiberian Mars, or destructive power of the diurnal
sun, is beardless like the Apollo of the Greeks, and, as far as can be
discovered in such barbarous sculpture, has the same androgynous
features. <span id="fr_233"></span>[3](#fn_232) We may therefore
reasonably suppose, that, like the Greeks, the Celtiberians personified
the destructive attribute under the different genders, accordingly as
they applied it to the sun, or subordinate elements; and then united
them, to signify that both were essentially the same. The Helman
therefore, who was the same as the Μοιραγητης or Διακτωζ of the Greeks,
may with equal propriety be called the minister of *both* or *either*.
The spear in his hand is not to be considered merely as the implement of
destruction, but as the symbol of power and command, which it was in
Greece and Italy, as well as all over the North. Hence ευθυνει{! 0x76 v
!}v δορι

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

 

<span id="img_pl20"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl20.jpg)  
PLATE XX  
THE LOTUS AND MEDALS OF MELITA

 

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

was *to govern*, <span id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_233) and *venire sub
hastâ*,--*to be sold as a slave*. The ancient Celtes and Scythians paid
divine honors to the sword, the battle-axe, and the spear; the first of
which was the symbol by which they represented the supreme god: hence to
swear by the edge of the sword was the most sacred and inviolable of
oaths. <span id="fr_235"></span>[2](#fn_234) Euripides alludes to this
ancient religion when he calls a sword ορκιον ξιφος and Æschylus shows
clearly, that it once prevailed in Greece, when he makes the heroes of
the Thebaid swear by the point of the spear (ομνυσι δ᾽αιχμην <span
id="fr_236"></span>[3](#fn_235)). Homer sometimes uses the word αρης to
signify the God of War, and sometimes a weapon: and we have sufficient
proof of this word's being of Celtic origin in its affinity with our
Northern word *War*; for, if we write it in the ancient manner, with the
Pelasgian *Vau*, or Æolian *Digamma*, Ϝαρης (Wares), it scarcely differs
at all.

Behind the bearded head, on the first-mentioned Celtiberian medal is an
instrument like a pair of firetongs, or blacksmith's pincers; <span
id="fr_237"></span>[4](#fn_236) from which it seems that the personage
here represented is the same as the Ἡφαιστος or Vulcan of the Greek and
Roman

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

mythology. The same ideas are expressed somewhat more plainly on the
medals of Æsernia in Italy, which are executed with all the refinement
and elegance of Grecian art. <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_237) On
one side is Apollo, the diurnal sun, mounting in his chariot; and on the
other a beardless head, with the same cap on, and the same instrument
behind it, but with the youthful features and elegant character of
countenance usually attributed to Mercury, who, as well as Vulcan, was
the God of Art and Mechanism; and whose peculiar office it also was to
conduct the souls of the deceased to their eternal mansions, from whence
came the epithet Διακτωζ, applied to him by Homer. He was, therefore, in
this respect, the same as the Helman of the Celtes and Scythians, who
was supposed to conduct the souls of all who died a violent death (which
alone was accounted truly happy) to the palace of Valhala. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_238) It seems that the attributes of the
deity which the Greeks represented by the mythological personages of
Vulcan and Mercury, were united in the Celtic mythology. Caesar tells us
that the Germans worshipped Vulcan, or fire, with the sun and moon; and
I shall soon have occasion to show that the Greeks held fire to be the
real conductor

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

of the dead, and emancipator of the soul. The Æsernians, bordering upon
the Samnites, a Celtic nation, might naturally be supposed to have
adopted the notions of their neighbours, or, what is more probable,
preserved the religion of their ancestors more pure than the Hellenic
Greeks. Hence they represented Vulcan, who, from the inscription on the
exergue of their coins, appears to have been their tutelar god, with the
characteristic features of Mercury, who was only a different
personification of the same deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[147:1](dwp08.htm#fr_202) In Numa.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[147:2](dwp09.htm#fr_203) Il. ζ. v. 223.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[147:3](dwp09.htm#fr_204) For the natural
properties attributed by the ancients to fire, see Plutarch, *in
Camillo*, Plin. *Hist. Nat*. lib. XXXVI c. 68.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[148:1](dwp09.htm#fr_205) Vol. iv. p. 32. See
also Plate v. Fig. 4, copied from it.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[148:2](dwp09.htm#fr_206) Liv. i. c. 3.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[149:1](dwp09.htm#fr_207) Table xliii. Fig. 26.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[149:2](dwp09.htm#fr_208) Stuart's *Athens*,
vol. i. c. 4, Plate x.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[149:3](dwp09.htm#fr_209) See Plate XXIII,
engraved merely to show the composition, it not being permitted to make
an exact drawing of it.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[149:4](dwp09.htm#fr_210) See Plate XXI. Fig.
7.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[150:1](dwp09.htm#fr_211) Strabo, lib. xv. p.
712.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[150:2](dwp09.htm#fr_212) Brucker, *Hist. Crit.
Philos*. vol. i. part 2, lib. i. Plutarch *de Placit. Philos*. lib. ii,
c. 18. Lucretius, lib. v. ver. 92. Cic. *de Nat. Deor*. lib. ii.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[150:3](dwp09.htm#fr_213) Εξ ἑνος τα παντα
γενεσθαι, και εις τ᾽ ἁυτον αναλυεσθαι. The same dogma is still more
plainly inculcated by the ancient Indian author before cited, see
*Bagvat Geeta*, Lect. ix.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[151:1](dwp09.htm#fr_214) The word in *Genesis*
upon which it is founded, conveyed no such sense to the ancients; for
the Seventy translated it , which signifies *formed*, or *fashioned*.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[151:2](dwp09.htm#fr_215) Hist. Nat. lib.
xxxiv. c. 8. Many copies of it are still extant. Winkleman has published
one from a bronze of Cardinal Albani's. *Monum. Antichi. inediti*, Plate
XL.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[152:1](dwp09.htm#fr_216) The verb λυω. from
which Apollo is derived, signifies in Homer both to free and to dissolve
or destroy, Il. *a, ver.* 20; Il, *i*, ver. 25. Macrobius derives the
title from απολλυμι. to *destroy*; but this word is derived from λυω
Sat. lib. I. c. 17.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[155:1](dwp09.htm#fr_217) Hieron. *Comment. in*
Paul *Epist. ad Ephes*.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[155:2](dwp09.htm#fr_218) Pausan. lib. iii. c.
16.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[155:3](dwp09.htm#fr_219) See a medal of
Augustus, published by Spanheim. *Not. in* Callim. *Hymn. ad Dian*. ver.
113.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[155:4](dwp09.htm#fr_220) Plate vi., from a
bronze in the museum of C. Townley, Esq.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[155:5](dwp09.htm#fr_221) Sophoclis *Ajax*,
ver. 172.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[155:6](dwp09.htm#fr_222) *Nonni* Dionys, lib.
i. the title Ταυροπολος was sometimes given to Apollo, Eustath. *Schol
in Dionys*. Περιηγης. ver. 609.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[156:1](dwp09.htm#fr_223) Sat. lib. i. c. 18.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[156:2](dwp09.htm#fr_224) Thucyd. lib. vii.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[156:3](dwp09.htm#fr_225) Homer. *Il*. *a*, v.
472.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[156:4](dwp09.htm#fr_226) Sat. lib. i. c. 19.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[157:1](dwp09.htm#fr_227) Plate X Fig. 2,
engraven from one belonging to me. I have since been confirmed in this
conjecture by observing the characters of Mars and Apollo mixt on Greek
coins. On a Mamertine one belonging to me is the head with the youthful
features and laurel crown of Apollo; but the hair is short, and the
inscription on the exergue denotes it to be Mars. See Plate XVI. Fig 2.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[157:2](dwp09.htm#fr_228) It may be seen with
the dagger on the medals of Brutus.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[157:3](dwp09.htm#fr_229) See Plate IX. Fig. 9,
from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[157:4](dwp09.htm#fr_230) The first to a
mixture of the Runic *Hagle* and Greek Η. The second is the Runic
Laugur, which is also the old Greek Λ, as it appears on the vase of the
Calydonian Boar in the British Museum. The other three differ little
from the common Greek.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[158:1](dwp09.htm#fr_231) Edda. Fab. XVI.
D'Hancarville, *Recherches sur les Arts*, liv. ii. c. 1.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[158:2](dwp09.htm#fr_232) See Plate IX. Fig.
11, from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[158:3](dwp09.htm#fr_233) See Plate X. Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[160:1](dwp09.htm#fr_234) Eurip. *Hecuba*.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[160:2](dwp09.htm#fr_235) Mallet, *Introd. d
l'Hist. de Danemarc*, c. 9.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[160:3](dwp09.htm#fr_236) Ἑπταοπι Θη Βας, v.
535.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[160:4](dwp09.htm#fr_237) Plate X. Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[162:1](dwp09.htm#fr_238) See Plate X. Fig. 6,
from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[162:2](dwp09.htm#fr_239) Mallet, *Hist. de
Danemarc. Introd.* c. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IX](dwp10)
