[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp05)  [Next](dwp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART V

But far as these Egyptian remains lead us into unknown ages, the symbols
they contain appear not to have been invented in that country, but to
have been copied from those of some other people, still anterior, who
dwelt on the other side of the Erythræan ocean. One of the most obvious
of them is the hooded snake, which is a reptile peculiar to

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

 

<span id="img_pl12"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl12.jpg)  
PLATE XXI  
INDIAN TEMPLE, SHOWING THE LINGAM

 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the south-eastern parts of Asia, but which I found represented, with
great accuracy, upon the obelisc of Rameses, and have also observed
frequently repeated on the Isiac Table, and other symbolical works of
the Egyptians. It is also distinguishable among the sculptures in the
sacred caverns of the island of Elephanta; <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) and appears frequently added, as a
characteristic symbol, to many of the idols of the modern Hindoos, whose
absurd tales concerning its meaning are related at length by M.
Sonnerat; but they are not worth repeating. Probably we should be able
to trace the connexion through many more instances, could we obtain
accurate drawings of the ruins of Upper Egypt.

By comparing the columns which the Egyptians formed in imitation of the
Nelumbo plant, with each other, and observing their different modes of
decorating them, we may discover the origin of that order of
architecture which the Greeks called Corinthian, from the place of its
supposed invention. We first find the plain bell, or seed-vessel, used
as a capital, without any further alteration than being a little
expanded at bottom, to give it stability. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119) In the next instance, the same
seed-vessel is surrounded by the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

leaves of some other plant; <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120) which
is varied in different capitals according to the different meanings
intended to be expressed by these additional symbols. The Greeks
decorated it in the same manner, with the leaves of the acanthus, and
other sorts of foliage; whilst various other symbols of their religion
were introduced as ornaments on the entablature, instead of being carved
upon the walls of the cell, or shafts of the columns. One of these,
which occurs most frequently, is that which the architects call the
honeysuckle, but which, as Sir Joseph Banks (to whom I am indebted for
all that I have said concerning the Lotus) clearly showed me, must be
meant for the young shoots of this plant, viewed horizontally, just when
they have burst the seed-vessel, and are upon the point of falling out
of it. The ornament is variously composed on different buildings; it
being the practice of the Greeks to make vegetable, as well as animal
monsters, by combining different symbolical plants together, and
blending them into one; whence they are often extremely difficult to be
discovered. But the specimen I have given, is so strongly characterised,
that it cannot easily be mistaken. <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121)
It appears on many Greek medals with the animal symbols and personified
attributes of the Deity; which first led me

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to imagine that it was not a mere ornament, but had some mystic meaning,
as almost every decoration employed upon their sacred edifices
indisputably had.

The square area, over which the Lotus is spread, in the Indian monument
before mentioned, was occasionally floated with water; which, by means
of a forcing machine, was first thrown in a spout upon the *Lingam*. The
pouring of water upon the sacred symbols, is a mode of worship very much
practised by the Hindoos, particularly in their devotions to the Bull
and the *Lingam*. Its meaning has been already explained, in the
instance of the Greek figure of Pan, represented in the act of paying
the same kind of worship to the symbol of his own procreative
power. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) The areas of the Greek
temples were, in like manner, in some instances, floated with water; of
which I shall soon give an example. We also find, not unfrequently,
little portable temples, nearly of the same form, and of Greek
workmanship: the areas of which were equally floated by means of a
fountain in the middle, and which, by the figures in relief that adorn
the sides, appear evidently to have been dedicated to the same worship
of Priapus, or the *Lingam*. <span id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123) The
square area is likewise impressed upon many

.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

ancient Greek medals, sometimes divided into four, and sometimes into a
greater number of compartments. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)
Antiquarians have supposed this to be merely the impression of something
put under the coin, to make it receive the stroke of the die more
steadily; but, besides that it is very ill adapted to this purpose, we
find many coins which appear, evidently, to have received the stroke of
the hammer (for striking with a balance is of late date) on the side
marked with this square. But what puts the question out of all doubt,
is, that impressions of exactly the same kind are found upon the little
Talismans, or mystic pastes, taken out of the Egyptian Mummies, which
have no impression whatever on the reverse. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125) On a little brass medal of Syracuse, we
also find the asterisc of the Sun placed in the centre of the square, in
the same manner as the Lingam is on the Indian monument. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_126) Why this quadrangular form was adopted,
in preference to any other, we have no means of discovering, from any
known

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

 

<span id="img_pl13"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl13.jpg)  
PLATE XIII  
CELTIC TEMPLE AND GREEK MEDALS

 

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Greek or Egyptian sculptures; but from this little Indian temple, we
find that the four corners were adapted to four of the subordinate
deities, or personified modes of action of the great universal
Generator, represented by the symbol in the middle, to which the others
are represented as paying their adorations, with gestures of humility
and respect. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127)

What is the precise meaning of these four symbolical figures, it is
scarcely possible for us to discover, from the small fragments of the
mystic learning of the ancients which are now extant. That they were
however intended as personified attributes, we can have no doubt; for we
are taught by the venerable authority of the *Bagvat Geeta*, that all
the subordinate deities were such, or else canonised men, which these
figures evidently are not. As for the mythological tales now current in
India, they throw the same degree of light upon the subject, as Ovid's
Metamorphoses do on the ancient theology of Greece; that is, just enough
to bewilder and perplex those who give up their attention to it. The
ancient author before cited is deserving of more credit; but he has said
very little upon the symbolical worship. His work, nevertheless, clearly
proves that its principles were precisely the same as those of the
Greeks and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Egyptians, among whose remains of art or
literature, we may, perhaps, find some probable analogies to aid
conjecture. The elephant is, however, a new symbol in the west; the
Greeks never having seen one of those animals before the expedition of
Alexander, <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128) although the use of
ivory was familiar among them even in the days of Homer. Upon this
Indian monument the head of the elephant is placed upon the body of a
man with four hands, two of which are held up as prepared to strike with
the instruments they bold, and the other two pointed down as in
adoration of the *Lingam*. This figure is called Gonnis and Pollear by
the modern Hindoos; but neither of these names is to be found in the
*Geeta*, where the deity only says, *that the learned behold him alike
in the reverend Brahman perfected in knowledge, in the ox, and in the
elephant*. What peculiar attributes the elephant was meant to express,
the ancient writer has not told us; but, as the characteristic
properties of this animal are strength and sagacity, we may conclude
that his image was intended to represent ideas somewhat similar to those
which the Greeks represented by that of Minerva, who was worshipped as
the goddess of force and wisdom, of war and counsel. The Indian Gonnis
is indeed male, and Minerva female;

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

but this difference of sexes, however important it may be in a physical,
is of very little consequence in metaphysical beings, Minerva being,
like the other Greek deities, either male or female, or both. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129) On the medals of the Ptolemies, under
whom the Indian symbols became familiar to the Greeks through the
commerce of Alexandria, we find her repeatedly represented with the
elephant's skin upon her head, instead of a helmet; and with a
countenance between male and female, such as the artist would naturally
give her, when he endeavoured to blend the Greek and Indian symbols, and
mould them into one. <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130) Minerva is
said by the Greek mythologists to have been born without a mother from
the head of Jupiter, who was delivered of her by the assistance of
Vulcan. This, in plain language, means no more than that she was a pure
emanation of the divine mind, operating by means of the universal agent
fire, and not, like others of the allegorical personages, sprung from
any of the particular operations of the deity upon external matter.
Hence she is said to be next in dignity to her father, and to be endowed
with all his attributes; <span id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_131) for, as
wisdom is the most exalted quality of the mind, and the divine mind the
perfection of

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

wisdom, all its attributes are the attributes of wisdom, under whose
direction its power is always exerted. Strength and wisdom therefore,
when considered as attributes of the deity, are in fact one and the
same. The Greek Minerva is usually represented with the spear uplifted
in her hand, in the same manner as the Indian Gonnis holds the
battle-axe. <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132) Both are given to
denote the destroying power equally belonging to divine wisdom, as the
creative or preserving. The statue of Jupiter at Labranda in Caria held
in his hand the battle-axe, instead of thunder; and on the medals of
Tenedos and Thyatira, we find it represented alone as the symbol of the
deity, in the same manner as the thunder is upon a great variety of
other medals. *I am the thunderbolt*, says the deity in the *Bagvat
Geeta*; <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_133) and when we find this
supposed engine of divine vengeance upon the medals, we must not imagine
that it is meant for the weapon of the supreme god, but for the symbol
of his destroying attribute. What instrument the Gonnis holds in his
other hand, is not easily ascertained, it being a little injured by the
carriage. In one of those pointed downwards he holds the Lotus flower,
to denote that he has the direction of the passive powers

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of production; and in the other, a golden ring or disc, which, I shall
soon show, was the symbol by which many nations of the East represented
the sun. His head is drawn into a conical, or pyramidal form, and
surrounded by an ornament which evidently represents flames; the
Indians, as well as the Greeks, looking upon fire as the essence of all
active power; whence perpetual lamps are kept burning in the holy of
holies of all the great pagodas in India, as they were anciently in the
temple of Jupiter Ammon, and many others both Greek and Barbarian; <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) and the incarnate god in the *Bagvat
Geeta* says, *I am the fire residing in the bodies of all things which
have life*. <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135) Upon the forehead of
the Gonnis is a crescent representing the moon, whose power over the
waters of the ocean caused her to be regarded as the sovereign of the
great nutritive element, and whose mild rays, being accompanied by the
refreshing dews and cooling breezes of the night, made her naturally
appear to the inhabitants of hot countries as the comforter and restorer
of the earth. *I am the moon* (says the deity in the Bagvat Geeta)
*whose nature it is to give the quality of taste and relish, and to
cherish the herbs and plants of the field*. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136) The light of the sun, moon,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

and fire, were however all but one, and equally emanations of the
supreme being. *Know*, says the deity in the same ancient dialogue,
*that the light which proceedeth from the sun, and illuminateth the
world, and the light which is in the moon and in the fire, are mine. I
pervade all things in nature, and guard them with my beams*. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) In the figure now under consideration a
kind of pre-eminence seems to be given to the moon over the sun;
proceeding probably from the Hindoos not possessing the true solar
system, which must however have been known to the people from whom they
learnt to calculate eclipses, which they still continue to do, though
upon principles not understood by themselves. They now place the earth
in the centre of the universe, as the later Greeks did, among whom we
also find the same preference given to the lunar symbol; Jupiter being
represented, on a medal of Antiochus VIII., with the crescent upon his
head, and the asterisc of the sun in his hand. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) In a passage of the *Bagvat Geeta*
already cited we find the elephant and bull mentioned together as
symbols of the same kind; and on a medal of Seleucus Nicator we find
them united by the horns of the one being placed on the head of the
other. <span id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) The later Greeks

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

also sometimes employed the elephant as the universal symbol of the
deity; in which sense he is represented on a medal of Antiochus VI.
bearing the torch, the emblem of the universal agent, fire, in his
proboscis, and the cornucopia, the result of its exertion, in his
tail. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140)

On another corner of the little Indian pagoda, is a figure with four
heads, all of the same pointed form as that of the Gonnis. This I take
to represent Brahma, to whom the Hindoos attribute four mouths, and say
that with them he dictated the four Beads, or Veads, the mystic volumes
of their religion. <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) The four heads
are turned different ways, but exactly resemble each other. The beards
have been painted black, and are sharp and pointed, like those of goats,
which the Greeks gave to Pan, and his subordinate emanations, the Fauns
and Satyrs. Hence I am inclined to believe, that the Brahma of the
Indians is the same as the Pan of the Greeks; that is, the creative
spirit of the deity transfused through matter, and acting in the four
elements represented by the four heads. The Indians indeed admit of a
fifth element, as the Greeks did likewise; but this is never classed
with the rest, being of an ætherial and more

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

exalted nature, and belonging peculiarly to the deity. *Some call it
heaven, some light, and some æther*, says Plutarch. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](dwp07.htm#fn_142) The Hindoos now call it
*Occus*, by which they seem to mean pure ætherial light or fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[105:1](dwp06.htm#fr_118) Niebuhr, voyage, vol.
ii.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[105:2](dwp06.htm#fr_119) See Plate XIX. Fig.
6, from Norden.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[106:1](dwp06.htm#fr_120) See Plate XIX. Fig.
7, from Norden.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[106:2](dwp06.htm#fr_121) Plate XIX. Fig. 3,
from the Ionian Antiquities, Ch. ii. Pl. XIII.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[107:1](dwp06.htm#fr_122) See Plate V. Fig. 1

<span id="fn_123"></span>[107:2](dwp06.htm#fr_123) See Plate XIV. from
one In the collection of Mr. Townley.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[108:1](dwp06.htm#fr_124) See Plate XIII. Fig.
1, from one of Selinus, and Fig. 3, from one of Syracuse, belonging to
me.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[108:2](dwp06.htm#fr_125) See Plate XIII. Fig.
2, from one in the collection of Mr. Townley.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[108:3](dwp06.htm#fr_126) See Plate XIII. Fig.
3. The medal is extremely common, and the quadrangular Impression is
observable upon a great number of the more ancient Greek medals,
generally with some symbol of the Deity in the centre. See those of
Athens, Lyttus, Maronea, &c.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[111:1](dwp06.htm#fr_127) See Plate XII.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[112:1](dwp06.htm#fr_128) Pausan. lib. i. c.
12.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[113:1](dwp06.htm#fr_129) Αρσεν και θηλυς εφυσ.
Orph. εις Αθην.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[113:2](dwp06.htm#fr_130) See Plate XIII. Fig.
5, engraved from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[113:3](dwp06.htm#fr_131) Hor. lib. i. Od. 12.
Callimach. εις Αθην.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[114:1](dwp06.htm#fr_132) See Plate XIII. Fig.
II, from a medal of Seleucus I. belonging to me.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[114:2](dwp06.htm#fr_133) Page 86.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[115:1](dwp06.htm#fr_134) See Plut. *de Orac.
defect*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[115:2](dwp06.htm#fr_135) Page 113.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[115:3](dwp06.htm#fr_136) Page 113.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[116:1](dwp06.htm#fr_137) See Plut. *de Orac.
defect*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[116:2](dwp06.htm#fr_138) Plate XIII. Fig. 10,
from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[116:3](dwp06.htm#fr_139) See Plate XIII. Fig.
9, and Gesner, *Num. Reg. Syr*. Tab. VIII. Fig. 23.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[117:1](dwp06.htm#fr_140) see Plate XIII. Fig.
8, and Gesner, *Num. Reg. Syr. Tab*. VIII. Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[117:2](dwp06.htm#fr_141) *Bagvat Geeta*, Note
41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](dwp07)
