[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp02)  [Next](dwp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART II

It is observable in all modern religions, that men are superstitious in
proportion as they are ignorant, and that those who know least of the
principles of religion are the most earnest and fervent in the practice
of its exterior rites and ceremonies. We may suppose from analogy, that
this was the case with the Egyptians. The learned and rational merely
respected and revered the sacred animals, whilst the vulgar worshipped
and adored them. The greatest part of the former being, as is natural to
suppose, destroyed by the persecution of the Persians, this worship and
adoration became general; different cities adopting different animals as
their tutelar deities, in the same manner as the Catholics now put
themselves under the protection of different saints and martyrs. Like
them, too, in the fervency of their devotion for the imaginary agent,
they forgot the original cause.

The custom of keeping sacred animals as images of the Divine attributes,
seems once to have prevailed in Greece as well as Egypt; for the God of
Health was represented by a living serpent at Epidaurus, even in the
last stage of their religion. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) In

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

general, however, they preferred wrought images, not from their
superiority in art, which they did not acquire until after the time of
Homer, <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) when their theology was
entirely corrupted; but because they had thus the means of expressing
their ideas more fully, by combining several forms together, and
showing, not only the Divine attribute, but the mode and purpose of its
operation. For instance; the celebrated bronze in the Vatican has the
male organs of generation placed upon the head of a cock, the emblem of
the sun, supported by the neck and shoulders of a man. In this
composition they represented the generative power of the Ερως, the
Osiris, Mithras, or Bacchus, whose centre is the sun, incarnate with
man. By the inscription on the pedestal, the attribute this personified,
is styled *The Saviour of the World* (Σωτηζ κοσμψ); a title always
venerable, under whatever image it be represented. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48)

The Egyptians showed this incarnation of the Deity by a less permanent,
though equally expressive symbol. At Mendes a living goat was kept as
the image of the generative power, to whom the women presented
themselves naked, and had the honour of being publicly enjoyed by him.
Herodotus saw the act

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

openly performed (ec epideiksin anðrwpwn), and calls it a prodigy. But
the Egyptians had no such horror of it; for it was to them a
representation of the incarnation of the Deity, and the communication of
his creative spirit to man. It was one of the sacraments of that ancient
church, and was, without doubt, beheld with that pious awe and reverence
with which devout persons always contemplate the mysteries of their
faith, whatever they happen to be; for, as the learned and orthodox
Bishop Warburton, whose authority it is not for me to dispute, says,
*from the nature of any action morality cannot arise, nor from its
effects*; <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) therefore, for aught we
can tell, this ceremony, however shocking it may appear to modern
manners and opinions, might have been intrinsically meritorious at the
time of its celebration, and afforded a truly edifying spectacle to the
saints of ancient Egypt. Indeed, the Greeks do not seem to have felt
much horror or disgust at the imitative representation of it, whatever
the historian might have thought proper to express at the real
celebration. Several specimens of their sculpture in this way have
escaped the fury of the reformers, and remained for the instruction of
later times. One of these, found among the ruins of Herculaneum, and

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

 

<span id="img_pl07"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl07.jpg)  
PLATE VII  
PHALLIC FIGURES FOUND IN ENGLAND

 

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

kept concealed in the Royal Museum of Portici, is well known. Another
exists in the collection of Mr. Townley, which I have thought proper to
have engraved for the benefit of the learned. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) It may be remarked, that in these
monuments the goat is *passive* instead of *active*; and that the *human
symbol* is represented as incarnate with the *divine*, instead of the
*divine* with the *human*: but this is in fact no difference; for the
Creator, being of both sexes, is represented indifferently of either. In
the other symbol of the bull, the sex is equally varied; the Greek
medals having sometimes a bull, and sometimes a cow, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) which, Strabo tells us, was employed as
the symbol of Venus, the passive generative power, at Momemphis, in
Egypt. <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52) Both the bull and the cow are
also worshipped at present by the Hindoos, as symbols of the male and
female, or generative and nutritive, powers of the Deity. The cow is in
almost all their pagodas; but the bull is revered with superior
solemnity and devotion. At Tanjour is a monument of their piety to him,
which even the inflexible perseverance, and habitual industry of the
natives of that country, could scarcely have erected

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

without greater knowledge in practical mechanics than they now possess.
It is a statue of a bull lying down, hewn, with great accuracy, out of a
single piece of hard granite, which has been conveyed by land from the
distance of one hundred miles, although its weight, in its present
reduced state, must be at least one hundred tons. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) The Greeks sometimes made their Taurine
Bacchus, or bull, with a human face, to express both sexes, which they
signified by the initial of the epithet Λιφνης placed under him. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54) Over him they frequently put the radiated
asterisk, which represents the sun, to show the Deity, whose attribute
he was intended to express. <span id="fr_55"></span>[3](#fn_55) Hence we
may perceive the reason why the Germans, who, according to Cæsar, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[4](#fn_56) worshipped the sun, carried a brazen bull,
as the image of their God, when they invaded the Roman dominions in the
time of Marius; <span id="fr_57"></span>[5](#fn_57) and even the chosen
people of Providence, when they made unto themselves an image of the God
who was to conduct them through the desert,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

and cast out the ungodly, from before them, made it in the shape of a
young bull, or calf. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

The Greeks, as they advanced in the cultivation of the imitative arts,
gradually changed the animal for the human form, preserving still the
original character. The human head was at first added to the body of the
bull; <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) but afterwards the whole
figure was made human, with some of the features, and general character
of the animal, blended with it. <span id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_60)
Oftentimes, however, these mixed figures had a peculiar and proper
meaning, like that of the Vatican Bronze; and were not intended as mere
refinements of art. Such are the fawns and satyrs, who represent the
emanations of the Creator, incarnate with man, acting as his angels and
ministers in the work of universal generation. In copulation with the
goat, they represent the reciprocal incarnation of man with the deity,
when incorporated with universal matter: for Deity, being both male and
female, was both act and passive in procreation; first animating man by
an emanation from his own essence, and then employing that emanation to
reproduce, in conjunction with the common productive powers of nature,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

which are no other than his own prolific spirit transfused through
matter.

These mixed beings are derived from Pan, the principle of universal
order; of whose personified image they partake. Pan is addressed in the
Orphic Litanies as the first-begotten love, or creator incorporated in
universal matter, and so forming the world. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) The heaven, the earth, water, and fire are
said to be members of him; and he is described as the origin and source
of all things (πανοφνης γενετωζπατων), as representing matter animated
by the Divine Spirit. Lycæan Pan was the most ancient and revered God of
the Arcadians, <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62) the most ancient
people of Greece. The epithet Lycæan (Λυκαοις), is usually derived from
λυκος, a wolf; though it is impossible to find any relation which this
etymology can have with the deities to which it is applied; for the
epithet Λυκαιος, or Λυκειοσ (which is only the different pronunciation
of a different dialect), is occasionally applied to almost all the gods.
I have therefore no doubt, but that it ought to be derived from the old
word λυκος, or λυκη, light; from which came the Latin word *lux*. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63) In this sense it is a very proper epithet
for the Divine Nature, of whose essence light was supposed

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

 

<span id="img_pl08"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl08.jpg)  
PLATE VIII  
BRONZE STATUE OF CERES

 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

to be. I am confirmed in this conjecture by a word in the *Electra* of
Sophocles, which seems hitherto to have been misunderstood. At the
opening of the play, the old tutor of Orestes, entering Argos with his
young pupil, points out to him the most celebrated public buildings, and
amongst them the Lycæan Forum, τψ λυκοκτουψ Θεψ which the scholiast and
translators interpret, *of the wolf-killing God*, though there is no
reason whatever why this epithet should be applied to Apollo. But, if we
derive the compound from λυκος, light, and εκτεινειν, to extend, instead
of κτεινειν, to kill, the meaning will be perfectly just and natural;
for *light-extending*, is of all others the properest epithet for the
sun. Sophocles, as well as Virgil, is known to have been an admirer of
ancient expressions, and to have imitated Homer more than any other
Attic Poet; therefore, his employing an obsolete word is not to be
wondered at. Taking this etymology as the true one, the Lycæan Pan of
Arcadia is Pan *the luminous*; that is, the divine essence of light
incorporated in universal matter. The Arcadians called him τον της υλης
Κυριον, the lord of matter as Macrobius rightly translates it. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) He was hence called Sylvanus by the
Latins; *Sylvus* being, in the ancient Pelasgian and Æolian Greek, from
which the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Latin is derived, the same as ἱλη for it is well
known to all who have compared the two languages attentively, that the
*Sigma* and *Vau* are letters, the one of which was partially, and the
other generally omitted by the Greeks, in the refinement of their
pronunciation and orthography which took place after the emigration of
the Latian and Etruscan colonies. The Chorus in the *Ajax* of Sophocles
address Pan by the title of Ἁλιπλαγκος, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) probably because he was worshipped on the
shores of the sea; water being reckoned the best and most prolific of
the subordinate elements, <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66) upon which
the Spirit of God, according to Moses, or the Plastic Nature, according
to the Platonics, operating, produced life and motion on earth. Hence
the ocean is said by Homer to be the source of all things; <span
id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67) and hence the use of water in baptism,
which was to regenerate, and, in a manner, new create the person
baptised; for the soul, supposed by many of the primitive Christians to
be naturally mortal, was then supposed to become immortal. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_68) Upon the same principle, the figure of
Pan, <span id="fr_69"></span>[5](#fn_69)

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

is represented pouring water upon the organ of generation; that is,
invigorating the active creative power by the prolific element upon
which it acted; for water was considered as the essence of the passive
principle, as fire was of the active; the one being of terrestrial, and
the other of æthereal origin. Hence, St. John the Baptist, who might
have acquired some knowledge of the ancient theology, through its
revivers, the Eclectic Jews, says: *I, indeed, baptise you in water to
repentance; but he that cometh after me, who is more powerful than I am,
shall baptise you in Holy Spirit, and in fire*: <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) that is, I only purify and refresh the
soul, by a communion with the terrestrial principle of life; but he that
cometh after me, will regenerate and restore it, by a communion with the
æthereal principle. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) Pan is again
addressed in Salaminian Chorus of the same tragedy of Sophocles, by the
titles of author and director of the dances of the gods (Θεων χοροποἰ
αναξ), as being the author and disposer of the regular motions of the
universe, of which these divine dances were symbols, which are said in
the same passage to be (αυτοδαη) *self-taught* 

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

to him. Both the Gnossian and Nysian dances are here included, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) the former sacred to Jupiter, and the
latter to Bacchus; for Pan, being the principle of universal order,
partook of the nature of all the other gods. They were personifications
of particular modes of acting of the great all-ruling principle; and he,
of his general law and pre-established harmony by which he governs the
universe. Hence he is often represented playing on a pipe; music being
the natural emblem of this physical harmony. According to Plutarch, the
Jupiter Ammon of the Africans was the same as the Pan of the
Greeks. <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) This explains the reason why
the Macedonian kings assumed the horns of that god; for, though
Alexander pretended to be his son, his successors never pretended to any
such honour; and yet they equally assumed the symbols, as appears from
their medals. <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) The case is, that Pan,
or Ammon, being the universe, and Jupiter a title of the Supreme God (as
will be shown hereafter), the horns, the emblems of his power, seemed
the properest symbols of that supreme and universal dominion to which
they all, as well as Alexander,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

had the ambition to aspire. The figure of Ammon was compounded of the
forms of the ram, as that of Pan was of the goat; the reason of which is
difficult to ascertain, unless we suppose that goats were unknown in the
country where his worship arose, and that the ram expressed the same
attribute. <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](dwp04.htm#fn_75) In a gem in the
Museum of Charles Townley, Esq., the head of the Greek Pan is joined to
that of a ram, on the body of a cock, over whose head is the asterisk of
the sun, and below it the head of an aquatic fowl, attached to the same
body. <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](dwp04.htm#fn_76) The cock is the
symbol of the sun, probably from proclaiming his approach in the
morning; and the aquatic fowl is the emblem of water; so that this
composition, apparently so whimsical, represents the universe between
the two great prolific elements, the one the active, and the other the
passive cause of all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[60:1](dwp03.htm#fr_46) Liv. *Hist. Epitom*.
lib. xi.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[61:1](dwp03.htm#fr_47) When Homer praises any
work of art, he calls. It the work of Sidonians.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[61:2](dwp03.htm#fr_48) See Plate II, Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[62:1](dwp03.htm#fr_49) Div. Leg. book i. c. 4.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[65:1](dwp03.htm#fr_50) See Plate VII.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[65:2](dwp03.htm#fr_51) See Plate IV. Fig. 1, 2,
3, and Plate III. Fig. 4, engraved from medals belonging to me.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[65:3](dwp03.htm#fr_52) Lib. xvii.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[66:1](dwp03.htm#fr_53) See Plate XXII. with the
measurements, as made by Capt. Patterson on the spot.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[66:2](dwp03.htm#fr_54) See Plate IV. Fig. 2,
from a medal of Naples in the Hunter collection.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[66:3](dwp03.htm#fr_55) See Plate IV. Fig. 2,
and Plate XIX. Fig. 4, from a medal of Cales, belonging to me.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[66:4](dwp03.htm#fr_56) *De B. G.*, lib. vi.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[66:5](dwp03.htm#fr_57) Plut. *in Mario*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[67:1](dwp03.htm#fr_58) *Exod*. c. xxxii., with
Patrick's *Commentary*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[67:2](dwp03.htm#fr_59) See the medals of
Naples, Gels. &c. Plate IV. Fig. 2. and Plate IX. Fig. 11, are
specimens; but the coins are in all collections.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[67:3](dwp03.htm#fr_60) see *Bronzi
d'Herculano*, tom. V. Plate V.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[68:1](dwp03.htm#fr_61) Hymn. x.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[68:2](dwp03.htm#fr_62) Dionys. *Antiq. Rom*.
lib. i. c. 32.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[68:3](dwp03.htm#fr_63) Macrob. Sat. xvii.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[71:1](dwp03.htm#fr_64) Sat. i. c. 22.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[72:1](dwp03.htm#fr_65) Ver. 703.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[72:2](dwp03.htm#fr_66) Pindar. *Olymp*. I. ver
1. Diodor. Sic. lib. i. p. II.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[72:3](dwp03.htm#fr_67) Il. Θ, ver. 246, and ζ,
ver. 196.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[72:4](dwp03.htm#fr_68) Clementina, *Hom*. xii.
Arnob. *adv*. Gentes, lib. ii.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[72:5](dwp03.htm#fr_69) See Plate V. Fig. I. The
original is among the antiquities found in Herculaneum, now in the
Museum of Portici.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[73:1](dwp03.htm#fr_70) *Matth*. c. iii.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[73:2](dwp03.htm#fr_71) It is the avowed
intention of the learned and excellent work of Grotius, to prove that
there is nothing new in Christianity. What I have here adduced, may
serve to confirm and illustrate the discoveries of that great and good
man. *See de Veritate Relig. Christ*. lib. iv, c. 12.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[74:1](dwp03.htm#fr_72) Ver. 708.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74:2](dwp03.htm#fr_73) *De Is. et Os*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[74:3](dwp03.htm#fr_74) See Plate IV. Fig 4,
engraved from one of Lysimachus, of exquisite beauty, belonging to me.
Antigonus put the head of Pan upon his coins, which. are not uncommon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](dwp04)
