[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp03)  [Next](dwp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART III

The Creator being both male and female, the emanations of his creative
spirit, operating upon universal matter, produced subordinate ministers
of both sexes, and gave, as companions to the fauns and satyrs, the
nymphs of the waters, the mountains and the woods, signifying the
passive productive powers

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

of each, subdivided and diffused. Of the same class are the
Γενετυλλιδες, mentioned by Pausanias as companions to Venus, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) who, as well as Ceres, Juno, Diana, Isis,
&c., was only a personification of nature, or the passive principle of
generation, operating in various modes. Apuleius invokes Isis by the
names of the Eleusinian Ceres, Celestial Venus, and Proserpine; and,
when the Goddess answers him, she describes herself as follows: "I am,"
says she, "nature, the parent of things, the sovereign of the elements,
the primary progeny of time, the most exalted of the deities, the first
of the heavenly Gods and Goddesses, the queen of the shades, the uniform
countenance; who dispose, with my nod, the luminous heights of heaven,
the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the mournful silence of the dead;
whose single Deity the whole world venerates, in many forms, with
various rites, and various names. The Egyptians, skilled in ancient
learning, worship me with proper ceremonies, and call me by my true
name, Queen Isis." <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78)

According to the Egyptians, Isis copulated with her brother Osiris in
the womb of their mother; from whence sprung Arueris, or Orus, the
Apollo of the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

 

<span id="img_pl09"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl09.jpg)  
PLATE IX  
COINS AND MEDALS

 

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Greeks. <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) This
allegory means no more than that the active and passive powers of
creation united in the womb of night; where they had been implanted by
the unknown father, Κρονος, or time, and by their union produced the
separation or delivery of the elements from each other; for the name
Apollo is only a title derived from απολνω, *to deliver from*. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) They made the robes of Isis various in
their colours and complicated in their folds, because the passive or
material power appeared in various shapes and modes, as accommodating
itself to the active; but the dress of Osiris was simple, and of one
luminous colour, to show the unity of his essence, and universality of
his power; equally the same through all things. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81) The luminous, or flame colour, represented
the sun, who, in the language of the theologists, was the substance of
his sacred power, and the visible image of his intellectual being. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[4](#fn_82) He is called, in the Orphic Litanies, the
chain which connects all things together (ο δ᾽ ανεδραμε δεσμος
απαντων), <span id="fr_83"></span>[5](#fn_83) as being the principle of
attraction; and the deliverer (λυσιος), <span
id="fr_84"></span>[6](#fn_84) as giving liberty to the innate powers of

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

nature, and thus fertilising matter. These epithets not only express the
theological, but also the physical system of the Orphic school;
according to which the sun, being placed in the centre of the universe,
with the planets moving round, was, by his attractive force, the cause
of all union and harmony in the whole; and, by the emanation of his
beams, the cause of all motion and activity in the parts. This system is
alluded to by Homer in the allegory of the golden chain, by which
Jupiter suspends all things; <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85) though
there is every reason to believe that the poet himself was ignorant of
its meaning, and only related it as he had heard it. The Ammonian
Platonics adopted the same system of attraction, but changed its centre
from the sun to their metaphysical abstraction or incomprehensible
unity, whose emanations pervaded all things, and held all things
together. <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86)

Besides the Fauns, Satyrs, and Nymphs, the incarnate emanations of the
active and passive powers of the Creator, we often find in the ancient
sculptures

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

certain androgynous beings possessed of the characteristic organs of
both sexes, which I take to represent organized matter in its first
stage; that is, immediately after it was released from chaos, and before
it was animated by a participation of the ethereal essence of the
Creator. In a beautiful gem belonging to R. Wilbraham, Esq., <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87) one of these androgynous figures is
represented sleeping, with the organs of generation covered, and the egg
of chaos broken under it. On the other side is Bacchus, the Creator,
bearing a torch, the emblem of ethereal fire, and extending it towards
the sleeping figure; whilst one of his agents seems only to wait his
permission to begin the execution of that office, which, according to
every outward and visible sign, he appears able to discharge with energy
and effect. The Creator himself leans upon one of those figures commonly
called *Sileni*; but which, from their heavy unwieldy forms, were
probably intended as personifications of brute inert matter, from which
all things are formed, but which, being incapable of producing anything
of itself, is properly represented as the support of the creative power,
though not actively instrumental in his work. The total baldness of this
figure represents the exhausted, unproductive state of matter,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

when the generative powers were separated from it; for it was an opinion
of the ancients, which I remember to have met with in some part of the
works of Aristotle, to which I cannot at present refer, that every act
of coition produced a transient chill in the brain, by which some of the
roots of the hair were loosened; so that baldness was a mark of
sterility acquired by excessive exertion. The figures of Pan have nearly
the same forms with that which I have here supposed to represent inert
matter; only that they are compounded with those of the goat, the symbol
of the creative power, by which matter was fructified and regulated. To
this is sometimes added the organ of generation, of an enormous
magnitude, to signify the application of this power to its noblest end,
the procreation of sensitive and rational beings. This composition forms
the common Priapus of the Roman poets, who was worshipped among the
other personages of the heathen mythology, but understood by few of his
ancient votaries any better than by the good women of Isernia. His
characteristic organ is sometimes represented by the artists in that
state of tension and rigidity, which it assumes when about to discharge
its functions, <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) and at other times in
that state of tumid languor, which immediately

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

succeeds the performance. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) In the
latter case he appears loaded with the productions of nature, the result
of those prolific efforts, which in the former case he appeared so well
qualified to exert. I have in Plate V. given a figure of him in each
situation, one taken from a bronze in the Royal Museum of Portici, and
the other from one in that of Charles Townley, Esq. It may be observed,
that in the former the muscles of the face are all strained and
contracted, so that every nerve seems to be in a state of tension;
whereas in the latter the features are all dilated and fallen, the chin
reposed on the breast, and the whole figure expressive of languor and
fatigue.

If the explanation which I have given of these androgynous figures be
the true one, the fauns and satyrs, which usually accompany them, must
represent abstract emanations, and not incarnations of the creative
spirit, as when in copulation with the goat. The Creator himself is
frequently represented in a human form; and it is natural that his
emanations should partake of the same, though without having any thing
really human in their composition. It seems, however, to have been the
opinion in some parts of Asia, that the Creator was really of a human
form. The Jewish legislator says expressly, that God

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

made man in his own image, and, prior to the creation of woman, created
him *male and female*, <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) as he himself
consequently was. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91) Hence an ingenious
author has supposed that these androgynous figures represented the first
individuals of the human race, who, possessing the organs of both sexes,
produced children of each. This seems to be the sense in which they were
represented by some of the ancient artists; but I have never met with
any trace of it in any Greek author, except Philo the Jew; nor have I
ever seen any monument of ancient art, in which the Bacchus, or Creator
in a human form, was represented with the generative organs of both
sexes. In the symbolical images, the double nature is frequently
expressed by some androgynous insect, such as the snail, which is
endowed with the organs of both sexes, and can copulate reciprocally
with either: but when the refinement of art adopted the human form, it
was represented by mixing the characters of the male and female bodies
in every part, preserving still the distinctive organs of the male.
Hence Euripides calls Bacchus θηλυμορφος, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[3](#fn_92) and the Chorus of Bachannals in the same
tragedy address him by masculine and

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

feminine epithets. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) Ovid also says to
him,

------Tibi, cum sine cornibus adstas,  
Virgineum caput est. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94)

alluding in the first line to his taurine, and in the second to his
androgynous figure.

The ancient theologists were, like the modern, divided into sects; but,
as these never disturbed the peace of society, they have been very
little noticed. I have followed what I conceive to be the true Orphic
system, in the little analysis which I have here endeavoured to give.
This was probably the true catholic faith, though it differs
considerably from another ancient system, described by
Aristophanes; <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95) which is more
poetical, but less philosophical. According to this, Chaos, Night,
Erebus, and Tartarus, were the primitive beings. Night, in the infinite
breast of Erebus, brought forth an egg, from which sprung Love, who
mixed all things together; and from thence sprung the heaven, the ocean,
the earth, and the gods. This system is alluded to by the epithet
Ωογενος, applied to the Creator in one of the Orphic Litanies: <span
id="fr_96"></span>[4](#fn_96) but this could never have been a part of
the orthodox

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

faith; for the Creator is usually represented as breaking the egg of
chaos, and therefore could not have sprung from it. In the confused
medleys of allegories and traditions contained in the Theogony
attributed to Hesiod, Love is placed after Chaos and the Earth, but
anterior to every thing else. These differences are not to be wondered
at; for Aristophanes, supposing that he understood the true system,
could not with safety have revealed it, or even mentioned it any
otherwise than under the usual garb of fiction and allegory; and as for
the author of the Theogony, it is evident, from the strange jumble of
incoherent fables which he has put together, that he knew very little of
it. The system alluded to in the Orphic verses quoted in the
*Argonautics*, is in all probability the true one; for it is not only
consistent in all its parts, but contains a physical truth, which the
greatest of the modern discoveries has only confirmed and explained. The
others seem to have been only poetical corruptions of it, which,
extending by degrees, produced that unwieldly system of poetical
mythology, which constituted the vulgar religion of Greece.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75:1](dwp03.htm#fr_75) Pausanias (lib. ii.)
says he knew the meaning of this symbol, but did not choose to reveal
It, it being a part of the mystic worship.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[75:2](dwp03.htm#fr_76) Plate III. Fig. 1.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[76:1](dwp04.htm#fr_77) Lib. i.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[76:2](dwp04.htm#fr_78) *Metamorph*. lib. xi.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[79:1](dwp04.htm#fr_79) Plutarch, *de Is. et
Os*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[79:2](dwp04.htm#fr_80) Damm. *Lex. Etym*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[79:3](dwp04.htm#fr_81) Plutarch, *de Is. et
Os*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[79:4](dwp04.htm#fr_82) Ibid.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[79:5](dwp04.htm#fr_83) Hymn. xlvi.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[79:6](dwp04.htm#fr_84) Hymn. xlix. the initials
of this epithet are with the bull on <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> a
medal of Naples belonging to me The bull has a human countenance, and
has therefore been called a minotaur by antiquarians; notwithstanding he
is to be found on different medals, accompanied with all the symbols
both of Bacchus and Apollo, and with the initials of most of the
epithets to be found in the Orphic Litanies.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[80:1](dwp04.htm#fr_85) Il. Θ, ver. xix.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[80:2](dwp04.htm#fr_86) Proclus in Theol. Plat.
lib. i. c. 21.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[81:1](dwp04.htm#fr_87) See Plate V. Fig. 3.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[82:1](dwp04.htm#fr_88) Plate V. Fig. 1, from a
bronze in the Museum at Portici.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[83:1](dwp04.htm#fr_89) Plate V. Fig 2, from a
bronze in the Museum of C. Townley, Esq.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[84:1](dwp04.htm#fr_90) Genes. c. i.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[84:2](dwp04.htm#fr_91) Philo. *de. Leg. Alleg*.
lib. ii.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[84:3](dwp04.htm#fr_92) Bach. v. 358.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[85:1](dwp04.htm#fr_93) Ω Βρομιε, Πεδωνρθσνος
ενοσι ποτνια. Vers. 504.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[85:2](dwp04.htm#fr_94) Metam. lib. iv. v. 18.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[85:3](dwp04.htm#fr_95) Ορνιθ. Vers. 693.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[85:4](dwp04.htm#fr_96) Hymn V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](dwp05)
