[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp06)  [Next](dwp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART VI

This mode of representing the allegorical personages of religion with
many heads and limbs to express their various attributes, and extensive
operation, is now universal in the East, <span
id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143) and seems anciently not to have been
unknown to the Greeks, at least if we may judge by the epithets used by
Pindar and other early poets. <span id="fr_144"></span>[3](#fn_144) The
union of two symbolical heads is common among the specimens of their art
now extant, as may be seen upon the medals of Syracuse, Marseilles, and
many other cities. Upon a gem of this sort in the collection of Mr.
Townley, the same ideas which are expressed on the Indian pagoda by the
distinct figures Brahma and Gonnis, are expressed by the united heads of
Ammon and Minerva. Ammon, as before observed, was the Pan of the Greeks,
and Minerva is here evidently the same as the Gonnis, being represented
after the Indian manner, with the elephant's skin on her head, instead
of a helmet. <span id="fr_145"></span>[4](#fn_145) Both these heads
appear separate upon

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

different medals of the Ptolemies, <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146)
under one of whom this gem was probably engraved, Alexandria having been
for a long time the great centre of religions, as well as of trade and
science.

Next to the figure of Brahma on the pagoda is the cow of plenty, or the
female emblem of the generative or nutritive power of the earth; and at
the other corner, next to the Gonnis, is the figure of a woman, with a
head of the same conic or pyramidal form, and upon the front of it a
flame of fire, from which hangs a crescent. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147) This seems to be the female
personification of the divine attributes represented by the Gonnis or
Pollear; for the Hindoos, like the Greeks, worship the deity under both
sexes, though they do not attempt to unite both in one figure. *I am the
father and the mother of the world*, says the incarnate god in the
*Bagvat Geeta*. <span id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_148) *Amongst cattle*,
adds he in a subsequent part, *I am the cow Kamadhook. I am the prolific
Kandarp, the god of love*. <span id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_149) These
two sentences, by being placed together, seem to imply some relation
between this *god of love* and the *cow Kamadhook*; and, were we to read
the words without punctuation, as they are in all ancient orthography,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

we should think the author placed the god of love amongst the cattle;
which he would naturally do, if it were the custom of his religion to
represent him by an animal symbol. Among the Egyptians, as before
observed, the cow was the symbol of Venus, the goddess of love, and
passive generative power of nature. On the capitals of one of the
temples of Philæ we still find the heads of this goddess represented of
a mixed form; the horns and ears of the cow being joined to the
beautiful features of a woman in the prime of life; <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) such as the Greeks attributed to that
Venus, whom they worshipped as the mother of the prolific god of love,
Cupid, who was the personification of animal desire or concupiscence, as
the Orphic love, the father of gods and men, was of universal
attraction. The Greeks, who represented the mother under the form of a
beautiful woman, naturally represented the son under the form of a
beautiful boy; but a people who represented the mother under the form of
a cow, would as naturally represent the son under the form of a calf.
This seems to be the case with the Hindoos, as well as with the
Egyptians; wherefore Kandarp may be very properly placed among the
cattle.

By following this analogy, we may come to the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

 

<span id="img_pl14"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl14.jpg)  
PLATE XIV  
PORTABLE TEMPLE DEDICATED TO PRIAPUS OR THE LINGAM

 

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

true meaning of a much-celebrated object of devotion, recorded by
another ancient writer, of a more venerable character. When the
Israelites grew clamorous on account of the absence of Moses, and called
upon Aaron to make them a god to go before them, he set up a golden
calf; to which the people sacrificed and feasted, and then rose up (as
the translator says) *to play*; but in the original the term is more
specific, and means, in its plain direct sense, that particular sort of
play which requires the concurrence of both sexes, <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) and which was therefore a very proper
conclusion of a sacrifice to Cupid, though highly displeasing to the god
who had brought them out of Egypt. The Egyptian mythologists, who
appeared to have invented this secondary deity of love, were probably
the inventors likewise of a secondary Priapus, who was the
personification of that particular generative faculty, which springs
from animal desire, as the primary Priapus was of the great generative
principle of the universe. Hence, in the allegories of the poets, this
deity is said to be a son of Bacchus and Venus; that is, the result of
the active and passive generative powers of nature. The story of his
being the son of a Grecian conqueror, and born at Lampsacus, seems to be
a corruption of this allegory.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

Of all the nations of antiquity the Persians were the most simple and
direct in the worship of the creator. They were the puritans of the
heathen world, and not only rejected all images of god or his agents,
but also temples and altars, according to Herodotus, <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) whose authority I prefer to any other,
because he had an opportunity of conversing with them before they had
adopted any foreign superstitions. <span id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_153)
As they worshipped the ætherial fire without any medium of
personification or allegory, they thought it unworthy of the dignity of
the god to be represented by any definite form, or circumscribed to any
particular place. The universe was his temple, and the all-pervading
element of fire his only symbol. The Greeks appear originally to have
held similar opinions; for they were long without statues; <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_154) and Pausanias speaks of a temple at
Sicyon, built by Adrastus, <span id="fr_155"></span>[4](#fn_155) who
lived an age before the Trojan war; which consisted of columns only,
without wall or roof, like the Celtic temples of our Northern ancestors,
or the Pyrætheia <span id="fr_156"></span>[4](#fn_155) of the Persians,
which were

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

circles of stones, in the centre of which was kindled the sacren
fire, <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_156) the symbol of the god. Homer
frequently speaks of places of worship consisting of an area and altar
only (τεμενοε Βωμος τε), which were probably inclosures like these of
the Persians, with an altar in the centre. The temples dedicated to the
creator Bacchus, which the Greek architects called *hypaethral*, seem to
have been anciently of the same kind; whence probably came the title
περικιονιον (*surrounded with columns*) attributed to that god in the
Orphic litanies. <span id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_157) The remains of
one of these are still extant at Puzzuoli near Naples, which the
inhabitants call the Temple of Serapis: but the ornaments of grapes,
vases, &c. found among the ruins, prove it to have been of Bacchus.
Serapis was indeed the same deity worshipped under another form, being
equally a personification of the sun. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_158) The architecture is of the Roman times;
but the ground plan is probably that of a very ancient one, which this
was made to replace; for it exactly resembles that of a Celtic temple in
Zeeland, published in Stukeley's *itinerary*. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_159) The ranges of square buildings which
inclose it are not properly parts of the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

temple, but apartments of the priests, places for victims and sacred
utensils, and chapels dedicated to subordinate deities introduced by a
more complicated and corrupt worship, and probably unknown to the
founders of the original edifice. <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_160)
The portico, which runs parallel with these buildings <span
id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_161) inclosed the *temenos*, or area of
sacred ground, which in the *pyræthia* of the Persians was circular, but
is here quadrangular, as in the Celtic temple in Zeeland, and the Indian
pagoda before described. In the centre was the holy of holies, the seat
of the god, consisting of a circle of columns raised upon a basement,
without roof or walls, in the middle of which was probably the sacred
fire, or some other symbol of the deity. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_162) The square area in which it stood, was
sunk below the natural level of the ground, <span
id="fr_164"></span>[4](#fn_163) and, like that of the little Indian
pagoda, appears to have been occasionally floated with water, the drains
and conduits being still to be seen, <span
id="fr_165"></span>[5](#fn_164) as also several fragments of sculpture
representing waves, serpents, and various aquatic animals, which once
adorned the basement. <span id="fr_166"></span>[6](#fn_165) The Bacchus
περικιονιος here worshipped, was,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

 

<span id="img_pl15"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl15.jpg)  
PLATE XV  
TEMPLE DEDICATED TO BACCHUS AT PUZZUOLI

 

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

as we learn from the Orphic hymn above cited, the sun in his character
of extinguisher of the fires which once pervaded the earth. This he was
supposed to have done by exhaling the waters of the ocean, and
scattering them over the land, which was thus supposed to have acquired
its proper temperature and fertility. For this reason the sacred fire,
the essential image of the god, was surrounded by the element which was
principally employed in giving effect to the beneficial exertions of his
great attribute.

These Orphic temples were, without doubt, emblems of that fundamental
principle of the mystic faith of the ancients, the solar system; fire,
the essence of the deity, occupying the place of the sun, and the
columns surrounding it as the subordinate parts of the universe. Remains
of the worship of fire continued among the Greeks even to the last, as
appears from the sacred fires kept in the interior apartment, or holy of
holies, of almost all their temples, and places of worship: and, though
the Ammonian Platonics, the last professors of the ancient religion,
endeavoured to conceive something beyond the reach of sense and
perception, as the essence of their supreme god; yet, when they wanted
to illustrate and explain the modes of action of this metaphysical
abstraction, who was more subtle than

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

intelligence itself, they do it by images and comparisons of light and
fire. <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](dwp08.htm#fn_166)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[118:1](dwp06.htm#fr_142) Ei apud Delph.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[118:2](dwp07.htm#fr_143) See Kæmpfer, Chappe
D'Auteroche, Sonnerat, &c.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[118:3](dwp07.htm#fr_144) Such as
ἕκατογκεφαλος, εκατοντακανος, εκατογχειρος, &c.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[118:4](dwp07.htm#fr_145) See Plate XIII. Fig.
7.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[119:1](dwp07.htm#fr_146) See Plate XXI. Fig. 6
and 6.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[119:2](dwp07.htm#fr_147) see Plate XII.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[119:3](dwp07.htm#fr_148) Page 80.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[119:4](dwp07.htm#fr_149) Page 86.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[120:1](dwp07.htm#fr_150) See Plate XVIII. Fig.
3.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[123:1](dwp07.htm#fr_151) *Exod*. xxxii.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[124:1](dwp07.htm#fr_152) Lib. i.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[124:2](dwp07.htm#fr_153) Hyde, Anquetil, and
other modern writers, have given us the operose superstitions of the
present Parsees for the simple theism of the ancient Persians.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[124:3](dwp07.htm#fr_154) Pauson, lib. vii. and
ix.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[124:4](dwp07.htm#fr_156) Lib. ii.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[125:1](dwp07.htm#fr_157) Strab. lib. XV.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[125:2](dwp07.htm#fr_158) Hymn. 46.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[125:3](dwp07.htm#fr_159) Diodor. Sic. lib. i.
Macrob. *Sat*. lib. i. c. 20.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[125:4](dwp07.htm#fr_160) See Plate XV, Fig. 1
and 2, and Plate XIII. Fig. 4.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[126:1](dwp07.htm#fr_161) Plate XV. Fig. 2,
*a--a*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[126:2](dwp07.htm#fr_162) Plate XV. Fig. 2,
*b--b*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[126:3](dwp07.htm#fr_163) See Plate XV. Fig. 1,
*a*, and Fig. 2, *c*.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[126:4](dwp07.htm#fr_164) See Plate XV. Fig. 1,
*b--b*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[126:5](dwp07.htm#fr_165) See Plate XV. Fig. 1
*c--c*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[126:6](dwp07.htm#fr_166) See Plate XVI. Fig.
1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VII](dwp08)
