[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp12)  [Next](dwp14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART XII

Another great means of corrupting the ancient theology, and establishing
the poetical mythology, was the practice of the artists in representing
the various attributes of the creator under human forms of various
character and expression. These figures, being

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

distinguished by the titles of the deity which they were meant to
represent, became in time to be considered as distinct personages, and
worshipped as separate subordinate deities. Hence the many-shaped god,
the πολυμορφος and μυριομορφος of the ancient theologists, became
divided into many gods and goddesses, often described by the poets as at
variance with each other and wrangling about the little intrigues and
passions of men. Hence too, as the symbols were multiplied, particular
ones lost their dignity; and that venerable one which is the subject of
this discourse, became degraded from the representative of the god of
nature to a subordinate rural deity, a supposed son of the Asiatic
conqueror Bacchus, standing among the nymphs by a fountain, <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_318) and expressing the fertility of a
garden, instead of the general creative power of the great active
principle of the universe. His degradation did not stop even here; for
we find him, in times still more prophane and corrupt, made a subject of
raillery and insult, as answering no better purpose than holding up his
rubicund snout to frighten the birds and thieves. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_319) His talents were also perverted from
their natural ends, and employed in base and abortive efforts in
conformity

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

to the taste of the times; for men naturally attribute their own
passions and inclinations to the objects of their adoration; and as God
made man in his own image, so man returns the favour, and makes God in
his. Hence we find the highest attribute of the all-pervading spirit and
first-begotten love foully prostituted to promiscuous vice, and calling
out, *Hæc cunnum, caput hic, præbeat ille nates*. <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_320)

He continued however still to have his temple, priestess and sacred
geese, <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_321) and offerings of the most
exquisite kind were made to him:

Crissabitque tibi excussis pulcherrima Iumbis  
Hoc anno primum experta puella virum.

Sometimes, however, they were not so scrupulous in the selection of
their victims, but suffered frugality to restrain their devotion:

Cum sacrum fieret Deo salaci  
Conducta est pretio puella parvo. <span id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_322)

The bride was usually placed upon him immediately before marriage; not,
as Lactantius says, *ut ejus pudicitiam prior Deus prælibasse videatur*,
but that she might be rendered fruitful by her communion with the divine
nature, and capable of fulfilling the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

duties of her station. In an ancient poem <span
id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_323) we find a lady of the name of Lalage
presenting the pictures of the "Elephantis" to him, and gravely
requesting that she might enjoy the pleasures over which he particularly
presided, in all the attitudes described in that celebrated
treatise. <span id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_324) Whether or not she
succeeded, the poet has not informed us; but we may safely conclude that
she did not trust wholly to faith and prayer, but, contrary to the usual
practice of modern devotees, accompanied her devotion with such good
works as were likely to contribute to the end proposed by it.

When a lady had served as the victim in a sacrifice to this god, she
expressed her gratitude for the benefits received, by offering upon his
altar certain small images representing his characteristic attribute,
the number of which was equal to the number of men who had acted as
priests upon the occasion. <span id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_325) On an
antique gem, in the collection of Mr. Townley, is one of these fair
victims, who appears just returned from a sacrifice of this kind, and
devoutly returning her thanks by offering upon an altar some of these
images, from the number of which one may observe

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

that she has not been neglected. <span id="fr_327"></span>[1](#fn_326)
This offering of thanks had also its mystic and allegorical meaning; for
fire being the energetic principle and essential force of the Creator,
and the symbol above mentioned the visible image of his characteristic
attribute, the uniting them was uniting the material with the essential
cause, from whose joint operation all things were supposed to proceed.

These sacrifices, as well as all those to the deities presiding over
generation, were performed by night: hence Hippolytus, in Euripides,
says, to express his love of chastity, that he likes none of the gods
revered by night. <span id="fr_328"></span>[2](#fn_327) These acts of
devotion were indeed attended with such rites as must naturally shock
the prejudices of a chaste and temperate mind, not liable to be warmed
by that ecstatic enthusiasm which is peculiar to devout persons when
their attention is absorbed in the contemplation of the beneficent
powers of the Creator, and all their faculties directed to imitate him
in the exertion of his great characteristic attribute. To heighten this
enthusiasm, the male and female saints of antiquity used to lie
promiscuously together in the temples, and honour God by a liberal
display and general communication of his bounties. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[3](#fn_328)

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Herodotus, indeed, excepts the Greeks and
Egyptians, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, the Romans, from this general
custom of other nations; but to the testimony of the former we may
oppose the thousand sacred prostitutes kept at each of the temples of
Corinth and Eryx; <span id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_329) and to that of
the latter the express words of Juvenal, who, though he lived an age,
later, lived when the same religion, and nearly the same manners,
prevailed. <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_330) Diodorus Siculus also
tells us, that when the Roman prætors visited Eryx, they laid aside
their magisterial severity, and honoured the goddess by mixing with her
votaries, and indulging themselves in the pleasures over which she
presided. <span id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_331) It appears, too, that
the act of generation was a sort of sacrament in the island of Lesbos;
for the device on its medals (which in the Greek republics had always
some relation to religion) is as explicit as forms can make it. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[4](#fn_332) The figures appear indeed to be mystic
and allegorical, the male having evidently a mixture of the goat in his
beard and features, and therefore probably represents Pan, the
generative power of the universe incorporated in universal matter. The
female has all that breadth and

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

fulness which characterise the personification of the passive power,
known by the titles of Rhea, Juno, Ceres, &e.

When there were such seminaries for female education as those of Eryx
and Corinth, we need not wonder that the ladies of antiquity should be
extremely well instructed in all the practical duties of their religion.
The stories told of Julia and Messalina show us that the Roman ladies
were no ways deficient; and yet they were as remarkable for their
gravity and decency as the Corinthians were for their skill and
dexterity in adapting themselves to all the modes and attitudes which
the luxuriant imaginations of experienced votaries have contrived for
performing the rites of their tutelar goddess. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[1](#fn_333)

The reason why these rites were always performed by night was the
peculiar sanctity attributed to it by the ancients, because dreams were
then supposed to descend from heaven to instruct and forewarn men. The
nights, says Hesiod, belong to the blessed gods; <span
id="fr_335"></span>[2](#fn_334) and the Orphic poet calls night the
source of all things (παντων γενεσις) to denote that productive power,
which, as I have been told, it really possesses; it being observed that
plants and animals grow more

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

by night than by day. The ancients extended this power much further, and
supposed that not only the productions of the earth, but the luminaries
of heaven, were nourished and sustained by the benign influence of the
night. Hence that beautiful apostrophe in the "Electra" of Euripides, Ω
νυξ μελαινα, χυσεων αστρων τροφε, &c.

Not only the sacrifices to the generative deities, but in general all
the religious rites of the Greeks, were of the festive kind. To imitate
the gods, was, in their opinion, to feast and rejoice, and to cultivate
the useful and elegant arts, by which we are made partakers of their
felicity. <span id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_335) This was the case with
almost all the nations of antiquity, except the <span
id="fr_337"></span>[2](#fn_336) Egyptians and their reformed imitators
the Jews, <span id="fr_338"></span>[3](#fn_337) who being governed by a
hierarchy, endeavoured to make it awful and venerable to the people by
an appearance of rigour and austerity. The people, however, sometimes
broke through this restraint, and indulged themselves in the more
pleasing worship of their neighbours, as when they danced and feasted
before the golden calf which Aaron erected, <span
id="fr_339"></span>[4](#fn_338) and devoted themselves to the worship of
obscene idols, generally

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

supposed to be of Priapus, under the reign of Abijam. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[1](dwp14.htm#fn_339)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_317"></span>[197:1](dwp12.htm#fr_318) So the translators
have rendered the expression of the original, which literally means
brooding as a fowl on its eggs, and alludes to the symbols of the
ancient theology, which I have before observed upon. See Patrick's
*Commentary*.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[198:1](dwp13.htm#fr_319) Theocrit. Idyll. i.
ver. 21.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[198:2](dwp13.htm#fr_320) Horat. lib. i. Sat.
viii. Virg. *Georg*. iv.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[199:1](dwp13.htm#fr_321) Priap. Carm. 21.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[199:2](dwp13.htm#fr_322) Petron. *Satyric*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[199:3](dwp13.htm#fr_323) Priap. Carm. 34.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[200:1](dwp13.htm#fr_324) Priap. Carm. 3.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[200:2](dwp13.htm#fr_325) The *Elephantis* was
written by one Philænis, and seems to have been of the same kind with
the *Puttana errante* of Aretin.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[200:3](dwp13.htm#fr_326) Priap. Carm. 34. *Ed.
Scioppii*.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[201:1](dwp13.htm#fr_327) See Plate III. Fig.
3.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[201:2](dwp13.htm#fr_328) Ver. 613.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[201:3](dwp13.htm#fr_329) Herodot. lib. ii.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[202:1](dwp13.htm#fr_330) Strab. lib. viii.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[202:2](dwp13.htm#fr_331) *Sat*. ix. ver. 24.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[202:3](dwp13.htm#fr_332) Lib. iv. *Ed.
Wessel*.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[202:4](dwp13.htm#fr_333) See Plate IX. Fig. 8,
from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[203:1](dwp13.htm#fr_334) Philodemi *Epigr.
Brunk. Analect*. vol. ii. p. 85.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[203:2](dwp13.htm#fr_335) Εργ· ver. 730.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[204:1](dwp13.htm#fr_336) Strabo, lib. x.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[204:2](dwp13.htm#fr_337) Herodot. lib. ii.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[204:3](dwp13.htm#fr_338) See Spencer *de Leg.
Rit. Vet. Hebræor*.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[204:4](dwp13.htm#fr_339) *Exod*. ch. xxxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part XIII](dwp14)
