[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp11)  [Next](dwp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART XI

This universality of the goddess was more concisely represented in other
figures of her, by the mystic instrument called a *Systrum*, which she
carried in her hand. Plutarch has given an explanation of it, <span
id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_299) which may serve to show that the mode
here adopted of explaining the ancient symbols is not founded merely
upon conjecture and analogy, but also upon the authority of one of the
most grave and learned of the Greeks. The curved top, he says,
represented the lunar orbit, within which the creative attributes of the
deity were exerted, in giving motion to the four elements, signified by
the four rattles below. <span id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_300) On the
centre of the curve was a cat, the emblem of the moon; who, from her
influence on the constitutions of women, was supposed to preside
particularly over the passive powers of generation; <span
id="fr_302"></span>[3](#fn_301) and below, upon the base, a head of Isis
or Nepthus; instead of which, upon that which I have had engraved, as
well as upon many others now extant, are the male organs of generation,
representing the active powers of the creator, attributed to Isis with
the

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

passive. The clattering noise, and various motions of the rattles being
adopted as the symbols of the movement and mixture of the elements from
which all things are produced; the sound of metals in general became an
emblem of the same kind. Hence, the ringing of bells, and clattering of
plates of metal, were used in all lustrations, sacrifices, &c. <span
id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_302) The title Priapus, applied to the
characteristic attribute of the creator, and sometimes to the Creator
himself, is probably a corruption of Βριαπυοε (clamorous or loud); for
the Β and Π being both labials, the change of the one for the other is
common in the Greek language. We still find many ancient images of this
symbol, with bells attached to them. <span
id="fr_304"></span>[2](#fn_303) as they were to the sacred robe of the
high priest of the Jews, in which he administered to the Creator. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[3](#fn_304) The bells in both were of a pyramidal
form, <span id="fr_306"></span>[4](#fn_305) to show the ætherial igneous
essence of the god. This form is still retained in those used in our
churches, as well as in the little ones rung by the Catholic priests at
the elevation of the host. The use of them was early adopted by the
Christians, in the same sense as they were employed

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

by the later heathens; that is, as a charm against evil daemons; <span
id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_306) for, being symbols of the active
exertions of the creative attributes, they were properly opposed to the
emanations of the destructive. The Lacedemonians used to beat a pan or
kettle-drum at the death of their king, <span
id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_307) to assist in the emancipation of his
soul at the dissolution of the body. We have a similar custom of tolling
a bell on such occasions, which is very generally practised, though the
meaning of it has been long forgotten. This emancipation of the soul was
supposed to be finally performed by fire; which, being the visible image
and active essence of both the creative and destructive powers, was very
naturally thought to be the medium through which men passed from the
present to a future life. The Greeks, and all the Celtic nations,
accordingly, burned the bodies of the dead, as the Gentoos do at this
day; while the Egyptians, among whom fuel was extremely scarce, placed
them in pyramidal monuments, which were the symbols of fire; hence come
those prodigious structures which still adorn that country. The soul
which was to be emancipated was the divine emanation, the vital spark of
heavenly flame, the principle of reason and perception, which

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

was personified into the familiar daemon, or genius, supposed to have
the direction of each individual, and to dispose him to good or evil,
wisdom or folly, and all their consequences of prosperity and
adversity. <span id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_308) Hence proceeded the
doctrines, so uniformly inculcated by Homer and Pindar. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_309) of all human actions depending
immediately upon the gods; which were adopted, with scarcely any
variations, by some of the Christian divines of the apostolic age. In
the Pastor of Hermas, and Recognitions of Clemens, we find the angels of
justice, penitence, and sorrow, instead of the genii, or daemons, which
the ancients supposed to direct men's minds and inspire them with those
particular sentiments. St. Paul adopted the still more comfortable
doctrine of grace, which served full as well to emancipate the
consciences of the faithful from the shackles of practical morality. The
familiar daemons, or divine emanations, were supposed to reside in the
blood; which was thought to contain the principles of vital heat, and
was therefore forbidden by Moses. <span id="fr_311"></span>[3](#fn_310)
Homer, who seems to have

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

collected little fragments of the ancient theology, and introduced them
here and there, amidst the wild profusion of his poetical fables,
represents the shades of the deceased as void of perception, until they
had tasted of the blood of the victims offered by Ulysses; <span
id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_311) by which their faculties were renewed by
a reunion with the divine emanation, from which they had been separated.
The soul of Tiresias is said to be entire in hell, and to possess alone
the power of perception, because with him this divine emanation still
remained. The shade of Hercules is described among the other ghosts,
though he himself, as the poet says, was then in heaven; that is, the
active principle of thought and perception returned to its native
heaven, whilst the passive, or merely sensitive, remained on earth, from
whence it sprung. <span id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_312) The final
separation of these two did not take place till the body was consumed by
fire, as appears from the ghost of Elpenor, whose body being still
entire, he retained both, and knew Ulysses before he had tasted of the
blood. It was from producing this separation, that the universal
Bacchus, or double Apollo, the creator and destroyer, whose essence was
fire, was

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

also called Λιχνιτης, the purifier, <span
id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_313) by a metaphor taken from the winnow,
which purified the corn from the dust and chaff, as fire purified the
soul from its terrestrial pollutions. Hence this instrument is called by
Virgil the mystic winnow of Bacchus. <span
id="fr_315"></span>[2](#fn_314) The Ammonian Platonics and Gnostic
Christians thought that this separation, or purification, might be
effected in a degree even before death. It was for this purpose that
they practised such rigid temperance, and gave themselves up to such
intense study; for, by subduing and extenuating the terrestrial
principle, they hoped to give liberty and vigour to the celestial, so
that it might be enabled to ascend directly to the intellectual world,
pure and unincumbered. <span id="fr_316"></span>[3](#fn_315) The clergy
afterwards introduced Purgatory, instead of abstract meditation and
study; which was the ancient mode of separation by fire, removed into an
unknown country, where it was saleable to all such of the inhabitants of
this world as had sufficient wealth and credulity.

It was the celestial or ætherial principle of the human mind, which the
ancient artists represented under the symbol of the butterfly, which may
be

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

considered as one of the most elegant allegories of their elegant
religion. This insect, when hatched from the egg, appears in the shape
of a grub, crawling upon the earth, and feeding upon the leaves of
plants. In this state, it was aptly made the emblem of man, in his
earthly form, in which the ætherial vigour and activity of the celestial
soul, the *divine particula mentis*, was supposed to be clogged and
incumbered with the material body. When the grub was changed to a
chrysalis, its stillness, torpor, and insensibility seemed to present a
natural image of death, or the intermediate state between the cessation
of the vital functions of the body and the final releasement of the soul
by the fire, in which the body was consumed. The butterfly breaking from
the torpid chrysalis, and mounting in the air, was no less natural an
image of the celestial soul bursting from the restraints of matter, and
mixing again with its native æther. The Greek artists, always studious
of elegance, changed this, as well as other animal symbols, into a human
form, retaining the wings as the characteristic members, by which the
meaning might be known. The human body, which they added to them, is
that of a beautiful girl, sometimes in the age of infancy, and sometimes
of approaching maturity. So beautiful an allegory as this would
naturally be a favourite subject of art among a people whose taste

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

had attained the utmost pitch of refinement. We accordingly find that it
has been more frequently and more variously repeated than any other
which the system of emanations, so favourable to art, could afford.

Although all men were supposed to partake of the divine emanation in a
degree, it was not supposed that they all partook of it in an equal
degree. Those who showed superior abilities, and distinguished
themselves by their splendid actions, were supposed to have a larger
share of the divine essence, and were therefore adored as gods, and
honoured with divine titles, expressive of that particular attribute of
the deity with which they seemed to be most favoured. New personages
were thus enrolled among the allegorical deities; and the personified
attributes of the sun were confounded with a Cretan and Thessalian king,
an Asiatic conqueror, and a Theban robber. Hence Pindar, who appears to
have been a very orthodox heathen, says, that the race of men and gods
is one, that both breathe from one mother, and only differ in
power. <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_316) This confusion of epithets
and titles contributed, as much as any thing, to raise that vast and
extravagant fabric of poetical mythology, which, in a manner,
overwhelmed the ancient theology,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

which was too pure and philosophical to continue long a popular
religion. The grand and exalted system of a general first cause,
universally expanded, did not suit the gross conceptions of the
multitude; who had no other way of conceiving the idea of an omnipotent
god, but by forming an exaggerated image of their own despot, and
supposing his power to consist in an unlimited gratification of his
passions and appetites. Hence the universal Jupiter, the aweful and
venerable, the general principle of life and motion, was transformed
into the god who thundered from Mount Ida, and was lulled to sleep in
the embraces of his wife; and hence the god whose spirit moved <span
id="fr_318"></span>[1](dwp13.htm#fn_317) upon the face of the waters,
and impregnated them with the powers of generation, became a great king
above all gods, who led forth his people to smite the ungodly, and
rooted out their enemies from before them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[189:1](dwp12.htm#fr_300) *De Is. & Os*.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[189:2](dwp12.htm#fr_301) see Plate X. Fig. 4,
engraved from one in the collection of R. Wilbraham, Esq.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[189:3](dwp12.htm#fr_302) Cic. *de Nat. Deor*.
lib. ii. c. 46.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[190:1](dwp12.htm#fr_303) Clem. Alex. Προτζ. p.
9. Schol *in Theocrit. Idyll*. II. ver. 36.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[190:2](dwp12.htm#fr_304) *Bronzi dell'
Hercol*. Tom. vi. Plate XCVIII.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[190:3](dwp12.htm#fr_305) *Exod*. ch. xxviii.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[190:4](dwp12.htm#fr_306) Bronzi dell' Hercol.
Tom. vi. Plate XCVIII. Maimonides in *Patrick's Commentary on Exodus*,
ch. xxviii.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[191:1](dwp12.htm#fr_307) Ovid. *Fast*. lib. v.
ver. 441. *Schol. in* Theocrit Idyll. ii. ver. 36.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[191:2](dwp12.htm#fr_308) *Schol. in* Theocrit.
Idyll. II. ver. 36.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[192:1](dwp12.htm#fr_309) Pindar. *Pyth*. v.
ver. 164. Sophocl. *Trachin*. ver. 922. Hor. lib. ii. epist. ii. ver.
187.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[192:2](dwp12.htm#fr_310) Εκ Θεων μαχαναι ηγσαι
Βροτεαις αρεταις, και σοποι, και χερσι Βιαται, Περιγλωσσοι τ᾽ εφ Ιν.
Pindar *Pyth*. i. ver. 79 Passages to the same purpose occur in almost
every page of the *Iliad* and *Odyssey*.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[192:3](dwp12.htm#fr_311) *Levit*. ch. xvii.
ver. 11 & 14.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[193:1](dwp12.htm#fr_312) *Odyss*. ζ, ver. 152.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[193:2](dwp12.htm#fr_313) Those who wish to see
the difference between sensation and perception clearly and fully
explained, may be satisfied by reading the *Essai analytique sur l'Ame*,
by Mr. Bonnet.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[194:1](dwp12.htm#fr_314) *Orph. Hymn*. 45.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[194:2](dwp12.htm#fr_315) *Mystica vannus
Iacchi*. Georg. i. ver. 166.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[194:3](dwp12.htm#fr_316) Plotin. *Ennead*. vi.
lib. IV. ch. 16. Mosheim, *Not y in* Cudw. *Syst. Intell*. ch. v. sect.
20.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[196:1](dwp12.htm#fr_317) *Nem*. v. ver. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part XII](dwp13)
