[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dwp10)  [Next](dwp12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART X

In the vision of Ezekiel, God is described as descending upon the
combined forms of the eagle, the bull, and the lion, <span
id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_263) the emblems of the ætherial spirit, the
creative and destructive powers, which were all united in the true God,
though hypostatically divided in the Syrian trinity. Man was compounded
with them, as representing the real image of God, according to the
Jewish theology. The cherubim on the ark of the covenant, between which
God dwelt, <span id="fr_265"></span>[3](#fn_264) were also compounded of
the same form, <span id="fr_266"></span>[4](#fn_265) so that the idea of
them must have been present to the prophet's mind, previous to the
apparition which furnished him with the description. Even those on the
ark of the covenant, though made at the express command of God, do not
appear to have been original; for a figure exactly answering to the
description of them appears among those curious ruins existing at
Chilminar, in Persia, which have been supposed to be those of the palace
of Persepolis, burnt by Alexander; but for what reason, it is not easy
to conjecture. They do not, certainly, answer to any ancient

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

 

<span id="img_pl21"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl21.jpg)  
PLATE XXI  
BACCHUS AND MEDALS OF CAMARINA AND SYRACUSE

 

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

description extant of that celebrated palace; but, as far as we can
judge of them in their present state, appear evidently to have been a
temple. <span id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_266) But the Persians, as
before observed, had no inclosed temples or statues, which they held in
such abhorrence, that they tried every means possible to destroy those
of the Egyptians; thinking it unworthy of the majesty of the deity to
have his all-pervading presence limited to the boundary of an edifice,
or likened to an image of stone or metal. Yet, among the ruins at
Chilminar, we not only find many statues, which are evidently of ideal
beings, <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_267) but also that remarkable
emblem of the deity, which distinguishes almost all the Egyptian temples
now extant. <span id="fr_269"></span>[3](#fn_268) The portals are also
of the same form as those at Thebes and Philæ; and, except the
hieroglyphics which distinguish the latter, are finished and ornamented
nearly in the same manner. Unless, therefore, we suppose the Persians to
have been so inconsistent as to erect temples in direct contradiction to
the first principles of their own religion, and decorate them with
symbols

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

and images, which they held to be impious and abominable, we cannot
suppose them to be the authors of these buildings. Neither can we
suppose the Parthians, or later Persians, to have been the builders of
them; for both the style of workmanship in the figures, and the forms of
the letters in the inscriptions, denote a much higher antiquity, as will
appear evidently to any one who will take the trouble of comparing the
drawings published by Le Bruyn and Niebuhr with the coins of the
Arsacidæ and Sassanidæ. Almost all the symbolical figures are to be
found repeated upon different Phœnician coins; but the letters of the
Phœnicians, which are said to have come to them from the Assyrians, are
much less simple, and evidently belong to an alphabet much further
advanced in improvement. Some of the figures are also observable upon
the Greek coins, particularly the bull and lion fighting, and the mystic
flower, which is the constant device of the Rhodians. The style of
workmanship is also exactly the same as that of the very ancient Greek
coins of Acanthus, Celendaris, and Lesbos; the lines being very strongly
marked, and the hair expressed by round knobs. The wings likewise of the
figure, which resembles the Jewish cherubim, are the same as those upon
several Greek sculptures now extant; such as the little images of
Priapus attached to the ancient bracelets,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

 

<span id="img_pl22"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl22.jpg)  
Plate XXII  
Statue of a Bull in the Pagoda of Tanjore.

 

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the compound figures of the goat and lion upon the frieze of the Temple
of Apollo Didymæus, &c. &c. <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_269) They
are likewise joined to the human figure on the medals of Melita and
Camarina, <span id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_270) as well as upon many
ancient sculptures in relief found in Persia. <span
id="fr_272"></span>[3](#fn_271) The feathers in these wings are turned
upwards like those of an ostrich, <span id="fr_273"></span>[4](#fn_272)
to which however they have no resemblance in form, but seem rather like
those of a fowl brooding, though more distorted than any I ever observed
in nature. Whether this distortion was meant to express lust or
incubation, I cannot determine; but the compositions, to which the wings
are added, leave little doubt, that it was meant for the one or the
other. I am inclined to believe that it was for the latter, as we find
on the medals of Melita a figure with four of these wings, who seems by
his attitude to be brooding over something. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[5](#fn_273) On his head is the cap of liberty,
whilst in his right hand he holds the hook or attractor, and in his left
the winnow or separator; so that he probably represents the Ερως, or
generative spirit brooding over matter, and giving

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

liberty to its productive powers by the exertion of his own attributes,
attraction and separation. On a very ancient Phœnician medal brought
from Asia by Mr. Pullinger, and published very incorrectly by Mr.
Swinton in the Philosophical Transactions of 1760, is a disc or ring
surrounded by wings of different forms, of which some of the feathers
are distorted in the same manner. <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_274)
The same disc, surrounded by the same kind of wings, incloses the
asterisc of the sun over the bull Apis, or Mnevis, on the Isiac
Table, <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_275) where it also appears with
many of the other Egyptian symbols, particularly over the heads of Isis
and Osiris. <span id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_276) It is also placed over
the entrances of most of the Egyptian temples described by Pococke and
Norden as well as on that represented on the Isiac Table, <span
id="fr_278"></span>[4](#fn_277) though with several variations, and
without the asterisc. We find it equally without the asterisc, but with
little or no variation, on the ruins at Chilmenar, and other supposed
Persian antiquities in that neighbourhood: <span
id="fr_279"></span>[5](#fn_278) but upon some of the Greek medals the
asterisc alone is placed over the bull with

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

the human face, <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279) who is then the
same as the Apis or Mnevis of the Egyptians; that is, the image of the
generative power of the sun, which is signified by the asterisc on the
Greek medals, and by the kneph, or winged disc, on the Oriental
monuments. The Greeks however sometimes employed this latter symbol, but
contrived, according to their usual practice, to join it to the human
figure, as may be seen on a medal of Camarina, published by Prince
Torremmuzzi. <span id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_280) On other medals of
this city the same idea is expressed, without the disc or asterisc, by a
winged figure, which appears hovering over a swan, the emblem of the
waters, to show the generative power of the sun fructifying that
element, or adding the *active* to the *passive* powers of
production. <span id="fr_282"></span>[3](#fn_281) On the medals of
Naples, a winged figure of the same kind is represented crowning the
Taurine Bacchus with a wreath of laurel. <span
id="fr_283"></span>[4](#fn_282) This antiquarians have called a Victory
crowning the Minotaur; but the fabulous monster called the Minotaur was
never said to have been victorious, even by the poets who invented it;
and whenever the sculptors and painters represented

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

it, they joined the head of a bull to a human body, as may be seen in
the celebrated picture of Theseus, published among the antiquities of
Herculaneum, and on the medals of Athens, struck about the time of
Severus, when the style of art was totally changed, and the mystic
theology extinct. The winged figure, which has been called a Victory,
appears mounting in the chariot of the sun, on the medals of queen
Philistis, <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_283) and, on some of those
of Syracuse, flying before it in the place where the asterisc appears on
others of the same city. <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_284) I am
therefore persuaded, that these are only different modes of representing
one idea, and that the winged figure means the same, when placed over
the Taurine Bacchus of the Greeks, as the winged disc over the Apis or
Mnevis of the Egyptians. The Ægis, or snaky breastplate, and the
Medusa's head, are also, as Dr. Stukeley justly observed, <span
id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_285) Greek modes of representing this winged
disc joined with the serpents, as it frequently is, both in the Egyptian
sculptures, and those of Chilmenar in Persia. The expressions of rage
and violence, which usually characterise the countenance of Medusa,
signify the destroying attribute joined with the generative, as both
were equally under the direction of

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Minerva, or divine wisdom. I am inclined to
believe, that the large rings, to which the little figures of Priapus
are attached, <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_286) had also the same
meaning as the disc; for, if intended merely to suspend them by, they
are of an extravagant magnitude, and would not answer their purpose so
well as a common loop.

On the Phœnician coin above mentioned, this symbol, the winged disc, is
placed over a figure sitting, who holds in his hands an arrow, whilst a
bow, ready bent, of the ancient Scythian form, lies by him. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_287) On his head is a large loose cap, tied
under his chin, which I take to be the lion's skin, worn in the same
manner as on the heads of Hercules, upon the medals of Alexander; but
the work is so small, though executed with extreme nicety and precision,
and perfectly preserved, that it is difficult to decide with certainty
what it represents, in parts of such minuteness. The bow and arrows, we
know, were the ancient arms of Hercules; <span
id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_288) and continued so, until the Greek poets
thought proper to give him the club. <span
id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_289) He was particularly worshipped at Tyre,
the metropolis of Phœnicia; <span id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_290) and
his head appears in the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

usual form, on many of the coins of that people. We may hence conclude
that he is the person here represented, notwithstanding the difference
in the style and composition of the figure, which may be accounted for
by the difference of art. The Greeks, animated by the spirit of their
ancient poets, and the glowing melody of their language, were grand and
poetical in all their compositions; whilst the Phœnicians, who spoke a
harsh and untuneable dialect, were unacquainted with fine poetry, and
consequently with poetical ideas; for words being the types of ideas,
and the signs or marks by which men not only communicate them to each
other, but arrange and regulate them in their own minds, the genius of a
language goes a great way towards forming the character of the people
who use it. Poverty of expression will produce poverty of conception;
for men will never be able to form sublime ideas, when the language in
which they *think* (for men always think as well as speak in some
language) is incapable of expressing them. This may be one reason why
the Phœnicians never rivalled the Greeks in the perfection of art,
although they attained a degree of excellence long before them; for
Homer, whenever he has occasion to speak of any fine piece of art, takes
care to inform us that it was the work of Sidonians. He also mentions
the Phœnician merchants

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

bringing toys and ornaments of dress to sell to the Greeks, and
practicing those frauds which merchants and factors are apt to practice
upon ignorant people. <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_291) It is
probable that their progress in the fine arts, like that of the Dutch
(who are the Phœnicians of modern history), never went beyond a strict
imitation of nature; which, compared to the more elevated graces of
ideal composition, is like a newspaper narrative compared with one of
Homer's battles. A figure of Hercules, therefore, executed by a
Phœnician artist, if compared to one by Phidias or Lysippus, would be
like a picture of Moses or David, painted by Teniers, or Gerard Dow,
compared to one of the same, painted by Raphael or Annibal Caracci. This
is exactly the difference between the figures on the medal now under
consideration, and those on the coins of Gelo or Alexander. Of all the
personages of the ancient mythology, Hercules is perhaps the most
difficult to explain; for physical allegory and fabulous history are so
entangled in the accounts we have of him, that it is scarcely possible
to separate them. He appears however, like all the other gods, to have
been originally a personified attribute of the sun. The eleventh of the
Orphic Hymns <span id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_292) is addressed to

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

him as the strength and power of the sun; and Macrobius says that he was
thought to be the strength and virtue of the gods, by which they
destroyed the giants; and that, according to Varro, the Mars and
Hercules of the Romans were the same deity, and worshipped with the same
rites. <span id="fr_294"></span>[1](#fn_293) According to Varro then,
whose authority is perhaps the greatest that can be cited, Hercules was
the destroying attribute represented in a human form, instead of that of
a lion, tiger, or hippopotamus. Hence the terrible picture drawn of him
by Homer, which always appeared to me to have been taken from some
symbolical statue, which the poet not understanding, supposed to be of
the Theban hero, who had assumed the title of the deity, and whose
fabulous history he was well acquainted with. The description however
applies in every particular to the allegorical personage. His attitude,
ever fixed in the act of letting fly his arrow, <span
id="fr_295"></span>[2](#fn_294) with the figures of lions and bears,
battles and murders, which adorn his belt, all unite in representing him
as the destructive attribute personified. But how happens it then that
he is so frequently represented strangling the lion, the natural emblem
of this power? Is this an historical fable belonging to the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Theban hero, or a physical allegory of the destructive power destroying
its own force by its own exertions? Or is the single attribute
personified taken for the whole power of the deity in this, as in other
instances already mentioned? The Orphic Hymn above cited seems to favour
this last conjecture; for he is there addressed both as the devourer and
generator of all (Παμφαγε, παγγενετωζ). However this may be, we may
safely conclude that the Hercules armed with the bow and arrow, as he
appears on the present medal, is like the Apollo, the destroying power
of the diurnal sun.

On the other side of the medal <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_295) is
a figure, somewhat like the Jupiter on the medals of Alexander and
Antiochus, sitting with a beaded sceptre in his right hand, which he
rests upon the head of a bull, that projects from the side of the chair.
Above, on his right shoulder, is a bird, probably a dove, the symbol of
the Holy Spirit, descending from the sun, but, as this part of the medal
is less perfect than the rest, the species cannot be clearly discovered.
In his left hand be holds a short staff, from the upper side of which
springs an ear of corn, and from the lower a bunch of grapes, which
being the two most esteemed productions of the earth, were the natural
emblems

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of general fertilization. This figure is therefore the generator, as
that on the other side is the destroyer, whilst the sun, of whose
attributes both are personifications, is placed between them. The
letters on the side of the generator are quite entire, and, according to
the Phœnician alphabet published by Mr. Dutens, are equivalent to the
Roman ones which compose the words *Baal Thrz*, of which Mr. Swinton
makes *Baal Tarz*, and translates *Jupiter of Tarsus*; whence he
concludes that this coin was struck at that city. But the first letter
of the last word is not a *Teth*, but a *Thau*, or aspirated T; and, as
the Phœnicians had a vowel answering to the Roman A, it is probable they
would have inserted it, had they intended it to be sounded: but we have
no reason to believe that they had any to express the U or Y, which must
therefore be comprehended in the preceding consonant whenever the sound
is expressed. Hence I conclude that the word here meant is *Thyrz* or
*Thurz*, the *Thor* or *Thur* of the Celtes and Sarmatians, the *Thurra*
of the Assyrians, the *Turan* of the Tyrrhenians or Etruscans, the
*Taurine Bacchus* of the Greeks, and the deity whom the Germans carried
with them in the shape of a bull, when they invaded Italy; from whom the
city of Tyre, as well as Tyrrhenia, or Tuscany, probably took its name.
His symbol the bull, to which the name alludes, is represented on the
chair or

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

throne in which he sits; and his sceptre, the emblem of his authority,
rests upon it. The other word, Baal, was merely a title in the Phœnician
language, signifying *God, or Lord*; <span
id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_296) and used as an epithet of the sun, as we
learn from the name Baal-bec (*the city of Baal*), which the Greeks
rendered Heliopolis (*the city of the sun*).

Thus does this singular medal show the fundamental principles of the
ancient Phœnician religion to be the same as those which appear to have
prevailed through all the other nations of the northern hemisphere.
Fragments of the same system every where occur, variously expressed as
they were variously understood, and oftentimes merely preserved without
being understood at all; the ancient reverence being continued to the
symbols, when their meaning was wholly forgotten. The *hypostatical*
division and *essential* unity of the deity is one of the most
remarkable parts of this system, and the farthest removed from common
sense and reason; and yet this is perfectly reasonable and consistent,
if considered together with the rest of it: for the emanations and
personifications were only figurative abstractions of particular modes
of action and existence, of which the primary cause and original essence
still continued one and the same.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

The three hypostases being thus only one being, each hypostasis is
occasionally taken for all; as is the case in the passage of Apuleius
before cited, where Isis describes herself as the universal deity. In
this character she is represented by a small basaltine figure, of
Egyptian sculpture, at Strawberry Hill, which is covered over with
symbols of various kinds from top to bottom. <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_297) That of the bull is placed lowest, to
show that the strength or power of the creator is the foundation and
support of every other attribute. On her head are towers, to denote the
earth; and round her neck is hung a crab-fish, which, from its power of
spontaneously detaching from its body, and naturally reproducing, any
limbs that are hurt or mutilated, became the symbol of the productive
power of the waters; in which sense it appears on great numbers of
ancient medals of various cities. <span id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_298)
The nutritive power is signified by her many breasts, and the
destructive by the lions which she bears on her arms. Other attributes
are expressed by various

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

other animal symbols, the precise meaning of which I have not sagacity
sufficient to discover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[170:1](dwp10.htm#fr_263) Pausan. lib. ii. c.
38.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[170:2](dwp11.htm#fr_264) Ezek. ch. i. ver. 10,
with Lowth's *Comm*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[170:3](dwp11.htm#fr_265) *Exod*. ch. xxv. ver.
22.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[170:4](dwp11.htm#fr_266) Spencer *de Leg.
Ritual Vet. Hebræor*, lib. iii. dissert. 6.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[173:1](dwp11.htm#fr_267) See Le Bruyn, *Voyage
en Perse*, Planche cxxiii.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[173:2](dwp11.htm#fr_268) See Le Bruyn and
Niebuhr.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[173:3](dwp11.htm#fr_269) See Plate XVIII. Fig.
1 from the Isiac Table, and Plate XIX. Fig 5 from Niebuhr's prints of
Chilminar. See also Plate XVIII. Fig. 2 and Plate XIX. Fig. 1 from the
Isiac Tables and the Egyptian Portals published by Norden and Pococke,
on every one of which this singular emblem occurs.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[177:1](dwp11.htm#fr_270) See Le Bruyn, Planche
cxxiii. *Ionian Antiquities*, vol. i. c. 3. Plate IX., and Plate II.
Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[177:2](dwp11.htm#fr_271) See Plate XX. Fig. 2,
from one of Melita, belonging to me.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[177:3](dwp11.htm#fr_272) See Le Bruyn, Planche
cxxi.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[177:4](dwp11.htm#fr_273) As those on Figures
described by Ezekiel were. See c. i. v. II.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[177:5](dwp11.htm#fr_274) See Plate XX. Fig. 2,
engraved from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[178:1](dwp11.htm#fr_275) See Plate IX. Fig. 9,
engraved from the original medal, now belonging to me.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[178:2](dwp11.htm#fr_276) See Plate XIX, Fig.
1, from Pignorius.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[178:3](dwp11.htm#fr_277) See Plate XVIII. Fig.
2, from Pignorius.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[178:4](dwp11.htm#fr_278) See Plate XVIII. Fig.
1, from Pignorius.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[178:5](dwp11.htm#fr_279) See Niebuhr and Le
Bruyn, and Plate XIX. Fig. 2, from the former.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[179:1](dwp11.htm#fr_280) See Plate IV. Fig. 2,
and Plate XIX. Fig. 4, from a medal of Cales, belonging to me.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[179:2](dwp11.htm#fr_281) See Plate XXI. Fig.
2, copied from it.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[179:3](dwp11.htm#fr_282) See Plate XXI. Fig.
3, from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[179:4](dwp11.htm#fr_283) See Plate XIX. Fig.
5. The coins are common in all collections.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[180:1](dwp11.htm#fr_284) See Plate XXI. Fig.
4, from one belonging to me.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[180:2](dwp11.htm#fr_285) See Plate XXI. Fig. 5
and 6, from coins belonging to me.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[180:3](dwp11.htm#fr_286) Abury, p. 93.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[181:1](dwp11.htm#fr_287) See Plate II. Fig. 1,
and Plate III. Fig. 2.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[181:2](dwp11.htm#fr_288) See Plate IX. Fig. 10
*b*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[181:3](dwp11.htm#fr_289) Homer's *Odyss*. Λ,
ver. 606.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[181:4](dwp11.htm#fr_290) Strabo, lib. xiv.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[181:5](dwp11.htm#fr_291) Macrob. *Sat*. lib.
i. c. 20.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[183:1](dwp11.htm#fr_292) Homer. Odyss. *O*,
ver. 414.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[183:2](dwp11.htm#fr_293) *Ed. Gesner*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[184:1](dwp11.htm#fr_294) *Sat*. lib. i. c. 20.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[184:2](dwp11.htm#fr_295) Αιει Βαλεοντι ἑοικως.
Odyss. λ, ver. 607.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[185:1](dwp11.htm#fr_296) See Plate IX. Fig. 10
*a*.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[187:1](dwp11.htm#fr_297) *Cleric. Comm. in 2
Reg*. c. i. ver. 2.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[188:1](dwp11.htm#fr_298) A print of one
exactly the same Is published by Montfaucon, *Antiq. expliq*. vol. i.
Plate XCIII. Fig. i.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[188:2](dwp11.htm#fr_299) See those of
Agrigentum, Himera, and Cyrene. On a small one of the first-mentioned
city, belonging to me, a cross, the abbreviated symbol of the male
powers of generation, approaches the mouth of the crab, while the
cornucopia issues from It (see Plate XX. Fig. 3): the one represents the
cause, and the other the effect of fertilization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part XI](dwp12)
