[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05038)  [Next](cc05040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span><span id="v.v-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
28:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)<span id="v.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**1.** And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt
hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe *and*
to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord
thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:

<span id="v.v-p4"></span>**1.** Et erit, si audiendo audieris vocem
Jehovae Dei tui, ut custodias ad faciendum omnia praecepta ejus quae ego
paecipio tibi hodie: tunc constituet to Jehova Deus tuus superiorem
onmibus gentibus terrae.

<span id="v.v-p5"></span>**2.** And all these blessings shall come on
thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the
Lord thy God.

<span id="v.v-p6"></span>**2.** Et venient super to omnes benedictiones
istae, apprehendentque te, si modo obedieris voci Jehovae Dei tui.

<span id="v.v-p7"></span>**3.** Blessed *shalt* thou *be* in the city,
and blessed *shalt* thou *be* in the field.

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>**3.** Benedictus eris in urbe ipsa, et
benedictus eris in agro.

<span id="v.v-p9"></span>**4.** Blessed *shall* *be* the fruit of thy
body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the
increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

<span id="v.v-p10"></span>**4.** Benedictus fructus ventris tui, et
fructus terrae tuae, et fructus jumenti tui, foetus boum tuorum et
greges ovium tuarum.

<span id="v.v-p11"></span>**5.** Blessed *shall* *be* thy basket and thy
store.

<span id="v.v-p12"></span>**5.** Benedictum canistrum tuum, et
conspersio tua.

<span id="v.v-p13"></span>**6.** Blessed *shalt* thou *be* when thou
comest in, and blessed *shalt* thou *be* when thou goest out.

<span id="v.v-p14"></span>**6.** Benedictus eris in tuo ingressu, et
benedictus eris in egressu tuo.

<span id="v.v-p15"></span>**7.** The Lord shall cause thine enemies that
rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out
against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.

<span id="v.v-p16"></span>**7.** Dabit Jehova hostes trios qui
insurrexerint in te, percussos coram te, per viam unam egredientur ad
te, et per septem vias fugient coram te.

<span id="v.v-p17"></span>**8.** The Lord shall command the blessing
upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou settest thine hand
unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth
thee.

<span id="v.v-p18"></span>**8.** Mandabit Jehova tecum benedictionem in
horreis tuis, et in omni ad quod miseris manum tuam: et benedicet tibi
in terra quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi.

<span id="v.v-p19"></span>**9.** The Lord shall establish thee an holy
people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.

<span id="v.v-p20"></span>**9.** Statuet te Jehova sibi in populum
sanctum, quemadmodum juravit tibi, quum custodieris praecepta Jehovae
Dei tui, et ambulaveris in viis ejus.

<span id="v.v-p21"></span>**10.** And all people of the earth shall see
that thou art called by the name of the Lord, and they shall be afraid
of thee.

<span id="v.v-p22"></span>**10.** Tunc intelligent omnes populi quod
nomen Jehovae invocatum sit super te, et timebunt sibi a te.

<span id="v.v-p23"></span>**11.** And the Lord shall make thee plenteous
in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and
in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the Lord sware unto thy
fathers to give thee.

<span id="v.v-p24"></span>**11.** Et abundare faciet to Jehova in bonum
fructu ventris tui, et fructu jumenti tui, et fructu terrae tuae, super
terram quam juravit Jehova patribus tuis se daturum tibi.

<span id="v.v-p25"></span>**12.** The Lord shall open unto thee his good
treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and
to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many
nations, and thou shalt not borrow.

<span id="v.v-p26"></span>**12.** Aperiet Jehova tibi thesaurum suum
optimum, coelum, ut det pluviam terrae tuae in tempore suo, et benedicat
omni operi marius tuae, et mutuabis gentibus multis, tu vero non
accipies mutuum.

<span id="v.v-p27"></span>**13.** And the Lord shall make thee the head,
and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be
beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the Lord thy God,
which I command thee this day, to observe and to do *them*:

<span id="v.v-p28"></span>**13.** Ponetque te Jehova in caput, et non in
candam, erisque duntaxat sursum, et non deorsum: quando obedieris
praeceptis Jehovae Dei tui, quae ego praecipio tibi hodie ut custodias
et facias.

<span id="v.v-p29"></span>**14.** And thou shalt not go aside from any
of the words which I command thee this day, *to* the right hand or *to*
the left, to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="v.v-p30"></span>**14.** Neque recesseris ab omnibus verbis
quae ego praecipio vobis hodie, ad dextram aut ad sinistram, eundo post
deos alienos ut colatis eos.

<span id="v.v-p31"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p32"></span><span id="v.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p33"></span>**1.** *And it shall come to pass, if thou
shalt hearken*. He teaches the same thing as before in different words;
but the diversity of expression, as well as the repetition, tends to its
confirmation. First, God says that He would deal with them so
bountifully that they should excel all other nations; for this is the
meaning of the words, that they should be illustrious above all the rest
of the world on account of the special blessings of God. He afterwards
enumerates the blessings which shall never depart from them, if they
persevere in the service of God; and here it must be observed that they
are reminded, not only in how many ways God is bountiful towards His
servants, but also to how many necessities they are exposed, which
require His direct and constant aid; for if we are blessed in the city
and in the field, we can no more move a foot than stand still, except by
His blessing. Such also is the tendency of the whole list, that a
scarcity of all things impends over us at every moment, unless God
should continually succor us by remedies sent down from heaven, and that
every good thing can only come from that one source.

<span id="v.v-p34"></span><span id="v.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p35"></span>**9.** *The Lord shall establish thee a holy
people unto himself*. This refers indeed to earthly blessings, as if
Moses said, that by them would be manifested God’s love towards His
chosen people; still it rises higher, so that the Israelites, led on by
degrees, should learn to embrace God alone, and to trust in Him
according to the covenant which He had made with Abraham, “I am thy
exceeding great reward.” (<span id="v.v-p35.1"></span>[Ge
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)<span id="v.v-p35.1"></span>.) For
the children of Abraham were set apart and chosen to be a holy people,
not only in order that, being well fed, and with a full belly, they
should aspire to nothing but earthly things, but that they might be
confidently assured that they would be blessed in death as well as life.
Although their adoption was gratuitous, still, inasmuch as they were
called unto purity, it is not without reason that God promises that what
He had spoken should be sure, if by keeping the Law the Israelites
themselves should continue in the covenant; as much as to say, that
their sanctification  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) should be
firm and perpetual if they walked in the commandments of the Law. When
He adds that it should be manifest “to  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) all people of the earth that the name
of God was called upon them,” it is equivalent to saying, that it should
be known that they were under God’s defense and patronage, and that thus
they should always be safe and secure in His protection.

<span id="v.v-p38"></span><span id="v.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p39"></span>**12.** *The Lord shall open to thee his good
treasure*. He again repeats, that the goodness of God shines forth in
many ways in the life of men, since He not only supplies the bread that
they eat, but that the rain which descends from heaven waters the earth;
and that thus He produces whatever is required for food from His
plenteous store-house or treasure. Let us learn, therefore, both above
and beneath, as well in the temperature of the atmosphere, in the
quickening heat of the sun, in the rain, and in other means, as in the
fertility of the earth, to contemplate the manifold riches which God
brings forth from His treasures. And when He declares that He will bless
the work of our hands, hence, too, let us learn that we can attain
nothing by our industry and hardest labors, except in so far as God
vouchsafes us good success; and that all our efforts without His secret
blessing are mere useless fatigue. For the figure which Paul uses in
reference to the spiritual culture of the Church, is taken from nature
itself:

<span id="v.v-p40"></span>“Neither is he that planteth anything, neither
he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase.” (<span
id="v.v-p40.1"></span>[1Co 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span
id="v.v-p40.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.v-p41"></span>God would not, indeed, have  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) us lie idle, and therefore He requires
the labor of our hands, but He would have the fruit of our labors
attributed to Himself.

<span id="v.v-p43"></span>After having spoken of the whole Law, and
forbidden that they should turn aside to the right or the left, He
adverts to the principal point, *i*.*e*., that they should not revolt to
strange gods. Wherefore, the sum comes to this, that, in order that God
may continue to shew us the favor which He has begun towards us, we
ought on our sides to be altogether submissive to His rule. This indeed
He demands of us by His word, and enables us to perform it by the power
of His Spirit; not, it is true, fully to do our duty, but to strive to
reach the goal; and, whereas we are far from attaining perfection, His
indulgence supplies what is wanting in us.

<span id="v.v-p44"></span>Here, however, a difficult question arises, —
If all prosperity proceeds from the peculiar blessing which God
vouchsafes to His servants, whence is it that many of His despisers have
children, easy and happy circumstances, abundance of the fruits of fire
earth, enjoyment and luxury, honors and power? I answer, that the happy
condition of life, which He assigns to His servants, does not prevent
Him from diffusing His bounty promiscuously over the whole human race.
He is truly called in <span id="v.v-p44.1"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="v.v-p44.1"></span>, the
preserver of “man and beast.” It is said elsewhere,  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) that His mercy is extended over all
His creatures, (<span id="v.v-p45.1"></span>[Ps
145:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017)<span id="v.v-p45.1"></span>;)
and justly does Christ exalt His unbounded goodness, in that “He maketh
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good.” (<span
id="v.v-p45.2"></span>[Mt 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="v.v-p45.2"></span>.) But equally true is the exclamation of the
Prophet;

<span id="v.v-p46"></span>“Oh, how great is thy goodness, which thou
hast laid up  
for them that fear thee!” (<span id="v.v-p46.2"></span>[Ps
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span id="v.v-p46.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.v-p47"></span>For since all without exception enjoy all the
supports of life, God’s goodness, which thus contends with the
wickedness of men, shines forth universally even towards the ungodly, so
that He does not cease to cherish and preserve those whom He has
created, although they be unworthy. He therefore does good to the
ungodly, because He is their Creator; besides, in order to keep the
minds of believers in suspense in expectation of the final judgment, He
now suffers many things to be confusedly mixed together, and hides His
judgment in the darkness of night, as it were, or at least under clouds;
whilst He also so tempers His patience towards the reprobate, as that,
in this confusion of which I have spoken, some signs of His anger and
favor are manifested. Thus, although the government of the world is not
yet reduced to a perfect rule, still God shews by it that He is both the
avenger of sins and the rewarder of righteousness, and some sparks are
seen through the darkness; whilst the faithful, although they do not
attain to the full enjoyment of the blessing promised them, nevertheless
taste of it as far as is expedient. But to the ungodly, although they
abound with all sorts of good things, not a single drop of God’s
goodness is dispensed; for unless a sense of God’s paternal favor is
awakened by His blessing, the blessing itself ceases to exist; nay, the
more they gorge themselves, they attain to a deadly fatness; and God
purposely lifts them up, that He may cast them down more heavily from
their high estate. In a word, they are fed, as the Prophet says,  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) “unto the day of slaughter.”

<span id="v.v-p49"></span>It must be concluded, therefore, that the
blessings which God here promises to His servants are seasoned by Him
with spiritual salt, lest they should be tasteless; whilst the
reprobate, who are destitute of a sense of His grace, are also deprived
altogether of all His blessings. There still, however, remains a
difficulty, because the felicity here spoken of does not always, nor
equally fall to the lot of God’s servants; nay, even under the Law they
were sharply tried by many troubles and adversities. I answer, that
since none, not even the most holy, was ever a perfect keeper of the
Law, since none was ever free from all transgression, it is no cause of
surprise that they only partially enjoyed the promised blessings;
inasmuch as they were not fit recipients (*capaces*) of their fullness;
and, if it sometimes happens that they are chastised more severely than
the ungodly, neither in this is there any absurdity, since God usually
begins His judgment at His own house. (<span id="v.v-p49.1"></span>[Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)<span id="v.v-p49.1"></span>;
<span id="v.v-p49.2"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="v.v-p49.2"></span>.)
Still, even in this confusion we see what the Prophet teaches, that the
righteous are never forsaken, (<span id="v.v-p49.3"></span>[Ps
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025)<span id="v.v-p49.3"></span>,)
and that they are like green and fruitful olive-trees in the courts of
the Lord, (<span id="v.v-p49.4"></span>[Ps
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)<span id="v.v-p49.4"></span>,)
whilst the ungodly, although for a season they may be exalted like
cedars of Lebanon, yet are plucked up in a moment by the roots, so that
no trace of them remains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc05039.htm#fr_214) <span
id="v.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p36"></span> “Leur election.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc05039.htm#fr_215) <span
id="v.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p37"></span> “And all the people of the earth shall see
that those are called by the name of the Lord.” — *A*.*V*. “And all
peoples of the earth shall see that the name of Jehovah is called upon
thee,” *i*.*e*., “thou art called by his name.” — Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc05039.htm#fr_216) <span
id="v.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p42"></span> “Que nous demeurions assis, et lesjambes
croissees comme des faineans;” that we should remain seated, with our
legs crossed, like do-nothings. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc05039.htm#fr_217) <span
id="v.v-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.v-p45"></span> See margin *A*.*V*., “Merciful, *or*
bountiful in all his works.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc05039.htm#fr_218) <span
id="v.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p48"></span> No reference is here given in the original.
The allusion might be to <span id="v.v-p48.1"></span>[Jer
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)<span id="v.v-p48.1"></span>, or
<span id="v.v-p48.2"></span>[Jer
51:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#040)<span id="v.v-p48.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 7:9-15](cc05040)
