[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05036)  [Next](cc05038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#000.md)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026.md)<span id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>**26.** Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse;

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span>**26.** Vide, ego pono coram vobis hodie
benedictionem et maledictionem:

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>**27.** A blessing, if ye obey the
commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day:

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>**27.** Benedictionem, si obedieritis
praeceptis Jehovae Dei vestri, quae ego praecipio vobis hodie:

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>**28.** And a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I
command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known.

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span>**28.** Maledictionem vero, si non
obedieritis praeceptis Jehovae Dei vestri, sed recesseritis e via quam
ego praecipio vobis hodie, ut ambuletis post deos alienos quos non
novistis.

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span>**29.** And it shall come to pass, when the
Lord thy God hath brought thee in unto the land whither thou goest to
possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the
curse upon mount Ebal.

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>**29.** Quumque introduxerit te Jehova Deus
tuus in terram quam tu ingrederis ut possideas eam, tunc dabis
benedictionem super montem Garizim, et maledictionem super montem Ebal.

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span>**30.** Are they not on the other side
Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the
Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the
plains of Moreh?

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span>**30.** Annon sunt trans Jordanem post viam
ad occasum solis vergentem in terra Chananaei, qui habitant in planitie
e regione Gilgal, juxta campestria Moreh?

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span>**31.** For ye shall pass over Jordan, to go
in to possess the land which the Lord your God giveth you, and ye shall
possess it, and dwell therein.

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>**31.** Vos enim transituri estis Jordanem,
ut pergatis ad possidendam terram quam Jehova Deus vester dat vobis, et
haereditabitis eam, et habitabitis in ea.

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span>**32.** And ye shall observe to do all the
statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span>**32.** Custodite ergo ad faciendum omnia
statuta, et judicia, quae ego pono ante faciem vestram hodie.

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span><span id="v.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span>**26.** *Behold, I set before you this day*.
He now embraces the two points at once, viz., that they would be blessed
if they earnestly apply themselves to the keeping of the Law, and
cursed, if they shake off its yoke and revel in their lusts. But, when
he says that he here sets before them a blessing and a curse, it is as
much as to declare, that he does not merely tell them what is right, but
that the reward is prepared if they obey; and if not, that the
punishment is also at hand. Thus we see, that the doctrine which he had
hitherto delivered is sealed by hope and fear, since they would not lose
their labor if they obeyed it, nor be unpunished if they rejected it.
But, that they may learn surely to embrace the promises and to fear the
threatenings, he repeats what we have met with before,  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) that God, who is both a faithful
rewarder, and a severe judge, is the Author of the Law; yet at the same
time he magnifies his own ministry,  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) since it behooved them to depend upon
God, and to acquiesce in His commandments, in such a manner as still to
submit themselves to His Prophet. For such is men’s pride, that they
desire to fly above the clouds to listen to God; whilst He would be
heard in His servants, by whose mouth He speaks. Moses, therefore, would
again enforce upon them this humility, when he states that he enjoins
what God has commanded, as if to call himself the organ of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span><span id="v.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span>**29.** *And it shall come to pass, when the
Lord*. I have lately expounded a similar passage, which, although it is
subsequent in the order observed by Moses, yet, inasmuch as it sets out
the matter more clearly, I have not hesitated for perspicuity’s sake to
put first. I said that God’s intention was, whilst appointing the
Israelites to proclaim their own condemnation, to lay them under more
solemn obligation to keep the Law. If He had Himself declared His will
through the Levites only, they ought indeed to have been seriously
affected, and to have listened with reverence both to the blessings and
the curses; but when each of them testifies with his own mouth what the
Levites dictated by God’s command, the introduction of this assent, as a
solemn ratification,  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) was more
efficacious in awakening their zeal and attention. A more fitting
season, however, for this protest was after they had entered the
promised land than as if it had been made in the plain of Moab; for the
sight of the land tended to its confirmation, as if they had been
brought into court to make a covenant with God.

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span>These  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) two mountains are situated opposite to
each other, in such a manner that the two divisions of the people might
easily stand to bless and to curse, so that they might in concert
approve of the promises and threats of God.

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span><span id="v.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p28"></span>**30.** *Are they not on the other side of
Jordan*. Although the form of interrogation is common in Hebrew, yet in
this place Moses affirms more vehemently than as if he had only stated
directly that these mountains were in the land of Canaan; for he wishes
to encourage them in the confidence of entering the promised
inheritance; just as he adds immediately afterwards, “Ye shall pass over
Jordan.” For, although they had already experienced the miraculous power
of God in the conquest of the Amorites, and in heir occupation of the
land of Bashan, yet such was their incredulity, that it was necessary
constantly to dissipate their fears, so that they might lay aside all
hesitation, and boldly prepare to advance. Finally, he founds an
exhortation upon this great goodness of God; for the actual enjoyment of
the land ought to have stimulated them the more in the service of God,
because they were made to inherit it for the purpose of keeping the Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc05037.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="v.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span> Added in *Fr*., “Plusieurs fois.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc05037.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="v.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span> Added in *Fr*., “Disant que c’est luy qui
commande apres Dieu;” saying that it is he who commands after God.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc05037.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="v.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span> The Latin word used by *C*. is a legal one,
*ratihabitio*, explained by Du Cange by “*confirmatio*, occurring more
than once in the Digest, and in more modern writers.” — Adelung’s Gloss.
Man., *in* *voce*.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc05037.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="v.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span> “Ebal and Gerizim are two closely adjoining
mountains, separated by a narrow valley, about a furlong in breadth, in
which stands the town of Naplous, the ancient Shechem. This beautiful
valley, covered with olive woods and corn fields, has Mount Gerizim on
the south, and Mount Ebal on the north. The two mountains are, according
to Buckingham, nearly equal in altitude, neither of them exceeding seven
or eight hundred feet above the level of the valley, but much more above
the level of the sea, as the whole country here is considerably
elevated.” — Illustrated Comment on <span id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>[De
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004.md)<span id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 26:3-13](cc05038.md)
