[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05051)  [Next](cc05053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
38](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span><span id="vi.v-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
38:1-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>**1.** And he made the altar of burnt-offering
*of* shittim-wood: five cubits *was* the length thereof, and five cubits
the breadth thereof, (*it* *was* foursquare,) and three cubits the
height thereof.

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span>**1.** Fecit quoque altare holocausti e lignis
sittim, quinque cubitorum latitudo ejus, et quinque cubitorum latitudo
ejus, quadratum: et trium cubitorum altitudo ejus.

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span>**2.** And he made the horns thereof on the
four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid
it with brass.

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span>**2.** Et fecit cornua ejus in quatuor angulis
ejus, ex ipso erant cornua ejus, et texit illud aere.

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>**3.** And he made all the vessels of the
altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, *and* the flesh-hooks,
and the fire-pans: all the vessels thereof made he *of* brass.

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span>**3.** Fecit insuper omnia vasa altaris,
lebetes scilicet, et scopas, et crateras, et tridentes, et receptacula:
omnia vasa ejus fecit aerea.

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span>**4.** And he made for the altar a brasen
grate of net-work, under the compass thereof, beneath unto the midst of
it.

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>**4.** Fecit praeterea altari cribrum opere
reticulato aeneum sub ambitu ejus inferne usque ad medium ejus.

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span>**5.** And he cast four rings for the four
ends of the grate of brass, *to* *be* places for the staves.

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span>**5.** Fudit item quatuor annulos in quatuor
extremitatibus cribro aeneo, in quos inducerentur vectes.

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span>**6.** And he made the staves *of*
shittim-wood, and overlaid them with brass.

<span id="vi.v-p14"></span>**6.** Et fecit vectes e lignis sittim, quos
texit aere.

<span id="vi.v-p15"></span>**7.** And he put the staves into the rings
on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow
with boards.

<span id="vi.v-p16"></span>**7.** Introduxitque vectes ipsos in annulos
illos per latera altaris ad ferendum illud illis: vacuum tabularum fecit
illud.

<span id="vi.v-p17"></span>**8.** And he made the laver *of* brass, and
the foot of it *of* brass, of the looking-glasses of *the* *women*
assembling, which assembled *at* the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="vi.v-p18"></span>**8.** Fecit similiter concham aeneam, et
basim ejus aeneam ex speculis mulierum convenientium, quae conveniebant
ad ostium tabernaeuli conventionis.

<span id="vi.v-p19"></span>**9.** And he made the court: on the south
side southward, the hangings of the court *were* *of* fine twined linen,
an hundred cubits:

<span id="vi.v-p20"></span>**9.** Fecit postremo atrium ad plagam austri
ad meridiem: cortinae atrii e bysso retorta centum cubitorum.

<span id="vi.v-p21"></span>**10.** Their pillars *were* twenty, and
their brasen sockets twenty: the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
*were* *of* silver.

<span id="vi.v-p22"></span>**10.** Columnae earum viginti, et bases
earum viginti ex aere: capitella columnarum, et fila eas cingentia, ex
argento.

<span id="vi.v-p23"></span>**11.** And for the north side *the*
*hangings* *were* an hundred cubits, their pillars *were* twenty, and
their sockets of brass twenty: the hooks of the pillars and their
fillets *of* silver.

<span id="vi.v-p24"></span>**11.** Et ad plagam aquilonis cortinae
centum cubitorum: columnae earum viginti, et bases earum viginti ex
aere: capitella columnarum, et fila eas cingentia, ex argento.

<span id="vi.v-p25"></span>**12.** And for the west side *were* hangings
of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten: the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets *of* silver.

<span id="vi.v-p26"></span>**12.** Ad plagam vero occidentis cortinae
quinquaginta cubitorum: columnae earum decem, et bases earum decem:
capitella columnarum, et fila eas cingentia, ex argento.

<span id="vi.v-p27"></span>**13.** And for the east side eastward, fifty
cubits.

<span id="vi.v-p28"></span>**13.** Et ad plagam orientis ad ortum
cortinae quinquaginta cubitorum.

<span id="vi.v-p29"></span>**14.** The hangings of the one side *of*
*the* *gate* *were* fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their
sockets three.

<span id="vi.v-p30"></span>**14.** Cortinae quindecim cubitorum erant in
uno latere: columnae earum tres et bases earum tres.

<span id="vi.v-p31"></span>**15.** And for the other side of the
court-gate, on this hand and that hand, *were* hangings of fifteen
cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="vi.v-p32"></span>**15.** Et in latere altero hinc et inde
portae atrii, cortinae quindecim cubitorum: columnae earum tres, et
bases earum tres.

<span id="vi.v-p33"></span>**16.** All the hangings of the court round
about *were* of fine twined linen:

<span id="vi.v-p34"></span>**16.** Omnes cortinae atrii per circuitum
erant ex bysso retorta.

<span id="vi.v-p35"></span>**17.** And the sockets for the pillars
*were* *of* brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets *of*
silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters *of* silver: and all the
pillars of the court *were* filled with silver.

<span id="vi.v-p36"></span>**17.** Bases vero columnarum ex aere:
capitella columnarum, et fila eas cingentia, ex argento: et operimenta
capitellorum earum ex argento: ipsae etiam omnes columnae atrii cinctae
erant argento.

<span id="vi.v-p37"></span>**18.** And the hanging for the gate of the
court *was* needle-work, *of* blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen; and twenty cubits *was* the length, and the height in the
breadth *was* five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.

<span id="vi.v-p38"></span>**18.** Velum autem portae atrii opere
phrygionis ex hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso
retorta: cujus longitudo erat viginti cubitorum, altitudo vero in
latitudine quinque cubitorum ad cortinas atrii.

<span id="vi.v-p39"></span>**19.** And their pillars *were* four, and
their sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying
of their chapiters and their fillets *of* silver.

<span id="vi.v-p40"></span>**19.** Et columnae earum quatuor, basesque
earum quatuar ex aere, uncini earum ex argento: et operimenta
capitellorum earum, et fila eas cingentia, ex argento.

<span id="vi.v-p41"></span>**20.** And all the pins of the tabernacle,
and of the court round about, *were* *of* brass.

<span id="vi.v-p42"></span>**20.** Omnes veto clavi tabernaculi et atrii
in circuitu erant ex aere.

<span id="vi.v-p43"></span>**21.** This is the sum of the tabernacle,
*even* of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to
the commandment of Moses, *for* the service of the Levites, by the hand
of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.

<span id="vi.v-p44"></span>**21.** Ista sunt numerata tabernaculi,
tabernaculi, inquam, testimonii, quae numerata sunt ad jussum Mosis, per
manum Ithamar filii Aharon sacerdotis, in ministerium Levitarum.

<span id="vi.v-p45"></span>**22.** And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son
of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.v-p46"></span>**22.** Besaleel autem filius Uri filii Hur,
de tribu Jehudah, fecit omnia illa quae praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vi.v-p47"></span>**23.** And with him *was* Aholiab, son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and
an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

<span id="vi.v-p48"></span>**23.** Et cum eo Aholiab filius Ahisamach,
de tribu Dan, artifex, et acupictor et phrygio, in hyacintho, et
purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso.

<span id="vi.v-p49"></span>**24.** All the gold that was occupied for
the work, in all the work of the holy *place*, even the gold of the
offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="vi.v-p50"></span>**24.** Universum aurum insumptum in ipso
opere, id est in toto opere sanctuarii (fuit autem aurum oblationis)
fuit novem et viginti talentorum, et septingentorum triginta siclorum,
secundum siclum sanctuarii.

<span id="vi.v-p51"></span>**25.** And the silver of them that were
numbered of the congregation *was* an hundred talents, and a thousand
seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of
the sanctuary:

<span id="vi.v-p52"></span>**25.** Et argentum numeratorum in coetu erat
centum talenta et mille septingenti septuaginta quinque sicli, secundum
siclum sanctuarii.

<span id="vi.v-p53"></span>**26.** A bekah for every man, *that* *is*,
half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that
went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred
thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty *men*

<span id="vi.v-p54"></span>**26.** Semissis in singula capita, id est
dimidium sicli, secundum siclum sanctuarii omnibus transeuntibus ad
numeratos, ab eo qui natus erat viginti annos et supra, in sexcentis
tribus millibus quingentis et quinquaginta.

<span id="vi.v-p55"></span>**27.** And of the hundred talents of silver
were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an
hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

<span id="vi.v-p56"></span>**27.** Fueruntque centum talenta argenti ad
fundandas bases sanctuarii, et bases veli: centum bases ex centum
talentis, talentum pro basi.

<span id="vi.v-p57"></span>**28.** And of the thousand seven hundred
seventy and five *shekels* he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid
their chapiters, and filleted them.

<span id="vi.v-p58"></span>**28.** Et ex mille septingentis septuaginta
quinque siclis fecit epistylia columnis, et texit capita ipsarum, et
texit eas.

<span id="vi.v-p59"></span>**29.** And the brass of the offering *was*
seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.

<span id="vi.v-p60"></span>**29.** Aes autem oblationis fuit septuaginta
talentorum, et duorum millium, et quadringentorum siclorum,

<span id="vi.v-p61"></span>**30.** And therewith he made the sockets to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar,
and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,

<span id="vi.v-p62"></span>**30.** Et fecit ex eo bases ostii
tabernaculi conventionis, et altare aereum, et cribrum ejus aereum,
omniaque vasa altaris.

<span id="vi.v-p63"></span>**31.** And the sockets of the court round
about, and the sockets of the court-gate, and all the pins of the
tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

<span id="vi.v-p64"></span>**31.** Et bases atrii per circuitum, et
bases portae atrii, praeterea omnes palos tabernaculi, omnesque palos
atrii per circuitum.

<span id="vi.v-p65"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p66"></span><span id="vi.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p67"></span>**1.** *And he made the altar of
burnt-offering*<span id="vi.v-p67.1"></span>. The purport of this
chapter is the same as that of the last, except that the order of some
parts of it is transposed, though not a word is changed. He begins with
the altar of burnt-offering, which he states to have been made of the
materials and the form prescribed by God, in order that the people might
there offer with surer confidence their sacrifices for the expiation of
sin, and for thanksgiving. One thing which had not been mentioned
before, is here added respecting the laver of brass, or cauldron
(*concha*<span id="vi.v-p67.2"></span>,) from whence they took the water
of sprinkling for expiation, viz., that this laver was ornamented with
the mirrors of the women. Some explain this,  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) <span id="vi.v-p68.1"></span> that the
vessel was so bright that it might be easily discovered on every side
whether there was any scandalous, or wanton, or indelicate act
committed; for we know that impure and ungodly men sometimes conceal
their iniquities under the cover of religion, even as it; is written
that the women who frequented the tabernacle for religious exercises
were defiled by the sons of Eli, the priests. (<span
id="vi.v-p68.2"></span>[1Sa 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.v-p68.2"></span><span id="vi.v-p68.3"></span>.) But there is
another conjecture equally probable, that these mirrors were dedicated
by holy women for the ornament of the Temple, and for sacred purposes;
for, whereas women are only too much given to outward adornment and
finery, they have been always very fond of mirrors, both for the purpose
of painting their cheeks and arranging their hair, so that not a single
hair should be out of place. Isaiah, therefore, (<span
id="vi.v-p68.4"></span>[Isa 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.v-p68.4"></span><span id="vi.v-p68.5"></span>,) enumerates
mirrors amongst the luxuries  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md)
<span id="vi.v-p69.1"></span> of the female world. Some, then, think
that women, being devoted to God’s service, laid aside this vanity, and
consecrated their mirrors in testimony of their repentance. It might,
however, have been that, amongst the other gifts before spoken of, they
offered mirrors also, which were mounted as embossments in this brasen
laver. Others suppose that they were carvings, by which the portraits of
females were depicted, as if seen in mirrors. The simple notion is most
approved by me, that they were votive offerings, wherewith pious women
had desired to decorate the sanctuary, and that they had been applied to
this use by the advice of the artificers; for he does not speak
generally of all the women, but of those who *warred*<span
id="vi.v-p69.2"></span> or *assembled* *by* *troops*<span
id="vi.v-p69.3"></span> at the door of the tabernacle; for translators
 <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) <span id="vi.v-p70.18"></span>
variously explain this word <span id="vi.v-p70.19"></span>צבא<span
id="vi.v-p70.20"></span>, *tzaba*<span id="vi.v-p70.21"></span>, both in
this passage and that from Samuel which I have just quoted. It is also
applied to the Levites, who are said  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) <span id="vi.v-p71.3"></span> “to war
the warfare” of the sanctuary, whilst performing their appointed work.
(<span id="vi.v-p71.4"></span>[Num.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003.md), [Num.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.v-p71.4"></span><span
id="vi.v-p71.5"></span>.) Indeed this metaphor is by no means unsuitable
to watchings and long-continued prayers. The sum is, that the laver was
cast of their materials, or, as I rather suppose, embossed with these
mirrors, in order that it might be more splendid.

<span id="vi.v-p72"></span><span id="vi.v-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p73"></span>**21.** *This is the sum of the tabernacle*
 <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md) As much as to say that this was
the computation, or these the numbers; for he gives us to understand
that not only was the tabernacle thus at once completed, but that its
several parts were numerically distinguished, and consigned as it were
to registers,  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) so as to be given
in charge to the Levites, lest any part of it should be lost. For the
reference here is not so much to the fabric, or the architecture of the
tabernacle, as to its perpetual conservation, viz., that Ithamar the
priest deposited its several parts with the Levites, and this in
accordance with the command of Moses.

<span id="vi.v-p76"></span><span id="vi.v-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p77"></span>**22.** *And Bezaleel, the son of Uri*. He
again impresses upon us that the whole work was divine, both because
Moses faithfully delivered the commands of God, and the artificers
followed them with precise accuracy. At the same time, he counts up the
whole sum of gold and silver, and shews us on what it was consumed.
Hence we gather that every one honestly discharged his duty, and that no
one was corrupted or drawn aside by covetousness so as to fall from his
integrity. We are also informed from whence the amount of silver was
obtained, viz., from the *census* of the people; for a tax of a common
shekel, which was half a shekel of the sanctuary, was imposed on every
head, as we  <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) have already seen.
Moses now shews that this entire sum was collected and paid without
fraud, and so applied as that none should be lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc05052.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="vi.v-p67.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p68"></span> All the difficulties connected with this
matter are set at rest by our increased acquaintance with Egyptian
Antiquities. *C*., and almost all the earlier commentators, were
evidently possessed with the idea that the mirrors of the women were
literally *looking-glasses*; and hence arose the various solutions which
are here given, and others which might be added. Sir G. Wilkinson, in
his “Popular Account of the Ancient Egyptians,” tells us; — “One of the
principal objects of the toilet was the mirror. It was of mixed metal,
chiefly copper, most carefully wrought and highly polished; and so
admirably did the Egyptians succeed in the composition of metals, that
this substitute for our modern looking-glass was susceptible of a lustre
which has even been partially revived at the present day, in some of
those discovered at Thebes, though buried in the earth for many
centuries. The same kind of metal-mirror was used by the Israelites, who
doubtless brought them from Egypt.” — Vol. 2, p. 346.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc05052.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="vi.v-p68.6"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p69"></span> “Entre les bagages superflus des femmes.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc05052.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="vi.v-p69.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p70"></span> *C*<span id="vi.v-p70.1"></span>. here
affords the reader a curious proof that he composed this note with *S*
*M*<span id="vi.v-p70.2"></span>. under his eye, by employing Munster’s
word *labrum*<span id="vi.v-p70.3"></span> for the Hebrew <span
id="vi.v-p70.4"></span>כיור<span id="vi.v-p70.5"></span>, which he had
previously rendered *concha*<span id="vi.v-p70.6"></span> in his own
text. But whilst *S* *M*<span id="vi.v-p70.7"></span> had translated
<span id="vi.v-p70.8"></span>צבאת אשר צבאו<span id="vi.v-p70.9"></span>,
(*mulierum*<span id="vi.v-p70.10"></span>) *militantium*<span
id="vi.v-p70.11"></span>, *quae* *militabant*<span
id="vi.v-p70.12"></span>, *C*<span id="vi.v-p70.13"></span>. had the
sagacity to drop the metaphor, and render the words *convenientium*<span
id="vi.v-p70.14"></span>, *quae* *conveniebant* <span
id="vi.v-p70.15"></span>צבא<span id="vi.v-p70.16"></span>, says
Professor Robertson, to assemble for worship, or for war. *Clav*
*Pentat* *in* *loco*<span id="vi.v-p70.17"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc05052.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="vi.v-p70.22"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p71"></span> <span id="vi.v-p71.1"></span>[Nu
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.v-p71.1"></span>, “All
that enter into the host.” — *A*.*V*. <span id="vi.v-p71.2"></span>[Nu
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.v-p71.2"></span>,
“They shall go in to wait upon the service,” margin, “Heb., to war the
warfare of the tabernacle.” — *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc05052.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="vi.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p74"></span> “These are the counted*-*things.” — *Lat*.
So also Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc05052.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="vi.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p75"></span> “Afin que les Levites sceussent ce qu’ils
devoyent avoir en garde;” in order that the Levites might know what they
ought to have in charge. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc05052.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="vi.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p78"></span> See on <span id="vi.v-p78.1"></span>[Exodus
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012.md)<span id="vi.v-p78.1"></span>,
vol. 1, p. 482.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 39:1-43](cc05053.md)
