[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05010)  [Next](cc05012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p1"></span>The Ceremonial Supplements of the Sixth
Commandment

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** If *one* be found slain in the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the
field, *and* it be not known who hath slain him;

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p4"></span>**1.** Quum inventum fuerit cadaver
hominis occisi in terra quam Jehova Deus tuus dabit tibi ut possideas
eam, prostratum in agro, nec cognitum fuerit quis percusserit eum:

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Then thy elders and thy judges
shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which *are*
round about him that is slain.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p6"></span>**2.** Tunc egredientur seniores tui, et
judices tui, et metientur usque ad civitates quae sunt in circuitibus
cadaveris hominis illius occisi.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** And it shall be, *that* the city
*which* *is* next unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall
take an heifer, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not
drawn in the yoke;

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p8"></span>**3.** Et seniores urbis, propinquioris
urbis illi cadaveri occiso, capient vitulam de armento qua nemo usus
fuerit, et quae non traxerit jugum.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** And the elders of that city shall
bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither card nor
sown, and shall strike off the heifer’s neck there in the valley:

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p10"></span>**4.** Et adducent seniores ejus urbis
vitulam ad vallem asperare, quae nunquam fuerit arata, neque seminata,
et praecident cervicem vitulae illic in valle.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** And the priests, the sons of
Levi, shall come near; (for them the Lord thy God hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the Lord;) and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be *tried*

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p12"></span>**5.** Et accedent sacerdotes filii
Levi (eos enim elegit Jehova Deus tuus ut ministrent ipsi, et ad
benedicendum in nomine Jehovae: et juxta quorum sermonem erit omnis lis
atque omnis plaga.)

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** And all the elders of that city,
*that* *are* next unto the slain *man*, shall wash their hands over the
heifer that is beheaded in the valley:

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p14"></span>**6.** Et omnes seniores ejus urbis ubi
accesserint ad cadaver hominis occisi, lavabunt manus suas super vitulam
percussam in valle.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p15"></span>**7.** And they shall answer and say,
Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p16"></span>**7.** Et testificabuntur, ac dicent,
Manus nostrae non effuderunt sanguinem istum, neque oculi nostri
viderunt.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy
people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto
thy people of Israel’s charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p18"></span>**8.** Expia populum tuum Israel quem
redemisti Jehova, et ne imputes sanguinem innocentem in medio populi tui
Israel: et expiabitur ab eis sanguis.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p19"></span>**9.** So shalt thou put away the
*guilt* *of* innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do *that*
*which* *is* right in the sight of the Lord.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p20"></span>**9.** Tu autem auferes sanguinem
innocentem e medio tui, quum feceris quod rectum est in oculis Jehovae.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p21"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p22"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p23"></span>**1.** *If* *one* *be* *found* *slain*
*in* *the* *land*. This Supplement: is of a mixed character, relating
partly to the civil, and partly to the criminal law. We are informed by
it how precious to God is the life of man; for, if a murder had been
committed by some unknown person, He requires an expiation to be made,
whereby the neighboring cities should purge themselves from the
pollution of the crime. Whence it appears that the earth is so polluted
by human blood, that those who encourage murder by impunity, implicate
themselves in the guilt. The question here is as to a secret crime, the
guilt of which attaches to the neighboring cities, until, by the
institution of a diligent inquiry, they can testify that the author is
not discovered; how much less excusable, then, will they be, if they
allow a murderer to escape with impunity? The rite prescribed is, that
the elders of the nearest city should take a heifer which had not drawn
in a yoke, and bring it into a stony and barren valley, cut off its neck
with the assistance of the priests, wash their hands, and bear witness
that their hands as well as their eyes are pure, as not being cognizant
of the criminal. God chose a heifer that had not born a yoke, in order
that the satisfaction made by innocent blood might be represented in a
more lively manner; whilst it was to be killed in a desert place, that
the pollution might be removed from the cultivated lands. For, if the
blood of the heifer had been shed in the middle of the market-place of
the city, or in any inhabited spot, the familiarity with the sight of
blood would have hardened their minds in inhumanity. For the purpose,
therefore, of awakening horror, it was drawn out into a solitary and
uncultivated spot, that they might be thus accustomed to detest cruelty.
But although, properly speaking, this was not a sacrifice which could be
offered nowhere except in the sanctuary, still it nearly approached to
the nature of a sacrifice, because the Levites were in attendance, and a
solemn deprecation was made; nevertheless, they were not only employed
as ministers of the altar, but also as judges, for their office is
expressed in the words, that they were “chosen to minister to God, to
bless the people, and to pronounce sentence as to every stroke.”

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p24"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.i-p25"></span>**6.** *And* *all* *the* *elders* *of*
*that* *city*. The washing of their hands had the effect of stirring
them up the more, so that they should not inconsiderately protest in
that solemn rite that they were pure and guiltless; for it was just as
if they had presented the corpse of the dead mall before God, and had
stood themselves opposite to it to purge away the crime. At the same
time, also, they ask for pardon, because it might have been through
their carelessness that the man was smitten; and again, since, by the
sacrilege of Achan alone the whole people were contaminated, it was to
be feared lest the vengeance of God should extend more widely on account
of the offense committed. And thus they were again taught how greatly
God abominates murders, when the people pray that they may be pardoned
for the crime of another, as if, by the very looking upon it, they had
contracted guilt. God at length declares that He will not impute it to
them, when they have duly performed this rite of expiation; not because
the heifer was the price of satisfaction to propitiate God, but because
in this way they humbly reconciled themselves to Him, and shut the door
against murders for the time to come. On this account it is said — “Thou
shalt put away the blood from among you;” for if the murder be passed
over without observation, there remains a blot upon the people, and the
earth itself, in a manner, stinks before God.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#016),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#020)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>-25

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p3"></span>**15.** Notwithstanding thou mayest
kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after,
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee:
the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roe-buck, and as of
the hart.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p4"></span>**15.** Pro omni desiderio animae tuae
mactabis, et comedes carnes secundum benedictionem Jehovae Dei tui, quam
dederit tibi intra omnes portas tuas: immundus et mundus comedet eas,
sicut capream et cervum.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p5"></span>**16.** Only ye shall not eat the
blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as water.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p6"></span>**16.** Tantummodo sanguinem non
comedetis, super terram effundetis illum instar aquae.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p7"></span>**20.** When the Lord thy God shall
enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will
eat flesh, (because thy soul longeth to eat flesh,) thou mayest eat
flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p8"></span>**20.** Quum dilataverit Jehova Deus
tuus terminum tuum, quemadmodum loquutus est tibi, et dixeris, Comedam
carnem, quod concupiscat anima tua vesci carnibus: juxta omne desiderium
animae tuae comedes carnes.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p9"></span>**21.** If the place which the Lord thy
God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from thee, then thou
shalt kill of thy herd, and of thy flock, which the Lord hath given
thee, as I have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p10"></span>**21.** Quum longinquus a te fuerit
locus quem elegerit Jehova Deus tuus ut ponat nomen suum ibi, mactabis
de bobus tuis et de pecudibus tuis quas dederit Jehova tibi: quemadmodum
praecepi tibi, et vesceris in portis tuis secundum omne desiderium
animae tuae.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p11"></span>**22.** Even as the roe-buck and the
hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them; the unclean and the clean shall
eat of them alike.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p12"></span>**22.** Certe quemadmodum comeditur
caprea et cervus, sic comedes illas: immundus pariter et mundus
vescentur illis.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p13"></span>**23.** Only be sure that thou eat not
the blood: for the blood is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life
with the flesh.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p14"></span>**23.** Tantum roborare ut non comedas
sanguinem: quia sanguis est anima, et non comedes animam una cum carne.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p15"></span>**24.** Thou shalt not eat it; thou
shalt pour it upon the earth as water.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p16"></span>**24.** Non comedes illum, sed in
terram effundes illum instar aquae.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p17"></span>**25.** Thou shalt not eat it; that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt
do *that* *which* is right in the sight of the Lord.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p18"></span>**25.** Non vesceris illo, ut bene sit
tibi, et filiis tuis post te, quum feceris quod rectum est in oculis
Jehovae.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p19"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p20"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Leviticus
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p21"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>[Leviticus
7:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#026)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p22"></span>**26.** Moreover, ye shall eat no
manner of blood, *whether* *it* *be* of fowl or of beast, in any of your
dwellings.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p23"></span>**26.** Nullum sanguinem comedetis in
cunctis habitationibus vestris, tam de avibus quam de jumentis.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p24"></span>**27.** Whatsoever soul *it* *be* that
eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p25"></span>**27.** Omnis anima quae comederit
ullum sanguinem, excidetur anima illa e populis suis.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p26"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p27"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p28"></span>**26.** Ye shall not eat *anything*
with the blood.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p29"></span>**26.** Non comedetis cum sanguine.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p30"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p31"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p32"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p33"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p34"></span>**<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>.** *Notwithstanding* *thou* *mayest*
*kill*. What precedes I have introduced in its proper place, viz., that
they should not kill the sacrifices anywhere but in the sanctuary, of
which there was only one in Judea. Here the permission to eat meat is
given, provided that they do not offer the animals to God, but eat of
them as of wild beasts. By way of example, two kinds are mentioned, the
roe-buck and the hart, of which no offering was made. They are,
therefore, freely allowed to eat meat wheresoever they pleased, with
this exception, that they should not taste the blood; for, although this
was observed by their forefathers before the giving of the Law, God
ratifies it anew when He would gather a peculiar people to Himself. We
know that immediately after the deluge, Noah and his posterity were
commanded to abstain from blood; but, inasmuch as the greater part of
mankind soon degenerated, it is probable that all nations neglected
God’s command, and permitted to themselves a universal license on this
point; and it is even questionable whether this observance, which was
everywhere fallen into desuetude, prevailed among the family of Shem.
Certainly it may be conjectured from the renewed promulgation of the
law, that it was altogether obsolete; at any rate, God would have His
chosen people distinguished by this mark of separation from heathen
nations.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p35"></span>The reason of the prohibition which is
now mentioned had already been declared,  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) viz., because the blood is the seat of
life. But although it, was allowable to kill an animal for food, yet,
was it a useful restraint to prevent inhumanity, that they should not
touch the blood; for if they abstained from the blood of beasts, much
more necessary was it to spare human blood. After God, therefore, has
forbidden blood to be eaten, He immediately proceeds to speak of men
themselves: “Whose sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
for in the image of God made he man.”  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) (<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>[Ge
9:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>.) Hence I have deemed it appropriate to
annex all the passages in which God commands the people to abstain from
blood, to the Sixth Commandment. In itself, indeed, the eating of blood
was a thing of no great importance: since, therefore, God so often
inculcates a point of so little weight, it may be inferred that the law
has some further object. To this may be added the severity of the
punishment, for surely it was not a crime worthy of death to taste the
blood of some little bird; and hence, also, it is manifested that the
prohibition had another meaning, viz., that cruelty might be abhorred.
And the words of Moses show that the eating of blood is not forbidden
because it infected man with its uncleanness, but that they might
account the life of man to be precious; for it is said, “the blood is
the life,” which, in the opinion of Augustine,  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) is equivalent to its being “the sign of
life;“ but Moses rather means that animal life is contained in the
blood. Wherefore, blood, which represents the life, was not interdicted
without reason, nor was it only sinful to eat the blood by itself, but
also together with the flesh, as is expressly declared both in
Deuteronomy and in the last passage from Leviticus.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p39"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p40"></span>**23.** *Only* *be*  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) *sure* *that* *thou* *eat* *not*. It is
not without cause that he earnestly exhorts them to inflexible firmness,
because it was both a matter trifling in appearance, and its observation
troublesome, whilst it was easy to decline from it on account of the
universal example of the Gentiles. For if they considered within
themselves that it contributed not to holiness that they should not
touch blood, hence a snare to indulgence might easily have arisen.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
17:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p3"></span>10. And whatsoever man *there* *be* of
the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that
eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul
that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p4"></span>**10.** Quicunque e domo Israel, et e
peregrinis qui peregrinantur in medio eorum, comederit ullum sanguinem,
ponam faciem meam in animam quae comederit sanguinem, et excidam eam e
medio populi sui.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p5"></span>11. For the life of the flesh *is* in
the blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an
atonement for your souls: for it *is* the blood *that* maketh an
atonement for the soul.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p6"></span>**11.** Quia anima carnis in sanguine
est: ego autem dedi illum vobis super altare ad expiandum animus
vestras, quia sanguis animam expiabit.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p7"></span>12. Therefore I said unto the children
of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger
that sojourneth among you eat blood.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p8"></span>**12.** Ideo dixi filiis Israel, Nulla
anima ex vobis comedet sanguinem, et peregrinus qui pregrinatur in medio
vestri non comedet sanguinem.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p9"></span>13. And whatsoever man *there* *be* of
the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you,
which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall
even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p10"></span>**13.** Et quicunque e filiis Israel,
et e peregrinis qui peregrinantur in medio eorum, venatus fuerit
venationem bestiae vel avis quae comeditur, effundet sanguinem ejus et
cooperiet pulvere.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p11"></span>14. For *it* *is* the life of all
flesh; the blood of it *is* for the life thereof: therefore I said unto
the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh:
for the life of all flesh *is* the blood thereof; whosoever eateth it
shall be cut off.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p12"></span>**14.** Quia anima cujusque carnis,
sanguis ejus est in anima: dixique filiis Israel, Sanguinem cujuscunque
carnis non comedetis, quia anima cujusque carnis est sanguis ejus:
quicunque comederit illum, excidetur.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p14"></span><span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *And* *whatsoever* *make*
*there* *be* *of* *the* *house* *of* *Israel*. God here not only
condemns to death whosoever shall have polluted themselves by eating of
blood, but declares that He will Himself take vengeance on them, though
they may escape from the hands of the judges; for He not only prescribes
to the judges what it is right for them to do, but asserts for Himself
the office of inflicting the punishment. For, if we consider the
intention of the Law, is there anything to surprise us in this; for
although it be not consistent that the blood of a brute should be
compensated for by the death of a man, still we must remember that this
mode of instruction  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) was necessary
for a rude people, lest they should speedily lapse into barbarism. But,
lest they should complain that no use remained for the blood, He reminds
them that since it was given for atonement, they would be very
ungrateful if they were not content with so great a blessing; and
surely, since it was the price they were to pay for appeasing God, this
was an employment of it far to be preferred to food. If, then, they
desired to *exchange* into ordinary food the blood, which was destined
to the altar for the *reconciliation* of God, Moses indirectly reproves
their ingratitude; for when God took away the right of eating it, He
left them something better, which should have abundantly satisfied them.
But we have elsewhere  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) seen in what
manner blood atones for souls, *i* *e*., in a sacramental manner, upon
which it must be observed that what properly belongs to Christ is thus
transferred by *metonomy* to figures and symbols, yet in such a way that
the similitude should neither be empty nor inefficacious; for in so far
as the fathers apprehended Christ in the external *sacrifices*,
atonement was truly exhibited in them. In this passage also, I do not
understand “the strangers” to be all such visitors as may have journeyed
amongst them on matters of business, but those who had devoted
themselves to the worship of God; for many foreigners, abandoning their
superstitions, were circumcised, and it behooved that such as these
should be expressly laid under the bonds of the Law, lest, if it had not
referred to them, they should have withdrawn themselves from obeying it.
This point must, therefore, be briefly adverted to, lest we should
suppose that heathen sojourners were prohibited from the eating of
blood, whereas they were allowed to buy for food  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) even flesh that had been torn by beasts.

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p19"></span>Since, however, the Patriarchs before
the Law had abstained from blood, and its prohibition had no reference
to the First Table or the legal service, hence it came to pass that when
the Apostles abrogated the ceremonial law, they did not dare to allow
immediately the free eating of blood, lest great scandal should arise
from this new and unwonted thing. (<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ac
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>.) Wherefore, lest so trifling a matter
should cause deadly schisms in the Churches, they commanded the Gentiles
not to eat of blood; adding as the reason, that those who were
accustomed to read the writings of Moses, would be disturbed at this
innovation; yet this was only observed for a short period, as we gather
from Paul.  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) It was, not without
superstition and misplaced zeal;. retained by some even to the days of
Tertullian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc05011.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36"></span> See on <span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>[Leviticus
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>, vol. 2, p. 335, whence, however, he
refers to <span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36.3"></span>[Genesis
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36.3"></span>. C. Society’s edition, vol. 1, p. 293.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc05011.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p36.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p37"></span> *Lat*. “Qui effuderit sanguinem
hominis in homine;” he who shall have shed the blood of man in man. —
*Vide* *C*. *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc05011.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p38"></span> Quaest. in Leviticum, 57 Section 2.
“Illud appellatur anima, quod *significat* animam.” — *Edit*.
*Benedict*. *tom*. 3, p. 1 pag. 516.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc05011.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.ii-p41"></span> *Lat*., “Roberare.” Margin, *A*.
*V*., “*Heb*., Be strong.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc05011.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p16"></span> “Hanc *paedagogiam*.” — *Lat*.
“Ceste doctrine puerile.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc05011.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p17"></span> See on <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>[Exodus
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>, *ante* vol. 1 p. 221.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc05011.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p18"></span> See on <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>, *ante* vol. 2, p. 69.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc05011.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p20"></span> There is no reference here in the
Latin, but the *Fr*. is, “comme il se peut recueillir par ce que Sainct
Paul en escrit aux Corinthiens;” as may be gathered from what St. Paul
writes respecting it to the Corinthians. In *C*.’*s* Commentary on the
Acts, 15:28, he says, “We know that this law was foredone by Paul, so
soon as the tumult and contention was once ended, when he teacheth that
nothing is unclean, (<span id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>[Ro
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>,)and when he granteth liberty to eat all
manner of meats, yea, even such as were sacrificed to idols. (<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p20.2"></span>[1Co
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025)<span
id="ii.ii.iv.iii-p20.2"></span>.)” — *C*. *Society*’*s* *edit*., vol. 2,
p. 79. Tertullian, *Apol*., *cap*. 9, speaks as follows; “Erubescat
error vester Christianis, qui ne animalium quidem sanguinem in epulis
esculentas habemus, qui propterea quoque suffocatis et morticinis
abstinemus, ne quo modo sanguine contaminemur, vel intra viscera
sepulto.” See Bingham, book 17 ch. 5 sec. 20 “But on the other hand,
because it was the custom of the Catholic Church, almost to the time of
St. Austin, to abstain from eating of blood, in compliance with the rule
given by the Apostles to the Gentile converts; therefore, by the most
ancient laws of the Church, all clergymen were obliged to abstain from
it under pain of degradation. This is evident from the Apostolical
Canons, and those of Gangra, and the second Council of Orleans, and the
Council of Trullo. But as this was looked upon by some only as a
temporary injunction, so it appears from St. Austin that it was of no
force in the African Church. (Contra Faust., lib. 32, c. 13.) He that
would see more about it may consult Curcellaeus, who has written a large
dissertation upon the subject.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Political Supplements](cc05012)
