[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05049)  [Next](cc05051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
36](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span><span id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
36:1-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>**1.** Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab,
and every wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom and
understanding, to know how to work all manner of work for the service of
the sanctuary, according to all that the Lord had commanded.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span>**1.** Fecit ergo Beseleel et Aholiab, et
omnis vir sapiens corde, quibus dederat Jebova sapientiam et
intelligentiam, ut scirent facere omne opus ministerii sanctuarii,
quaecunque praeceperat Jehova.

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**2.** And Moses called Bezaleel and
Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the Lord had put
wisdom, *even* every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the
work to do it:

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>**2.** Nam vocavit Moses Beseleel et
Aholiab, omnemque virum sapientem corde, cujus cordi indiderat Jehova
sapientiam, et omnem cujus cor excitaverat ipsum ut accederet ad opus ad
faciendum illud.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>**3.** And they received of Moses all the
offering which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the
service of the sanctuary, to make it *withal*. And they brought yet unto
him free-offerings every morning.

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>**3.** Tuleruntque a facie Mosis omnem
oblationem quam attulerant filii Israel ad opus ministerii sanctuarii:
illi autem afferebant ad eum adhuc oblationem spontaneam quotidie.

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>**4.** And all the wise men, that wrought
all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they
made;

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>**4.** Venerunt itaque omnes sapientes qui
faciebant omne opus sanctuarii, singuli ab opere quod faciebant:

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>**5.** And they spake unto Moses, saying,
the people bring much more than enough for the service of the work which
the Lord commanded to make.

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span>**5.** Et loquuti sunt ad Mosen, dicendo:
Plus affert populus afferendo quam opus sit ad ministerium pro opere
faciendo quod praecepit Jehova fieri.

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses gave commandment, and they
caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man
nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the
people were restrained from bringing.

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>**6.** Praecepit ergo Moses ut proclamarent
in castris, dicendo: Vir et mulier ne quid addant ultra ad oblationem
sanctitatis. Itaque prohibitus est populus ab offerendo.

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>**7.** For the stuff they had was
sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span>**7.** Materia enim erat ad sufficientiam
eis pro toto opere ad faciendum illud, et superabundabat.

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span>**8.** And every wise-hearted man, among
them that wrought the work of the tabernacle, made ten curtains *of*
fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: *with* cherubims
of cunning work made he them.

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span>**8.** Et fecerunt omnis sapiens corde
inter facientes opus, tabernaculum e decem cortinis, quae erant ex bysso
retorta, et hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, ex Cherubin opere
phrygionico fecit illas.

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>**9.** The length of one curtain *was*
twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits; the
curtains *were* all of one size.

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span>**9.** Longitudo cortinae unius erat octo
et viginti cubitorum, et quatuor cubitorum latitudo cortinae unius,
mensura erat omnibus cortinis.

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span>**10.** And he coupled the five curtains
one unto another; and *the* *other* five curtains he coupled one unto
another.

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span>**10.** Postea conjunxit quinque cortinas
alteram cum altera, et quinque alias cortinas conjunxit alteram cum
altera.

<span id="vi.iii-p23"></span>**11.** And he made loops of blue on the
edge of one curtain, from the selvedge in the coupling; likewise he made
in the uttermost side of *another* curtain, in the coupling of the
second.

<span id="vi.iii-p24"></span>**11.** Fecit et laqueolos hyacinthinos in
ora cortinae unius, in extremo in conjunctione: sic fecit in ora
cortinae extrema in conjunctione secundae.

<span id="vi.iii-p25"></span>**12.** Fifty loops made he in one curtain,
and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which *was* in the
coupling of the second: the loops held one *curtain* to another.

<span id="vi.iii-p26"></span>**12.** Quinquaginta laqueolos fecit; in
cortina una, et quinquaginta laqueolos fecit in extremo cortinae
secundae, quae erat in conjunctione secunda: oppositi erant laqueoli
alter alteri.

<span id="vi.iii-p27"></span>**13.** And he made fifty taches of gold,
and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became
one tabernacle.

<span id="vi.iii-p28"></span>**13.** Fecit et quinquaginta uncinos
aureos, et conjunxit cortinas alteram cum altera uncinis, et ita factum
est tabernaculum unum.

<span id="vi.iii-p29"></span>**14.** And he made curtains of goats’
*hair* for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

<span id="vi.iii-p30"></span>**14.** Fecit insuper cortinas e caprarum
pilis in tentorium super tabernaculum.

<span id="vi.iii-p31"></span>**15.** The length of one curtain *was*
thirty cubits, and four cubits *was* the breadth of one curtain: the
eleven curtains *were* of one size.

<span id="vi.iii-p32"></span>**15.** Longitudo cortinae unius triginta
cubitorum, et quatuor cubitorum latitudo cortinae unius, mensura una
erat undecim cortinis.

<span id="vi.iii-p33"></span>**16.** And he coupled five curtains by
themselves, and six curtains by themselves.

<span id="vi.iii-p34"></span>**16.** Conjunxit quinque cortinas seorsum,
et sex cortinas seorsum.

<span id="vi.iii-p35"></span>**17.** And he made fifty loops upon the
uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he
upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.

<span id="vi.iii-p36"></span>**17.** Fecit etiam laqueolos quinquaginta
in ora cortinae extrema, in conjunctione: quinquaginta item laqueolos
fecit in ora cortinae, in conjunctione secunda.

<span id="vi.iii-p37"></span>**18.** And he made fifty taches *of* brass
to couple the tent together, that it might be one.

<span id="vi.iii-p38"></span>**18.** Fecit praeterea uncinos aereos
quinquaginta ad conjungendum tentorium, ut esset unum.

<span id="vi.iii-p39"></span>**19.** And he made a covering for the tent
*of* rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering *of* badgers’ skins above
*that*

<span id="vi.iii-p40"></span>**19.** Fecit insuper operimentum tentorio
e pellibus arietum rubricatis, et operimentum e pellibus taxorum
superne.

<span id="vi.iii-p41"></span>**20.** And he made boards for the
tabernacle *of* shittim-wood, standing up.

<span id="vi.iii-p42"></span>**20.** Fecit et tabulas tabernaculo e
lignis sittim stantes.

<span id="vi.iii-p43"></span>**21.** The length of a board *was* ten
cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.

<span id="vi.iii-p44"></span>**21.** Decem cubitorum erat longitudo
tabubae, cubiti vero et dimidii latitudo tabulae.

<span id="vi.iii-p45"></span>**22.** One board had two tenons, equally
distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the
tabernacle.

<span id="vi.iii-p46"></span>**22.** Duo cardines erant tabulae uni
instar scalarum gradus dispositi, alter e regione alterius: sic fecit
omnibus tabulis tabernaculi.

<span id="vi.iii-p47"></span>**23.** And he made boards for the
tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side, southward.

<span id="vi.iii-p48"></span>**23.** Fecit inquam tabulas tabernaculo,
viginti tabulas ad latus, austri ad meridiem.

<span id="vi.iii-p49"></span>**24.** And forty sockets of silver he made
under the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for his two tenons,
and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.

<span id="vi.iii-p50"></span>**24.** Et quadraginta bases argenteas
fecit sub viginti tabulis, duas bases sub tabula una pro duabus
clastraturis ejus, et duas bases sub tabula altera pro duabus
clastraturis ejus.

<span id="vi.iii-p51"></span>**25.** And for the other side of the
tabernacle, *which* *is* toward the north corner, he made twenty boards,

<span id="vi.iii-p52"></span>**25.** In latere vero tabernaculi secundo,
nempe in latere aquilonari, fecit viginti tabulas.

<span id="vi.iii-p53"></span>**26.** And their forty sockets of silver:
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="vi.iii-p54"></span>**26.** Et quadraginta bases earum
argenteas, duas bases sub tabula una, et duas bases sub tabula altera.

<span id="vi.iii-p55"></span>**27.** And for the sides of the tabernacle
westward he made six boards.

<span id="vi.iii-p56"></span>**27.** In latere autem tabernaculi ad
occidentem fecit sex tabalas.

<span id="vi.iii-p57"></span>**28.** And two boards made he for the
corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.

<span id="vi.iii-p58"></span>**28.** Duas tabulas fecit angulis
tabernaculi in duobus lateribus.

<span id="vi.iii-p59"></span>**29.** And they were coupled beneath, and
coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both
of them in both the corners.

<span id="vi.iii-p60"></span>**29.** Et erant quasi gemellae inferne, et
pariter quasi gemellae in summitate ejus, in circulum unum: sic fecit
utrique in duobus angulis.

<span id="vi.iii-p61"></span>**30.** And there were eight boards; and
their sockets *were* sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two
sockets.

<span id="vi.iii-p62"></span>**30.** Fuerunt itaque octo tabulae, et
bases earum argenteae sedecim, bases binae sub qualibet tabula.

<span id="vi.iii-p63"></span>**31.** And he made bars *of* shittim-wood;
five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="vi.iii-p64"></span>**31.** Fecit et vectes e lignis sittim,
quinque pro tabulis unius lateris tabernaculi:

<span id="vi.iii-p65"></span>**32.** And five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle for the sides westward.

<span id="vi.iii-p66"></span>**32.** Et quinque vectes pro tabulis
alterius lateris tabernaculi, et quinque vectes pro tabulis lateris
tabernaculi, in lateribus duobus ad occidentem.

<span id="vi.iii-p67"></span>**33.** And he made the middle bar to shoot
through the boards from the one end to the other.

<span id="vi.iii-p68"></span>**33.** Fecit item vectem medium, ut
transiret per medium tabularum, ab extremo ad extremum.

<span id="vi.iii-p69"></span>**34.** And he overlaid the boards with
gold, and made their rings *of* gold *to* *be* places for the bars, and
overlaid the bars with gold.

<span id="vi.iii-p70"></span>**34.** Tabulas antem texit auro, et
annulos earum fecit ex auro, per quos trajicerentur vectes: et texit
vectes auro.

<span id="vi.iii-p71"></span>**35.** And he made a vail *of* blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: *with* cherubims made he it
of cunning work.

<span id="vi.iii-p72"></span>**35.** Fecit etiam velum ex hyacintho, et
purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta: opere phrygionico fecit
illud, cum figuris cherubim.

<span id="vi.iii-p73"></span>**36.** And he made thereunto four pillars
*of* shittim*-wood*, and overlaid them with gold; their hooks *were*
*of* gold: and he cast for them four sockets of silver.

<span id="vi.iii-p74"></span>**36.** Et fecit illi quatuor columnas de
lignis sittim, et texit eas auro: uncini autem earum erant aurei: et
fudit eis quatuor bases argenteas.

<span id="vi.iii-p75"></span>**37.** And he made an hanging for the
tabernacle-door *of* blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen, of needle-work;

<span id="vi.iii-p76"></span>**37.** Fecit quoque velum ad ostium
tabernaculi ex hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso
retorta, opere phrygionico.

<span id="vi.iii-p77"></span>**38.** And the five pillars of it with
their hooks; and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with
gold: but their five sockets *were* *of* brass.

<span id="vi.iii-p78"></span>**38.** Et columnas ejus quinque, et
uncinos earum: texitque capita earum, et fila ea cingentia auro, bases
autem earum quinque aereas.

<span id="vi.iii-p79"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p80"></span><span id="vi.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p81"></span>**1.** *Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab*.
Although Moses might have seemed to be unnecessarily prolix in recording
the injunctions which God gave respecting the building of the
tabernacle, yet he repeats the same narrative here almost in the same
words; and this he does with the best design, and for very good reasons.
For it was of much importance that it might be seen by actual comparison
how exactly the artificers had conformed everything to the pattern laid
down by God: and this, not only in commendation of their obedience, but
because it behooved that there should be nothing human in the structure;
for although they might each of them have exerted themselves strenuously
in the work, still it was not lawful for them to give the slightest
scope to their own inventions; nay, this would have been a profanation
of the sacred edifice, not to follow in every part what had been so
carefully dictated to Moses. And this might avail as a restraint upon
them in future times, so that they might not violate God’s commands by
any change or innovation. They did not indeed understand the reason of
everything either in reference to number or measure; but it became them
to be assured that God had commanded nothing without a purpose. Hence,
also, their minds should have been elevated to the heavenly pattern, so
as reverently to look up to the mysteries, obscure as they were, which
it contained, until its full manifestation. This verbal repetition,
then, reminds us how accurately the labor and art of men in the building
corresponded with the command of God.

<span id="vi.iii-p82"></span><span id="vi.iii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p83"></span>**2.** *And Moses called Bezaleel and
Aholiab*. It is not without reason that Moses so often exalts the grace
of God’s Spirit in the ingenuity and artistic skill of the workmen. In
the first place he speaks of them as skillful architects, and then, by
way of correction, adds that they were furnished from above with such
intelligence. Thus the absurdity of the Papists is refuted, who, in
order to prove free-will, think it sufficient to drag forward the
passages in which rectitude of will is commended: whereas, even though
men may will aright, it is foolish to infer that therefore they are
possessed of free-will, unless it be proved that the will proceeds from
themselves. Consequently, what follows in the text, — that every one
contributed either of his labor or his substance to the building of the
tabernacle, according as their hearts stirred them up, — does not so
make men the authors of pious affections, as to defraud God of His
praise. It is true that men understand — are willing — encourage
themselves to holy endeavors; but the question is, from whence comes
their intelligence, their will, and their zeal in well-doing? Scripture
decides that they are the gifts of God and the Spirit: the Papists
improperly arrogate them to themselves.

<span id="vi.iii-p84"></span><span id="vi.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p85"></span>**3.** *And they received of Moses all the
offering*. Here is set forth, first of all, the diligence and prudence
both of Moses and the artificers, and secondly, their integrity. Their
prudence is shewn in the distribution of the materials among them; their
diligence in the quickness with which they commence the work, without
waiting till they have enough for its completion; whilst they testify
their extraordinary integrity when they voluntarily declare that enough
has been given, and put a stop to the offerings, lest they should be
more than they required. We know how few restrain themselves  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) when an opportunity is given of
thieving without detection; and, even if there be no disposition to
deceive, yet most people are tempted by ambition, greedily to long for
more to pass through their hands than they need. We see, then, how God
directed them all to undertake the work of the sanctuary, and impelled
them to persevere in it by His Spirit. This grace, however, manifests
itself most fully in the marvelous ardor of the people. They were not
very rich, for they had had no treasures laid up for a long period; and
the wealthiest among them had no more than what they had secretly
conveyed away out of Egypt; whilst the building was sumptuous; and still
they do not cease from contributing more than was necessary, until an
edict forbade them. Such promptitude and liberality was worthy of no
common praise; and hence it is more wonderful that they should soon
afterwards neglect the true God in whose service they were thus zealous,
and fall into foul idolatry. Let us learn from hence, that the pious
zeal, which existed in them for a short time, emanated from the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit; and further, that all our best feelings
vanish, unless the gift of stedfastness be superadded.

<span id="vi.iii-p87"></span>What follows represents, as by a lively
image, as we have said, how faithfully they executed whatever God had
prescribed, so as not to vary from it even in the smallest thread.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc05050.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="vi.iii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p86"></span> “Qui gardent leurs mains pures et nettes;”
who keep their hands pure and clean — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 37:1-29](cc05051.md)
