[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05017)  [Next](cc05019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v-p1"></span>These Supplements are Judicial  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md)

<span id="ii.iii.v.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.iii.v.i-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#012.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#017.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.iii.v.i-p2.1"></span>-24

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p3"></span>**11.** And the man that lieth with his
father’s wife hath uncovered his father’s nakedness: both of them shall
surely be put to death; their blood *shall* *be* upon them.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p4"></span>**11.** Quicunque concubuerit cum uxore
patris sui, turpitudinem patris sui revelavit: moriendo morientur ambo,
sanguis eorum super eos.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p5"></span>**12.** And if a man lie with his
daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have
wrought confusion; their blood *shall* *be* upon them.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p6"></span>**12.** Vir qui coierit cum nuru sua,
moriendo morientur ambo: flagitium admiserunt, sanguis eorum super eos.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p7"></span>**14.** And if a man take a wife and her
mother, it *is* wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and
they; that there be no wickedness among you.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p8"></span>**14.** Qui acceperit mulierem et matrem
ejus, scelus est: igni comburent illum et illas, ne sit scelus in medio
vestri.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p9"></span>**17.** And if a man shall take his
sister, his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter, and see her
nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it *is* a wicked thing; and they
shall be cut off ill the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his
sister’s nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p10"></span>**17.** Quisquis acceperit sororem suam
filiam patris sui, vel filiam matris suae, et viderit turpitudinem ejus,
ipsaque viderit turpitudinem illius, foeditas est: propterea
succindentur ambo coram oculis populi sui: turpitudinem sororis suae
revelavit, iniquitatem suam feret.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p11"></span>**19.** And thou shalt not uncover the
nakedness of thy mother’s sister, nor of thy father’s sister; for he
uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p12"></span>**19.** Turpitudinem sororis matris
tuae et sororis patris tui, non discooperies: quia propinquam suam
nudavit, iniquitatem suam portabunt.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p13"></span>**20.** And if a man shall lie with his
uncle’s wife, he hath uncovered his uncle’s nakedness: they shall bear
their sin; they shall die childless.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p14"></span>**20.** Quisquis dormierit cum uxore
fratris patris sui, turpitudinem fratris patris sui revelavit,
iniquitatem suam portabunt, orbati morientur.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p15"></span>**21.** And if a man shall take his
brother’s wife, it *is* an unclean thing; he hath uncovered his
brother’s nakedness: they shall be childless.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p16"></span>**21.** Qui acceperit uxorem fratris
sui, opprobrium est, turpitudinem fratris sui revelavit, orbati erunt.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p17"></span>**22.** Ye shall therefore keep all my
statutes, and all my judgments, and do them; that the land, whither I
bring you to dwell therein, spew you not out.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p18"></span>**22.** Custodite itaque omnia statuta
mea, et omnia judicia, et facite ea, ut non evomat vos terra in quam ego
introduco vos ut illic habitetis.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p19"></span>**23.** And ye shall not walk in the
manners of the nations which I cast out before you: for they committed
all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p20"></span>**23.** Neque ambuletis in statutis
gentis quam ego ejiciam a facie vestra: omnia enim ista fecerunt, et
detestatus sum eas.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p21"></span>**24.** But I have said unto you, Ye
shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a
land that floweth with milk and honey: I am the Lord your God, which
have separated you from *other* people.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p22"></span>**24.** Vobis autem dixi, Possidebitis
terram eorum, quam ego daturus sum vobis ut haereditate eam possideatis
terram fluentem lacte et melle: ego Jehova Deus vester qui separavi vos
a populis.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p23"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p24"></span><span id="ii.iii.v.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p25"></span>Nothing new occurs here, for the object
of Moses was, by the enactment of penalties, to sanction the instruction
lately given. By previously condemning incestuous marriages, he would
cite the Israelites before God, in order that their consciences might
abhor the crime, although he gave them nothing to fear from earthly
judges; whereas now he alarms them by the dread of punishment, in case
any should indulge themselves with too great security. He does not
chastise the incestuous with rods, as if they were only guilty of a
light offense; but he pronounces it to be a capital crime, if any had
sinned against the law of nature; and first he condemns the step-mother
and step-son to death, if they should have had connection with each
other; he then makes the same decree with reference to the father-in-law
and daughter-in-law; and, thirdly, the step-father and step-daughter.
But when, if a man cohabits at the same time with a mother and her
daughter, he extends the punishment to the mother also, it must be
understood, provided she also consents to the abominable medley; for, if
a man, against the mother’s will, seduces her daughter, and the mother
is unable to resist it if she would, she is free from guilt. The same
punishment is awarded to brother and sister, and nephew and aunt, and it
is extended also to affinity; if any should cohabit with the wife of his
uncle or his brother. We have elsewhere explained the meaning of the
expression, “their blood shall be upon them;” *i*.*e*., that the cause
of their death is to be imputed to none but the gross criminals
themselves, lest their judges, under the cloak of humanity, should
shrink from being severe, since it often happens that those who do not
sufficiently weigh the atrocity of the evil, are led away by an empty
show of clemency.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) Moreover, Moses
indirectly hints that if the guilty be pardoned, vengeance will be thus
provoked against the whole people, since iniquity is fostered by
impunity, until it bursts out like a deluge. The penalty of
childlessness corresponds with the crime, for it is just that those
should be exterminated in barrenness from the world, who have endeavored
to corrupt the holy race of Abraham with their adulterous seed.

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p27"></span><span id="ii.iii.v.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p28"></span>**22.** *Ye shall therefore keep all my
statutes* He now warns the Israelites, for the third time, not to
imitate the Gentiles, and exhorts them to keep themselves within the
limits of the Law. I have already pointed out that this was not done
without reason, since otherwise they might have easily fallen away into
the approval of their evil habits. Moreover, lest they should shake off
God’s yoke, after He has said that the nations of Canaan were destroyed
on account of similar abominations, He adds, that they were made the
inheritors of the land on condition that they should separate themselves
from heathen nations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc05018.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="ii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v-p2"></span> Omitted in the French; and the ensuing
verses considered under the “Political Supplements” of the Commandment.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc05018.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="ii.iii.v.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.v.i-p26"></span> “Sont ployables, et faciles a
pardoner;” are pliable and easily disposed to pardon. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Political Supplement](cc05019.md)
