[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05050)  [Next](cc05052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
37](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span><span id="vi.iv-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
37:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>**1.** And Bezaleel made the ark *of*
shittim-wood: two cubits and a half *was* the length of it, and a cubit
and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Fecit etiam Beseleel arcam e lignis
sittim: duorum cubitorum et dimidii longitudo ejus: cubiti et dimidii
latitudo ejus: cubiti quoque et dimidii altitudo ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**2.** And he overlaid it with pure gold
within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Et texit eam auro mundo intrinsecus,
et extrinsecus: fecitque ei coronam auream in circuitu.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>**3.** And he cast for it four rings of gold,
*to* *be* *set* by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one
side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Et fudit ei quatuor annulos aureos ad
quatuor angulos ejus, duos videlicet annulos in latere ejus uno, et duos
annulos in latere ejus altero.

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>**4.** And he made staves *of* shittim-wood,
and overlaid them with gold.

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Fecit et vectes e lignis sittim, et
texit eos auro.

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>**5.** And he put the staves into the rings
by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>**5.** Induxitque vectes in annulos in
lateribus arcae ad portandum arcam.

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span>**6.** And he made the mercy-seat *of* pure
gold: two cubits and a half *was* the length thereof, and one cubit and
a half the breadth thereof.

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span>**6.** Fecit et propitiatorium ex auro
mundo: duorum cubitorum et dimidii longitudo ejus, cubiti et dimidii
latitudo ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span>**7.** And he made two cherubims *of* gold,
beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy-seat;

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span>**7.** Fecit quoque duos Cherubim ex auro,
ductiles fecit eos in duabus extremitatibus propitiatorii.

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>**8.** One cherub on the end on this side,
and another cherub on the *other* end on that side: out of the
mercy-seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span>**8.** Cherub unum ab extremo hinc, et
cherub alterum ab extremo inde: ex propitiatorio fecit cherubim in
duabus extremitatibus ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span>**9.** And the cherubims spread out *their*
wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy-seat, with
their faces one to another; *even* to the mercy-seat-ward were the faces
of the cherubims.

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span>**9.** Cherubim autem extendebant alas
sursum versus, tegentes alis suis propitiatorium et facies eorum altera
ad alteram: ad propitiatorium facies Cherubim.

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span>**10.** And he made the table *of*
shittim-wood: two cubits *was* the length thereof, and a cubit the
breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span>**10.** Fecit et mensam e liguis sittim:
duorum cubitorum longitudo ejus, et cubiti latitudo ejus, cubiti autem
et dimidii altitudo ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span>**11.** And he overlaid it with pure gold,
and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span>**11.** Et texit eam auro puro, fecitque ei
coronam auream in circuitu.

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span>**12.** Also he made thereunto a border of
an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border
thereof round about.

<span id="vi.iv-p26"></span>**12.** Fecit quoque ei clausuram palmi per
circuitum: et fecit coronam auream clausurae illi per circuitum.

<span id="vi.iv-p27"></span>**13.** And he cast for it four rings of
gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that *were* in the four
feet thereof.

<span id="vi.iv-p28"></span>**13.** Fudit ei etiam quatuor annulos
aureos, quos posuit in quatuor angulis qui erant in quatuor pedibus
ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p29"></span>**14.** Over against the border were the
rings, the places for the staves, to bear the table.

<span id="vi.iv-p30"></span>**14.** Contra clausuram illam erant annuli
per quos traducerentur vectes ad portandam mensam.

<span id="vi.iv-p31"></span>**15.** And he made the staves *of*
shittim-wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.

<span id="vi.iv-p32"></span>**15.** Fecit etiam vectes e lignis sittim,
quos texit auro ad portandam mensam.

<span id="vi.iv-p33"></span>**16.** And he made the vessels which *were*
upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his
covers to cover withal, *of* pure gold.

<span id="vi.iv-p34"></span>**16.** Et fecit vasa quae erant super
mensam, scutellas ejus, et cochlearia ejus, et crateras ejus, et
opercula quibus libabatur, ex auro mundo.

<span id="vi.iv-p35"></span>**17.** And he made the candlestick *of*
pure gold: *of* beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his
branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:

<span id="vi.iv-p36"></span>**17.** Fecit et candelabrum ex auro puro,
ductile fecit candelabrum, hastile ejus, et calamus ejus, scyphi ejus,
sphaerulae ejus, et flores ejus ex ipso erant.

<span id="vi.iv-p37"></span>**18.** And six branches going out of the
sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side
thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof:

<span id="vi.iv-p38"></span>**18.** Porro sex calami egrediebantur e
lateribus ejus, tres calami candelabri ex latere ipsius uno, et tres
calami candelabri ex latere ejus altero.

<span id="vi.iv-p39"></span>**19.** Three bowls made after the fashion
of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like
almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six
branches going out of the candlestick.

<span id="vi.iv-p40"></span>**19.** Tres calices in speciem nucis
amygdalinae deformati erant in calamo uno, sphaerula et flos: et tres
calices in speciem nucis amygdalinae deformati in calamo altero,
sphaerula et flos: sic sex calamis egredientibus e candelabro.

<span id="vi.iv-p41"></span>**20.** And in the candlestick *were* four
bowls made like almonds, his knops and his flowers:

<span id="vi.iv-p42"></span>**20.** Et in candelabro erant quatuor
calices in speciem nucis deformati, sphaerulae ejus, et flores ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p43"></span>**21.** And a knop under two branches of the
same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two
branches of the same, according to the six branches growing out of it.

<span id="vi.iv-p44"></span>**21.** Et erat sphaerula sub duobus calamis
ex ipso, et sphaerula altera sub duobus calamis ex ipso, et sphaerula
tertia sub duobus calamis ex ipso: sic sex calamis egredientibus ex
ipso.

<span id="vi.iv-p45"></span>**22.** Their knops and their branches were
of the same: all of it *was* one beaten work *of* pure gold.

<span id="vi.iv-p46"></span>**22.** Sphaerulae eorum et calami eorum ex
ipso fuerunt: totum erat ductile unum ex auro puro.

<span id="vi.iv-p47"></span>**23.** And he made his seven lamps, and his
snuffers, and his snuff-dishes, *of* pure gold.

<span id="vi.iv-p48"></span>**23.** Fecit et lucernas ejus septem, et
forcipes ejus, et receptacula ipsius, ex auro puro.

<span id="vi.iv-p49"></span>**24.** *Of* a talent of pure gold made he
it, and all the vessels thereof.

<span id="vi.iv-p50"></span>**24.** Et talento puri auri fecit ipsum, et
omnia vasa ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p51"></span>**25.** And he made the incense-altar *of*
shittim-wood: the length of it *was* a cubit, and the breadth of it a
cubit, (*it* *was* four-square,) and two cubits *was* the height of it;
the horns thereof were of the same.

<span id="vi.iv-p52"></span>**25.** Fecit etiam altare incensi e lignis
sittim: cubitus longitudo ejus: et cubitus latitudo ejus, quadratum: duo
autem cubiti altitudo ejus: ex ipso erant cornua ejus.

<span id="vi.iv-p53"></span>**26.** And he overlaid it with pure gold,
*both* the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns
of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="vi.iv-p54"></span>**26.** Et texit illud auro puro, tectum
ejus scilicet et parietes ejus in circuitu, et cornua ejus, fecitque ei
coronam auream per circuitum.

<span id="vi.iv-p55"></span>**27.** And he made two rings of gold for it
under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides
thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.

<span id="vi.iv-p56"></span>**27.** Duos similiter annulos aureos fecit
ei sub corona ejus in duobus angulis ejus, in duobus lateribus ejus, per
quos trajicerentur vestes ad portandum illud ipsis.

<span id="vi.iv-p57"></span>**28.** And he made the staves of
shittim-wood, and overlaid them with gold.

<span id="vi.iv-p58"></span>**28.** Et fecit vectes ipsos e lignis
sittim, et texit eos auro.

<span id="vi.iv-p59"></span>**29.** And he made the holy anointing oil,
and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the
apothecary.

<span id="vi.iv-p60"></span>**29.** Fecit et oleum unctionis,
sanctitatem, et suffimentum aromaticum purum, opere unguentarii.

<span id="vi.iv-p61"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p62"></span><span id="vi.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p63"></span>If the repetition, which might appear to be
superfluous in these chapters, should be wearisome to us, let us reflect
on the intention of the Holy Spirit, who, in narrating the execution of
the work, uses almost the identical words wherein He had previously set
forth the commands of God, viz., that we may understand that Moses, and
the artificers themselves, did not vary in the smallest point from the
rule prescribed to them. God had commanded the Ark of the Covenant to be
made, together with its cover; and Moses relates how it was completed,
so that the artificers did not omit even its very minutest detail. He
ordered a table to be made for the offering of bread, and not a single
syllable is neglected. As to the candlestick there was the same
scrupulous obedience, so that they did not alter it in any part. In the
altar of incense there was no kind of dissimilarity between the command
and the work; and, finally, the composition of the oil exactly
corresponds with the command. There is no question, then, but that Moses
commends obedience, as it is the foundation of true piety, and at the
same time reminds us that there was no exercise of the imagination in
the whole service of the tabernacle, because there is nothing more
opposite to the purity of religion than to do anything which is not
enjoined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 38:1-31](cc05052.md)
