[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05061)  [Next](cc05063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span><span id="vii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
40:1-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001)<span id="vii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saving,

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**2.** On the first day of the first month
shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation;

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>**2.** Die mensis primi, prima ejusdem,
eriges tabernaculum, tabernaculum conventionis.

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>**3.** And thou shalt put therein the ark
of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>**3.** Et pones ibi arcam testimonii quam
teges velo.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span>**4.** And thou shalt bring in the table,
and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and
thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>**4.** Introducesque mensam, et
ordinationem ejus: introduces insuper candelabrum, et accendes luernas
ejus.

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span>**5.** And thou shalt set the altar of
gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the
hanging of the door to the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span>**5.** Pones praeterea altare aureum ad
suffimentum e regione arcae testimonii: et pones aulaeum ostii
tabernaculi.

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span>**6.** And thou shalt set the altar of the
burnt-offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span>**6.** Dein pones altare holocausti coram
ostio tabernaculi conventionis:

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>**7.** And thou shalt set the laver
between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water
therein.

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span>**7.** Postea pones concham inter
tabernaculum conventionis et altare, in qua pones aquam.

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt set up the court
round about, and hang up the hanging at the court-gate.

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span>**8.** Postremo pones atrium in circuitu,
et aulueum portae atrii.

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span>**9.** And thou shalt take the anointing
oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that *is* therein, and shalt
hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.

<span id="vii.iii-p20"></span>**9.** Tunc accipies oleum unctionis, et
unges tabernaculum atque omnia vasa qum sunt in eo: sanctificabisque
illud et omnia vasa ejus, et erit sanctum.

<span id="vii.iii-p21"></span>**10.** And thou shalt anoint the altar of
the burnt-offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it
shall be an altar most holy.

<span id="vii.iii-p22"></span>**10.** Unges et altare holocausti, atque
onmia vasa ejus: sanctificabisque altare, et erit altare sacrosanctum.

<span id="vii.iii-p23"></span>**11.** And thou shalt anoint the laver
and his foot, and sanctify it.

<span id="vii.iii-p24"></span>**11.** Unges etiam concham et basira
ejus, sanctificabisque illam.

<span id="vii.iii-p25"></span>**12.** And thou shalt bring Aaron and his
sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them
with water.

<span id="vii.iii-p26"></span>**12.** Tunc appropinquare facies Aharon
et filius ejus ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, lavabisque cos aqua.

<span id="vii.iii-p27"></span>**13.** And thou shalt put upon Aaron the
holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister
unto me in the priest’s office.

<span id="vii.iii-p28"></span>**13.** Et induere facies Aharon vestes
sanctas, ungesque eum, et sanctificabis eum, ut sacerdotio fungatur
mihi.

<span id="vii.iii-p29"></span>**14.** And thou shalt bring his sons, and
clothe them with coats:

<span id="vii.iii-p30"></span>**14.** Filios quoque ejus appropinquare
facies, et indues eos tunicis.

<span id="vii.iii-p31"></span>**15.** And thou shalt anoint them, as
thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the
priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting
priesthood throughout their generations.

<span id="vii.iii-p32"></span>**15.** Ungesque filius, quemadmodum
unxeris patrem eorum: et sacerdotio fungentur mihi, eritque unctio eorum
ut sit els in sacerdotium perpetuum per generationes suas.

<span id="vii.iii-p33"></span>**16.** Thus did Moses: according to all
that the Lord commanded him, so did he.

<span id="vii.iii-p34"></span>**16.** Fecit ergo Moses juxta omnia quae
illi praeceperat Jehova, sic fecit.

<span id="vii.iii-p35"></span>**17.** And it came to pass in the first
month, in the second year, on the first *day* of the month, *that* the
tabernacle was reared up.

<span id="vii.iii-p36"></span>**17.** Et factum est mense primo, anno
secundo, prima mensis, erectum filit tabernaculum.

<span id="vii.iii-p37"></span>**18.** And Moses reared up the
tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the hoards thereof, and
put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.

<span id="vii.iii-p38"></span>**18.** Erexit igitur Moses tabernaculum,
posuitque bases ejus, et tabulas ejus, et vectes ejus, atque erexit
columnas ejus.

<span id="vii.iii-p39"></span>**19.** And he spread abroad the tent over
the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the
Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p40"></span>**19.** Extendit praeterea tentorium super
tabernaculum, et posuit operimentum tentorii super idud superne,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova, Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p41"></span>**20.** And he took and put the testimony
into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy-seat
above upon the ark.

<span id="vii.iii-p42"></span>**20.** Tulitque et posuit testimonium in
arca ipsa, posuit quoque vectes super arcata, et propitiatorium super
arcata superne.

<span id="vii.iii-p43"></span>**21.** And he brought the ark into the
tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of
the testimony; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p44"></span>**21.** Induxitque aream in tabernaculum,
posuitque velum tentorii, et texit arcata testimonii, quemadmodum
praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p45"></span>**22.** And he put the table in the tent
of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without
the vail.

<span id="vii.iii-p46"></span>**22.** Posuit et mensam in tabernaculo
conventionis ad latus tabernaculi ad aquilonem extra velum.

<span id="vii.iii-p47"></span>**23.** And he set the bread in order upon
it before the Lord; as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p48"></span>**23.** Et ordinavit super eam
ordinationem panum coram Jehova, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi
Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p49"></span>**24.** And he put the candlestick in the
tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the
tabernacle southward.

<span id="vii.iii-p50"></span>**24.** Posuitque candelabrum in
tabernaculo conventionis ex adverso in latere tabernaculi ad meridiem.

<span id="vii.iii-p51"></span>**25.** And he lighted the lamps before
the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p52"></span>**25.** Et accendit lucernas coram Jehova,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p53"></span>**26.** And he put the golden altar in the
tent of the congregation before the vail:

<span id="vii.iii-p54"></span>**26.** Posuit etiam altare aureum in
tabernaculo conventionis coram velo:

<span id="vii.iii-p55"></span>**27.** And he burned sweet incense
thereon; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p56"></span>**27.** Et incendit super illud
suffimentum aromaticum, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p57"></span>**28.** And he set up the hanging *at* the
door of the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.iii-p58"></span>**28.** Posuit praeterea aulaeum ostii
tabernaculi.

<span id="vii.iii-p59"></span>**29.** And he put the altar of
burnt-offering *by* the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation, and offered upon it the burnt-offering, and the
meat-offering; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p60"></span>**29.** Et altare holocausti posuit ad
ostium tabernaculi, tabernaculi conventionis: et obtulit super illo
holocaustum, et minham, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p61"></span>**30.** And he set the laver between the
tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water *there,* to wash
*withal.*

<span id="vii.iii-p62"></span>**30.** Et posuit concham inter
tabernaculum conventionis et altare, in qua posuit aquam ad lavandum.

<span id="vii.iii-p63"></span>**31.** And Moses, and Aaron, and his
sons, washed their hands and their feet thereat.

<span id="vii.iii-p64"></span>**31.** Et lavabant ex ea Moses et Aharon
et filii ejus marius suas et pedes suos.

<span id="vii.iii-p65"></span>**32.** When they went into the tent of
the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed;
as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.iii-p66"></span>**32.** Quando ingrediebantur tabernaculum
conventionis, et quando accedebant ad altare, lavabant se, sicut
praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.iii-p67"></span>**33.** And he reared up the court round
about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the
court-gate: so Moses finished the work.

<span id="vii.iii-p68"></span>**33.** Postremo erexit atrium in circuitu
tabernaculi et altaris, posuitque aulaeum portae atrii. Itaque, absolvit
Moses opus ipsum.

<span id="vii.iii-p69"></span>**34.** Then a cloud covered the tent of
the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.iii-p70"></span>**34.** Et operuit nubes tabernaculum
conventionis, gloriaque Jehovae replevit tabernaculum.

<span id="vii.iii-p71"></span>**35.** And Moses was not able to enter
into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and
the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.iii-p72"></span>**35.** Neque poterat Moses ingredi
tabernaculum conventionis, quia habitabat super illud nubes, et gloria
Jehovae replebat tabernaculum.

<span id="vii.iii-p73"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p74"></span><span id="vii.iii-p74.1"></span>[Numbers
9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p75"></span><span id="vii.iii-p75.1"></span>[Num.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#016)<span id="vii.iii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p76"></span>**15.** And on the day that the tabernacle
was reared up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, *namely,* the tent of
the testimony; and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the
appearance of fire, until the morning.

<span id="vii.iii-p77"></span>**15.** Quo die erectum fuit tabernaculum,
operuit nubes tabernaculum supra rectum testimonii: vespere autem erat
super tabernaculum tanquam species ignis usque mane.

<span id="vii.iii-p78"></span>**16.** So it was alway: the cloud covered
it *by* *day,* and the appearance of fire by night.

<span id="vii.iii-p79"></span>**16.** Sic erat jugiter: nubes operiebat
ilud, et species ignis noctu.

<span id="vii.iii-p80"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p81"></span><span id="vii.iii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p82"></span>**<span id="vii.iii-p82.1"></span>[Exodus
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002)<span
id="vii.iii-p82.1"></span>.** *On the first day of the first month* I
cannot at all approve of the opinion of those commentators who think
that the tabernacle was only now set up. That it was already complete in
all its parts before Moses went the second time into the Mount, we infer
from the fact that the ark was then prepared in which the tables were
deposited, as we shall see from the context. Besides, it has elsewhere
 <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) been shewn by sound arguments,
as I think, that it was pitched without the camp in token of divorce,
from the time that the people had made the calf. What, then, is the
meaning of the setting-up which is now spoken of? I reply, that it is
said to have been set up, when  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)
it was brought back from its strange to its proper place. For then it
was both anointed and honored by sacred oblations, whilst Aaron and his
sons were consecrated to the performance of the priestly office. Since,
therefore, it had not yet been duly placed in the middle of the camp,
nay, rather had been removed from the people lest they should enjoy that
pledge of God’s presence, its solemn dcdication is justly celebrated
after the renewal of the covenant. This passage also confirms what I
have said elsewhere,  <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) that this
was the tabernacle which Moses pitched at a distance from the camp; for,
by the addition of its title, he speaks as of something well known,
“Thou shalt set up (He says) the tabernacle, viz., the tabernacle of
convention.” Now Moses himself had already stated that this name had
been given it by the mouth of God. He repeats, however, the same
injunctions, not that He distrusted the memory of His servant, but that
it might be more fully apparent that He was Himself the sole Author of
the whole work, and also that it nlight obtain more reverence, since He
had so often deigned to give initructions as concerning things of very
great importance.

<span id="vii.iii-p86"></span><span id="vii.iii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p87"></span>**9.** *And thou shalt take the anointing
oil* There was by no means any virtue or efficacy for sanctification in
the oil, except in so far as it was a type of the Spirit, from whom as
its only source all holiness emanates. Assuredly the oil, as being a
corruptible fluid, neither penetrates into the soul, nor would by itself
at all avail unto spiritual service. It appears, however, from many
pnssages of Scripture, that it was a symbol of all the gifts of the Holy
Spirit. This figure, therefore, clearly shews that nothing pleases God,
that nothing is pure or holy in His sight, except what has been purged,
and duly consecrated by the influence and grace of the Holy Spirit.
Moreover, God would have all the vessels of the sanctuary set apart by
this sacred anointing from common use, in order that the Israelites
might distinguish between things sacred and profane, and thus that God’s
service might receive its due reverence, so that none should intrude the
pollutions of the flesh into that place, the purity of which had been
signalized by that sacred symbol. A question, however, here arises why
he dignifies the altar of burnt-offering with a more exalted title; for,
after having called the tabernacle itself with its vessels simply
*holy,* He calls the altar “holy of holies,” which I have rendered
*sacrosanctum.* I doubt not but that it acquired this name from the
sacrifices, which are also so called on account of the expiation made by
them,  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) as we have seen
elsewhere. The children of Israel, therefore, were instructed that God
is truly reconciled by holocausts and burnt-offerings, since “the
holiness of holinesses” resided on the altar itself.

<span id="vii.iii-p89"></span><span id="vii.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p90"></span>**12.** *And thou shalt bring Aaron and
his sons* I have already expounded all that might seem to be profitable
with respect to the garments and the mode of anointing; only let; my
readers remember that the priest,  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) who had been before appointed, is now
at length inaugurated, in order that he may begin the discharge of his
office. At the same time, let them also bear in mind that this oil was
consecrated by God. Hence it appears how foolishly the Popish bishops,
as it were, ape Moses, when, in imitation of him, they sprinkle their
priests and altars and other rubbish with stinking oil, since it is
abundantly clear that this ceremony of anointing, belonging as it did to
the ancient shadows of the Law, ceased at the coming of Christ. What
Augustine  <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) reminds us of is also
worthy of observation, that Moses, who is commissioned to anoint the
others, was never consecrated himself by any visible symbol, in order
that we may understand that outward signs are not to be estimated by the
dignity of the minister, but only by the ordinance of God; and again,
that invisible grace has profited some without visible sacraments,
whilst visible sanctification may be imparted, but cannot profit,
without invisible.

<span id="vii.iii-p93"></span><span id="vii.iii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p94"></span>**17.** *And it came to pass in the first
month* In all the arrangements, which are here described, it must be
especially noted, that Moses obeyed God in such a manner as not to vary
in the most trifling point from the form prescribed to him. He therefore
so frequently enforces the fact, that he did as God had commanded him;
and not without reason, for there is nothing to which men are more prone
than to mix up their inventions with God’s commands, as if they would be
wiser than He is. In order then that the people might know that there
was nothing of human invention in all the legal service, Moses so
carefully insists on this point, and so often testifes to his obedience.
But if so great the Prophet dared to attempt nothing of himself in
trifling matters, how great is the audacity and arrogance of those men
who arbitrarily invent innumerable figments, whereby God may be
worshipped! Let us, however, learn from this passage to embrace with
reverence whatever has proceeded from God, whilst we reject whatever men
advance of themselves.

<span id="vii.iii-p95"></span><span id="vii.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p96"></span>**34.** *Then a cloud covered the tent*
The holiness of the tabernacle was proved by this signal or pledge, for
the people assuredly knew that it had not been set up in vain, but that
the promise given before was actually fulfilled, and that it was chosen
to be the dwelling-place of God, who would be the Leader and Keeper of
His people. For it was not a natural thing that the cloud should settle
over the sanctuary in which the Ark of the Covenant was deposited; and
much less so that by day a cloud should be seen and a fire by night,
especially when this did not occur once only, but when they succeeded
each other in perpetual alternation. It is fitly said, that when the
tabernacle was covered by the cloud, it was at, the same time filled
with the glory of God; for this was a magnificent distinction, that an
earthly edifice should be rendered illustrious by a more than heavenly
ornament, as if God’s majesty were visibly presented to them.

<span id="vii.iii-p97"></span>Whereas before Moses had been concealed
and separated from the people by the cloud, its density is now said to
have prevented even him from entering; thus, then, ought their reverence
and admiration of the place to have been increased, when the greatness
of its glory was a hinderance to their holy Prophet. It is probable that
by his example not only the rest of the multitude, but all the Levites
also, were admonished that they should not endeavor to penetrate further
than they were allowed. For, after the possession of the priesthood was
transmitted to his brother, he, as well as his descendants, was excluded
from that sacred dignity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc05062.htm#fr_393) <span
id="vii.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p83"></span> See ante.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc05062.htm#fr_394) <span
id="vii.iii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p84"></span> “Lors qu’il a este assis en son droit
lieu, et legitime, assavoir au milieu du peuple duquel il avoit este
comme estranger;” when it was fixed in its right and legitimate place,
that is to say, in the midst of the people, to whom it had been, as it
were, a stranger. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc05062.htm#fr_395) <span
id="vii.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p85"></span> See ante.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc05062.htm#fr_396) <span
id="vii.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p88"></span> See on <span
id="vii.iii-p88.1"></span>[Leviticus
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025)<span id="vii.iii-p88.1"></span>,
*ante,* vol. 2, p. 366.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc05062.htm#fr_397) <span
id="vii.iii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p91"></span> “Aaron, ayant este cree auparavant
Sacrificateur.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc05062.htm#fr_398) <span
id="vii.iii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p92"></span> Quaest. in <span
id="vii.iii-p92.1"></span>Leviticus 84<span id="vii.iii-p92.1"></span>.
Edit. Bened. tom. 3, p. 524.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 7:1-89](cc05063)
