[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05033)  [Next](cc05035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>Sanctions of the Law

<span id="v-p2"></span>contained in the Promises and Threats

<span id="v-p3"></span>We now come to the conclusion of the Exposition
of the Law, wherein we are to treat of the sanctions of it contained
both in the promises and threats. For, although God might in His own
right simply require what He pleased, yet such is His kindness to men,
that He chose to entice them by promises to obey Him freely. Since,
therefore, we are naturally attracted by the hope of reward, we are slow
and lazy, until some fruit appears. Consequently God voluntarily
promises, in order to arouse them from their sloth, that if men obey His
Law, He will repay them. Nor is this an ordinary act of liberality that
He prefers to agree with us for the payment of a recompense, rather than
simply to command by His sovereignty. For we must bear in mind the
declaration of Christ, that when we have fulfilled the whole Law, we
still deserve nothing; since God claims for Himself our entire services.
(<span id="v-p3.1"></span>[Lu
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)<span id="v-p3.1"></span>..md)
However we may strive, therefore, even beyond our strength, and devote
ourselves entirely to keep the Law, still God lies under no obligation
to us, except in so far as He has Himself voluntarily agreed, and made
Himself our spontaneous debtor. And this has been pointed out even by
the common theologians, that the reward of good works does not depend
upon their dignity or merit, but upon His covenant.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) Still, as we shall soon see, such
promises would not avail us the least if God rewarded every one
according to his works; but, because this defect is adventitious, God’s
great mercy nevertheless shines forth in the fact that he has deigned to
encourage us to obedience by setting before us the hope of eternal life.
And hence He reproves the ingratitude of the Israelites by <span
id="v-p4.1"></span>[Eze 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021.md)<span
id="v-p4.1"></span>; because they had despised His good commandments, of
which it was said that “if a man do them, he should live in them.”

<span id="v-p5"></span>We now perceive how the authority of the Law was
confirmed by the promises; but because we are not only indolent but also
refractory, He added on the other side threats which might inspire
terror, both to subdue the obstinacy of the flesh and to correct the
security in which we are too apt to indulge. It will be expedient now to
treat of both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc05034.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v-p4"></span> “Sur ceste paction, que Dieu en a faite;” but
upon that agreement which God has made to give it. — *Fr*. Bishop
Davenant, after quoting William Archbishop of Paris, Aquinas, and
Durandus, to the same effect, says, “To these may be added Scotus,
Gregory, Occam, Gabriel, (Biel,) Alfonsus, and very many others of the
better class of writers among the Romanists, who avowedly maintain that
the works of the righteous, wrought by the assistance of grace, do not
on that account acquire any intrinsic worthiness for life eternal; but
that, as regards this reward, it depends entirely upon the gracious
acceptance and promise of God.” — Disputatio de Justitia. Allport’s
Transl., vol. 2, p. 70.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 18:5](cc05035.md)
