[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05062)  [Next](cc05064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#000.md)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span><span id="vii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
7:1-89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**1.** And it came to pass on the day that
Moses had fully set up the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and
sanctified it, and all the instruments thereof, both the altar, and all
the vessels thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them,

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Et fuit quo die finivit Moses erigere
tabernaculum, unxit illud et sanctificavit, omniaque utensilia ejus,
altare quoque et omnia utensilia ejus, ex quo unxit ca et sanctificavit.

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>**2.** That the princes of Israel, heads of
the house of their fathers, (who were the princes of the tribes, and
were over them that were numbered,) offered.

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Tunc obtulerunt principes Israelis,
capita domuum patrum suorum, principes tribuum, hi erant praefecti
numeratis.

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>**3.** And they brought their offering
before the Lord, six covered waggons, and twelve oxen; a waggon for two
of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the
tabernacle.

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Et attulerunt oblationem suam coram
Jehova, sex plaustra operta, et duodecim boves, plaustrum pro binis
principibus, et bovem in singulos obtulerunt coram tabernaculo.

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span>**4.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Dixerat autem Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>**5.** Take *it* of them, that they may be
to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; and thou shalt
give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span>**5.** Accipe ab els, et servient in
ministerio tabernaculi conventionis: et dabis ea Levitis, cuique
secundun, rationem sui ministerii.

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses took the waggons and the
oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span>**6.** Accepit itaque Moses plaustra et
boves, et dedit Levitis:

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>**7.** Two waggons and four oxen he gave
unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service:

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span>**7.** Duo plaustra, et quatuor boves dedit
filiis Gerson secundum rationem ministerii ipsorum.

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span>**8.** And four waggons and eight oxen he
gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the
hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span>**8.** Et quatuor plaustra et octo boves
tradidit filiis Merari secundum rationem ministerii ipsorum sub manu
Ithamar filii Aharon sacerdotis.

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span>**9.** But unto the sons of Kohath he gave
none; because the service of the sanctuary belonging un to them *was,*
*that* they should bear upon their shoulders.

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span>**9.** Filiis veto Cehath nihil dedit: quia
ministerium sanctuarii quod illis injunctum erat, humero ferebant.

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span>**10.** And the princes offered for
dedicating of the altar, in the day that it was anointed, even the
princes offered their offering before the altar.

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span>**10.** Obtulerunt autem principes pro
dedicatione altaris die quo unctum fuit: obtulerunt, inquam, principes
oblationem suam coram altari.

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span>**11.** And the Lord said unto Moses, They
shall offer their offering, each prince on his day, for the dedicating
of the altar.

<span id="vii.iv-p24"></span>**11.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Singuli
principes singulis diebus of ferent oblationem suam ad dedicationem
altaris.

<span id="vii.iv-p25"></span>**12.** And he that offered his offering
the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah.

<span id="vii.iv-p26"></span>**12.** Obtulit itaque primo die oblationem
suam Nahason filius Amminadab de tribu Jehudah.

<span id="vii.iv-p27"></span>**13.** And his offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* *an* hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them *were* full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p28"></span>**13.** Fuit autem oblatio ejus patina
argentea, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus: phiala una argentia,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae plenae
similaconspersa oleo in minha:

<span id="vii.iv-p29"></span>**14.** One spoon of ten *shekels* of gold,
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p30"></span>**14.** Cochlear unum aureum decent
siclorum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p31"></span>**15.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p32"></span>**15.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p33"></span>**16.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p34"></span>**16.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p35"></span>**17.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="vii.iv-p36"></span>**17.** Pro sacrificio autem prosperitatum,
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi qumque. Haec
fuit oblatio Nahason filii Amminadab.

<span id="vii.iv-p37"></span>**18.** On the second day Nethaneel the son
of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer.

<span id="vii.iv-p38"></span>**18.** Die autem secundo obtulit Nethanel
filius Suar princeps Issachar.

<span id="vii.iv-p39"></span>**19.** He offered for his offering one
silver charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty
*shekels,* one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingld with oil, for a
meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p40"></span>**19.** Obtulit oblationem suam, patinam
argenteam unam, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus: phialam unam
argenteam, septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii, arebas
ipsas plenas simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p41"></span>**20.** One spoon of gold of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p42"></span>**20.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p43"></span>**21.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p44"></span>**21.** Juvencum unum, fillum armenti,
arietem unum, agnum anniculum in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p45"></span>**22.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p46"></span>**22.** Et hircum caprarum unum pro
peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p47"></span>**23.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

<span id="vii.iv-p48"></span>**23.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duos, arietes quinque, hircos quinque, agnos anniculos qninque.
Haec est oblatio Nethanel filii Suar.

<span id="vii.iv-p49"></span>**24.** On the third day Eliab the son of
Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, *did* *offer.*

<span id="vii.iv-p50"></span>**24.** Die tertio princeps filiorum
Zebulon, Eliab filius Helon.

<span id="vii.iv-p51"></span>**25.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p52"></span>**25.** Oblatio autem ejus fuit patina
argentea una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus: phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p53"></span>**26.** One golden spoon of ten
*shekels,*full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p54"></span>**26.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
auremn, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p55"></span>**27.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p56"></span>**27.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p57"></span>**28.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p58"></span>**28.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p59"></span>**29.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first *year.* This *was* the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="vii.iv-p60"></span>**29.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum
boves duo, arides quinque, hirci quinque, agni quinque anniculi. Haec
fuit oblatio Eliab filii Helon.

<span id="vii.iv-p61"></span>**30.** On the fourth day Elizur the son of
Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, *did* *offer.*

<span id="vii.iv-p62"></span>**30.** Die quarto princeps filiorum Ruben,
Elisur filius Sedeur.

<span id="vii.iv-p63"></span>**31.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, of the weight of an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p64"></span>**31.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pontius ejus: phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii, ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p65"></span>**32.** One golden spoon often *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p66"></span>**32.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p67"></span>**33.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p68"></span>**33.** Juvencus unus, illius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p69"></span>**34.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p70"></span>**34.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p71"></span>**35.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="vii.iv-p72"></span>**35.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Elisur filii Sedeur.

<span id="vii.iv-p73"></span>**36.** On the fifth day Shelumiel the son
of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon, *did* *offer.*

<span id="vii.iv-p74"></span>**36.** Die quinto princeps filiorum
Simeon, Selumiel, filius Surisaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p75"></span>**37.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver

<span id="vii.iv-p76"></span>**37.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentia
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus: phiala una argentea,

<span id="vii.iv-p77"></span>**38.** One golden spoon of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p78"></span>**38.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p79"></span>**39.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p80"></span>**39.** Juvencus unus filius armenti, aries
unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p81"></span>**40.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p82"></span>**40.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p83"></span>**41.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p84"></span>**41.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Selumiel filii Surisaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p85"></span>**42.** On the sixth day Eliasaph the son
of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p86"></span>**42.** Die sexto princeps filiorum Gad,
Eliasaph filius Deuel.

<span id="vii.iv-p87"></span>**43.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, of the weight of an hundred and thirty *shekels,* a silver bowl
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p88"></span>**43.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus, phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii, ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p89"></span>**44.** One golden spoon of ten *slhekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p90"></span>**44.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p91"></span>**45.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p92"></span>**45.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries nuns anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p93"></span>**46.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p94"></span>**46.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p95"></span>**47.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="vii.iv-p96"></span>**47.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duo, ariet es quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Eliasaph filii Deuel.

<span id="vii.iv-p97"></span>**48.** On the seventh day Elishama the son
of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p98"></span>**48.** Die septimo, princeps filiorum
Ephraim, Elisarea filius Ammihud.

<span id="vii.iv-p99"></span>**49.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p100"></span>**49.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus: phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p101"></span>**50.** One golden spoonoften *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p102"></span>**50.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p103"></span>**51.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p104"></span>**51.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p105"></span>**52.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p106"></span>**52.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato.

<span id="vii.iv-p107"></span>**53.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Elisharod the son of Ammihud.

<span id="vii.iv-p108"></span>**53.** Et pro sacrificio
prosperitatum,boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque,agni anniculi
quinque. Haec fuit oblatio Elisama filii Ammihud.

<span id="vii.iv-p109"></span>**54.** On the eighth day *offered*
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh.

<span id="vii.iv-p110"></span>**54.** Die octavo princeps filiorum
Manasse, Gamliel filius Padahsur.

<span id="vii.iv-p111"></span>**55.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, of the weight of an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p112"></span>**55.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pontius ejus, phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p113"></span>**56.** One golden spoon often *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p114"></span>**56.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
aureum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p115"></span>**57.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p116"></span>**57.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p117"></span>**58.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p118"></span>**58.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p119"></span>**59.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="vii.iv-p120"></span>**59.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Gamliel filii Pedahsur.

<span id="vii.iv-p121"></span>**60.** On the ninth day Abidan the son of
Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p122"></span>**60.** Die nono princeps filiorum
Benjamin, Abidan filius Gidoni.

<span id="vii.iv-p123"></span>**61.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p124"></span>**61.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus: phiala una argentea, septuaginta
siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: amble ipsae plenae simila
conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p125"></span>**62.** One golden spoon of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p126"></span>**62.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p127"></span>**63.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p128"></span>**63.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p129"></span>**64.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p130"></span>**64.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p131"></span>**65.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="vii.iv-p132"></span>**65.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculiquinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Abidan filii Gidoni.

<span id="vii.iv-p133"></span>**66.** On the tenth day Ahiezer the son
of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p134"></span>**66.** Die decimo princeps filiorum Dan,
Ahiezer filius Ammisaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p135"></span>**67.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p136"></span>**67.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pontius ejus: phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p137"></span>**68.** One golden spoon of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p138"></span>**68.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
argenteum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p139"></span>**69.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p140"></span>**69.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p141"></span>**70.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p142"></span>**70.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p143"></span>**71.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p144"></span>**71.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Ahiezer filii Ammisaddai.

<span id="vii.iv-p145"></span>**72.** On the eleventh day Pagiel the son
of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p146"></span>**72.** Die undecimo princeps filiorum
Aser, Pagiel filius Ochran.

<span id="vii.iv-p147"></span>**73.** His offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p148"></span>**73.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus, phiala una argentea,
septnaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii, ambae ipsae plenae
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p149"></span>**74.** One golden spoon of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p150"></span>**74.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
auremn, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p151"></span>**75.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p152"></span>**75.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p153"></span>**76.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p154"></span>**76.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p155"></span>**77.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rains, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocram

<span id="vii.iv-p156"></span>**77.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque. Haec
fuit oblatio Pagiel filii Ochran.

<span id="vii.iv-p157"></span>**78.** On the twelfth day Ahira the son
of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, *offered.*

<span id="vii.iv-p158"></span>**78.** Die duodecimo, princeps filiorum
Nephthali, Ahira filius Enan:

<span id="vii.iv-p159"></span>**79.** His offering *was* one silver
charger, the weight whereof *was* an hundred and thirty *shekels,* one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both
of them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a meat-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p160"></span>**79.** Oblatio ejus fuit patina argentea
una, centum triginta siclorum pondus ejus, phiala una argentea,
septuaginta siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii: ambae ipsae plenaee
simila conspersa oleo in minham:

<span id="vii.iv-p161"></span>**80.** One golden spoon of ten *shekels,*
full of incense:

<span id="vii.iv-p162"></span>**80.** Cochlear unum decem siclorum,
argenteum, plenum suffitu:

<span id="vii.iv-p163"></span>**81.** One young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p164"></span>**81.** Juvencus unus, filius armenti,
aries unus, agnus unus anniculus in holocaustum:

<span id="vii.iv-p165"></span>**82.** One kid of the goats for a
sin-offering:

<span id="vii.iv-p166"></span>**82.** Hircus caprarum unus pro peccato:

<span id="vii.iv-p167"></span>**83.** And for a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the
first year. This *was* the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="vii.iv-p168"></span>**83.** Et pro sacrificio prosperitatum,
boves duo, arietes quinque, hirci quinque, agni anniculi quinque, Haec
fuit oblatio Allira filii Enan.

<span id="vii.iv-p169"></span>**84.** This *was* the dedication of the
altar (in the day when it was anointed) by the princes of Israel: twelve
chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:

<span id="vii.iv-p170"></span>**84.** Haec fuit dedicatio altaris, die
quo unctum fuit a principibus Israel: patrum argentine duodecim, phiale
argenteae duodecim, cochlearia aurea duodecim.

<span id="vii.iv-p171"></span>**85.** Each charger of silver *weighing*
an hundred and thirty *shekels,* each bowl seventy: all the silver
vessels *weighed* *two* thousand and four hundred *shekels,* after the
shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="vii.iv-p172"></span>**85.** Centum triginta siclorum erat
patina una argentea, et septuaginta phiala una: omne argentum vasorum,
duo millia, et quadringenti sicli, secundum siclure sanctuarii.

<span id="vii.iv-p173"></span>**86.** The golden spoons *were* twelve,
full of incense, *weighing* ten *shekels* apiece, after the shekel of
the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons *was* an hundred and twenty
*shekels.*

<span id="vii.iv-p174"></span>**86.** Cochlearia aurea duodecim plena
suffitu: decem siclorum erant cochlearia secundum pondus sanctuarii:
omne aurum cochlearium, centurm viginti siclorum.

<span id="vii.iv-p175"></span>**87.** All the oxen for the
burnt-offering *were* twelve bullocks, the rains twelve, the lambs of
the first year twelve, with their meat-offering; and the kids of the
goats for sin-offering twelve.

<span id="vii.iv-p176"></span>**87.** Omnes boves in holocaustum,
duodecim juvenci, arietes duodecim, agni anniculi duodecim, cum minha;
ipsorum: et hirci caprarum duodecim pro peccato.

<span id="vii.iv-p177"></span>**88.** And all the oxen, for the
sacrifice of the peace-offerings, *were* twenty and four bullocks, the
rams sixty, the he-goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This
*was* the dedication of the altar, after that it was anointed.

<span id="vii.iv-p178"></span>**88.** Orenos autem boves sacrificii
prosperitatum viginti quatuor, juvenci arietes sexaginta, hirci
sexaginta, agni anniculi sexaginta. Haec fuit dedicatio altaris postquam
unctum fuit.

<span id="vii.iv-p179"></span>**89.** And when Moses was gone into the
tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him, then he heard the
voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy-seat that *was* upon
the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims: and he spake unto
him.

<span id="vii.iv-p180"></span>**89.** Quum autem ingrediebatur Moses
tabernaculum conventionis, ut loqueretur cum eo, audiebat vocem
loquentis ad se e propitiatorio, quod erat super arcam testimonii inter
duos Cherubim, et loquebatur ei.

<span id="vii.iv-p181"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p182"></span><span id="vii.iv-p182.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p183"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass on the day
that Moses* This was the second contribution of the people, after the
completion of the Tabernacle; for although mention is only made of the
princes, it is probable that each of them presented what the whole tribe
had subscribed, since there was no private person at that time wealthy
enough to give so much gold and silver of his own. Let it be understood,
then, that they brought in the name, and at the desire of all, what they
had received from the members of their respective tribes. Before,
however, I proceed any further, it must be remarked that the sacrifices
were not killed, before the sanctuary was anointed. Moses himself is
said to have anointed it, as he had his brother Aaron; for the
exposition of some, that what properly applies to Aaron is attributed to
his brother, does not appear to be sound. We have said elsewhere that
God thus freely used the visible signs, in order that He might by no
means bind the grace of the Spirit to particular persons. When Moses,
therefore, who was not anointed himself, anointed both the sanctuary and
the priest, it was manifestly shewn that the efficacy of consecration
did not emanate from himself, inasmuch as He could not give of his own
that which he did not possess. Consequently the entire virtue and
utility of signs depend on the command of God. We have elsewhere seen
why it was necessary to consecrate the tabernacle, the altar, and all
the vessels by a sacred anointing. Here let us only observe, that the
connection of the two words *anointing* and *sanctifying* is not
superfluous: that we may understand that the symbol of the oil was not
vain and inefficacious, but that true spiritual sanctity was annexed to
it; for God institutes nothing in vain, but, by filling what He typifies
with the secret influence of the Spirit, He effectually proves Himself
to be true. It is said that the princes were set “over them that were
numbered,” *i.e.,* after the people were numbered, and separated into
their several divisions, these were chosen as the chiefs of the tribes.
The exposition which some give, that they assisted when the people were
numbered, in my opinion, is far-fetched.

<span id="vii.iv-p184"></span><span id="vii.iv-p184.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p185"></span>**3.** *And they brought their offering
before the Lord, six covered waggons* These waggons were dedicated for
the conveyance of the tabernacle: for its pillars and many other parts
of it could not be carried on men’s shoulders; and therefore they are
said to have been *covered,* lest the things which were deposited in
them should be exposed to the rain. For it is by no means suitable to
suppose that they were litters;  <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399.md)
and, in fact, a pair of oxen is assigned to every waggon. It is pretty
clear, then, that the materials of the tabernacle were placed in them
when they were travelling from one place to another.

<span id="vii.iv-p187"></span>This oblation is stated to have been made
“before the Lord,” and then “before the tabernacle,” but the meaning is
precisely the same; for God had, as it were, put on that face in which
he might be beheld by believers. What follows, “But the Lord had spoken
to Moses,” etc., I thus interpret, That God had required this tribute of
the people: I have thought it well, therefore, to render it in the
pluperfect tense, whereas others translate it, “The Lord said unto
Moses,” as if Moses had not been ordered to receive it, before it was
actually presented by the princes and the people. Indeed, it is probable
that the number of the waggons was not accidentally determined, but by a
just calculation of the things which they were to carry.

<span id="vii.iv-p188"></span><span id="vii.iv-p188.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p189"></span>**10.** *And the princes offered for
dedicating of the altar* Here is another kind of offering, viz., a
silver dish and bowl from every tribe, besides a golden spoon,  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400.md) which properly means a censer. Their
use was as follows, — that the sacred cakes should be received in the
dishes, the wine of libation in the bowls, and the frankincense in the
censers. But God would have each tribe contribute their respective
vessels, in order that the common interest of the whole people in the
sacrifices might be the better testified. Although the word *shekel*
 <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md) is derived front its being
*weighed,* still it is almost everywhere used for a coined piece of
money, which, as we have seen at <span
id="vii.iv-p191.13"></span>[Exodus
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#000.md)<span id="vii.iv-p191.13"></span>,
was of the value of twenty *oboli.* Josephus estimates it at an Attic
tetradrachm. But Ezekiel, when he is inveighing against their fraud in
having diminished its weight, settles its value at twenty oboli, and
adds that it is the third part of a pound or *mina.* (<span
id="vii.iv-p191.14"></span>[Eze
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.iv-p191.14"></span>.) But it must be borne in remembrance, as we
have also seen elsewhere, that the shekel of the sanctuary was double
the ordinary one, for it was worth four drachmas, whereas the common
shekel was only worth two drachmas, or a staler. Now, if we calculate,
we shall find that the value of each dish amounted to nearly a hundred
French livres; and that of each bowl to forty-four. If we take the
shekel in the same sense with reference to the censers, or spoons, they
must have been very small, only being about seven livres in value:
whereas a gold vessel of this size would scarcely hold three grains of
frankincense. Wherefore, I doubt whether they had not also gold shekels;
but I leave it undecided as a point on which we have no knowledge.

<span id="vii.iv-p192"></span>Lastly, follow the animals offered as
victims, a young bullock, a ram, and a lamb for a burnt-offering; a kid
for a sin-offering; two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, and five lambs
for a sacrifice of thanksgiving. It would, however, have been difficult
for each prince to present so many out of his own folds or stalls;
whence it is probable that they were aided by a general contribution.
God chose that each tribe should have its peculiar day appointed for it
in order, not only that there might be no confusion or disturbance, but;
also that by this lengthened exercise the hearts even of the careless
might be stirred up to zealous devotion.

<span id="vii.iv-p193"></span><span id="vii.iv-p193.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p194"></span>**12.** *And he that offered his offering
the first day* The oracular declaration which God made by the mouth of
Jacob is well known. “The scepter shall not depart from Judah,” etc.
(<span id="vii.iv-p194.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.iv-p194.1"></span>.) Non, although the time had not yet arrived
when the truth of this prophecy should be manifested by its fulfillment,
still it was brought to pass by the admirable counsel of God that
certain marks of supremacy should exist in the tribe of Judah; and, by
general consent, if not dominion, at least the chief dignity, was always
lodged in it. The assignment of the first day to Nahshon was,
therefore,a presage of that future kingdom which was at length set up in
the person of David. If any should allege the absurdity that the tribe
of Reuben, who was the first-born, should be kept back till the fourth
day, I reply that the tribes of Zebulun and Issachar were ranked under
the banner of Judah; since it will appear in chapter 10.  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md) that the twelve tribes were divided
into four divisions of three. Thus it was more honorable for the tribe
of Reuben to have the fourth day, so as to have the two tribes over
which it presided attached to it. But the fathers of the two tribes,
which God placed under the banner of Judah, were the two youngest sons
of Leah, who followed next after Judah, her fourth son. We see,
therefore, that the kingdom was thus obscurely shadowed forth, from
which salvation was to be hoped for by the whole people: in order that
they might be the more attentive to the promise given them; although
this indication of it had but little effect on their sluggish minds.

<span id="vii.iv-p196"></span><span id="vii.iv-p196.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p197"></span>**89.** *And when Moses was gone into the
tabernacle* There seems at first sight to be a kind of contradiction
between this passage and the other, in which we saw that a thick cloud
stood in the door of the tabernacle, so that Moses could not enter it.
It might, indeed, be answered that this only occurred once; but to me it
appears more probable that, Moses sought the replies of God at the
mercy-seat, until Aaron began to exercise the priesthood, and then
abandoned his dignity, which was only temporary, as far as regarded the
entering of the sanctuary. For we know that by the established Law of
God the priesthood was distinct from the civil government; and therefore
that he could not, except by special privilege, be at the same time the
leader and the priest.  <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) If this
exposition be accepted, he does not here record in its proper place that
answers were given to him by God from the mercy-seat; since it is by no
means unusual that what has preceded in order of time should be annexed
at the end of a narrative. His intention, indeed, was to declare to
posterity that God had not promised in vain that the Israelites should
experience the presence of His favor; because He had chosen His
dwelling-place in the sanctuary, to sit between the cherubim. By this
testimony, therefore, of God’s grace, the external anointing was
ratified and confirmed, inasmuch as God appeared to Moses upon the Ark
of the Covenant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc05063.htm#fr_399.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p185.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p186"></span><span id="vii.iv-p186.1"></span> So
Vatablus, quoted in Poole. “In <span id="vii.iv-p186.2"></span>[Le
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029.md)<span
id="vii.iv-p186.2"></span><span id="vii.iv-p186.3"></span>, (says
Ainsworth,) <span id="vii.iv-p186.4"></span>צב *(tsab)*<span
id="vii.iv-p186.5"></span> is a *tortoise,*<span
id="vii.iv-p186.6"></span> so called from the shell that covereth it:
accordingly here they may be called <span id="vii.iv-p186.7"></span>עגלת
צב<span id="vii.iv-p186.8"></span>, *(gnegeloth* *tsab,)* *waggons* *of*
*the* *tortoise,*<span id="vii.iv-p186.9"></span> (or of
*covering,)*<span id="vii.iv-p186.10"></span> because they were like to
a tortoise, covered above.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc05063.htm#fr_400.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p189.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p190"></span> *V.,* *mortariolum.* *LXX.,:* <span
id="vii.iv-p190.1"></span>θυί̑σκη<span id="vii.iv-p190.2"></span>
Ainsworth, *cup.* *Heb.,* <span id="vii.iv-p190.3"></span>כן<span
id="vii.iv-p190.4"></span> from whence probably our English word *cup.*

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc05063.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p190.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p191"></span> <span id="vii.iv-p191.1"></span>שקל
*shekel,*<span id="vii.iv-p191.2"></span> from <span
id="vii.iv-p191.3"></span>שקל<span id="vii.iv-p191.4"></span>,
*shakal,*<span id="vii.iv-p191.5"></span> to weigh. *C.*<span
id="vii.iv-p191.6"></span> follows *LXX.*<span
id="vii.iv-p191.7"></span> in renderining <span
id="vii.iv-p191.8"></span>גרה *gerah,*<span id="vii.iv-p191.9"></span> —
*the*<span id="vii.iv-p191.10"></span> twentieth part of a shekel, — by
the word *obolus,* <span id="vii.iv-p191.11"></span>ὀβολός<span
id="vii.iv-p191.12"></span> The general opinion of modern commentators
is, that the shekel, throughout the Old Testament, expressed not a coin,
but a weight of about half an ounce Troy, which would bring its value in
silver, at a rough calculation, to 2s. 6d., and in gold to 2 Pounds
sterling: though indeed it appears impossible to ascertain either the
intrinsic or relative value of the precious metals at so early a period
with anything like accuracy. The Rabbins (see Ainsworth) consider the
estimate of the golden vessels to have been made by the shekel of
silver.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc05063.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p194.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p195"></span> “Que la compagnie a suyvi son chef: car
les douze lignees,” etc.; that the company followed its chief; for the
twelve tribes, *etc.*— *Fr.*

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc05063.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="vii.iv-p197.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p198"></span> This sentence is omitted in *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 8:4-36](cc05064.md)
