[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05024)  [Next](cc05026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.i"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p3"></span>**16.** Thou shalt not bear false witness
against thy neighbor.

<span id="ii.v.i-p4"></span>**16.** Non dices adversus proximum tuum
falsum testimonium (*vel*, non loqueris contra proximum tuum ut testis
mendacii.)

<span id="ii.v.i-p5"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p5.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p6"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p6.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#020)<span id="ii.v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p7"></span>**20.** Neither shalt thou bear false
witness against thy neighbor.

<span id="ii.v.i-p8"></span>**20.** Non dices in proximum tuum falsum
testimonium.

<span id="ii.v.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.v.i-p10"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p11"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p11.1"></span>G<span
id="ii.v.i-p11.2"></span>od<span id="ii.v.i-p11.3"></span> here makes a
provision for every man’s character and good name, lest any should be
undeservedly weighed down by calumnies and false accusations. The same
*synecdoche*<span id="ii.v.i-p11.4"></span> exists here, which I have
pointed out in the previous Commandments, for God comprises many things
under a single head. With reference to the words, inasmuch as <span
id="ii.v.i-p11.5"></span>עד<span id="ii.v.i-p11.6"></span>, *gned*<span
id="ii.v.i-p11.7"></span>, properly means a witness, it may be literally
translated, “Thou shalt not answer a false witness against thy
neighbor,” but then the particle *as*<span id="ii.v.i-p11.8"></span>
must be supplied. The Hebrews poorly translate it in the vocative case,
Thou shalt not speak, O false witness, etc.

<span id="ii.v.i-p12"></span>  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)
Although God seems only to prescribe that no one, for the purpose of
injuring the innocent, should go into court, and publicly testify
against him, yet it is plain that the faithful are prohibited from all
false accusations, and not only such as are circulated in the streets,
but those which are stirred in private houses and secret corners. For it
would be absurd, when God has already shewn that men’s fortunes are
cared for by Him, that He should neglect their reputation, which is much
more precious. In whatever way, therefore, we injure our neighbors by
unjustly defaming them, we are accounted false witnesses before God. We
must now pass on from the prohibitive to the affirmative precept: for it
will not be enough for us to restrain our tongues from speaking evil,
unless we are also kind and equitable towards our neighbors, and candid
interpreters of their acts and words, and do not suffer them, as far as
in us lies, to be burdened with false reproaches. Besides, God does not
only forbid us to invent accusations against the innocent, but also to
give currency to reproaches and sinister reports in malevolence or
hatred. Such a person may perhaps deserve his ill-name, and we may truly
lay such or such an accusation to his charge; but if the reproach be the
ebullition of our anger, or the accusation proceed from ill-will, it
will be vain for us to allege in excuse that we have advanced nothing
but, what is true. For when Solomon says that “love covereth many sins;”
whereas “hatred brings reproaches to light,”  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) (<span id="ii.v.i-p14.1"></span>[Pr
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.i-p14.1"></span>;)
he signifies, as a faithful expositor of this precept, that we are only
free from falsehood when the reputation of our neighbors suffers no
damage from us; for, if the indulgence of evil-speaking violates
charity, it is opposed to the Law of God. In short, we must conclude
that by these words a restraint is laid on all virulence of language
which tends to bring disgrace on our brethren; and on all petulance
also, whereby their good name suffers injury; and on all detractions,
which flow from malice, or envy, and rivalry, or any other improper
feeling. We must also go further, and not be suspicious or too curious
in observing the defects of others; for such eager inquisitiveness
betrays malevolence, or at any rate an evil disposition. For, if love is
not suspicious, he who condemns his neighbor either falsely, or upon
trifling surmises, or who holds him in light esteem, is undoubtedly a
transgressor of this Commandment. Consequently, we must close our ears
against false and evil speaking; since he is just as injurious to his
brother who eagerly listens to sinister reports respecting him, as he
who exercises his tongue in maligning him. The necessity of this
instruction let each man estimate by his own disposition; for scarcely
one in a hundred will be found who will be as kind in sparing the
character of others, as he himself desires to be pardoned for manifest
vices; nay, slander is often praised under the pretext of zeal and
conscientiousness. Hence it happens that this vice insinuates itself
even among the saints, creeping in under the name of virtue. Moreover,
the volubility of the tongue causes us to think it a light transgression
to inflict a deadly and disgraceful wound on our brother, to whom,
nevertheless, his good name is of more importance than his life. The sum
is, that we should manifest our charity no less by candor, and by
abstaining from slander, than by the performance of other duties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc05025.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.v.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p13"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Or revenons a la
substance.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc05025.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p14"></span> “Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love
covereth all sins.” — *A*.*V*. The latter clause, in *C*.’*s* quotation,
is probably rather intended to be the necessary converse of the latter
part of the proverb than a paraphrastic rendering of the first, which it
does not appear that the words will bear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exposition of the Commandment](cc05026)
