[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05072)  [Next](cc05074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#000)<span id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p2"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
10:11-28](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** And it came to pass on the
twentieth *day* of the second month, in the second year, that the cloud
was taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.

<span id="vii.xiv-p4"></span>**11.** Fuit autem anno secundo, mense
secundo, vicesima mensis, ascendit nubes a tabernaculo testimonii.

<span id="vii.xiv-p5"></span>**12.** And the children of Israel took
their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in
the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="vii.xiv-p6"></span>**12.** Tunc profecti sunt filii Israel per
profectiones suas e deserto Sinai, substititque nubes in deserto Paran.

<span id="vii.xiv-p7"></span>**13.** And they first took their journey,
according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

<span id="vii.xiv-p8"></span>**13.** Profecti itaque sunt primum ad os
Jehovae per manum Mosis.

<span id="vii.xiv-p9"></span>**14.** In the first *place* went the
standard of the camp of the children of Judah, according to their
armies: and over his host *was* Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="vii.xiv-p10"></span>**14.** Et profectum est vexilium
castrorum filiorum Jehuda primo loco per exercitus suos: et super
exercitum ejus erat Nahason filius Amminadab.

<span id="vii.xiv-p11"></span>**15.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Issachar *was* Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

<span id="vii.xiv-p12"></span>**15.** Super exercitum autem tribus
filiorum Issachar erat Nethanel filius Suar.

<span id="vii.xiv-p13"></span>**16.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Zebuluu *was* Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="vii.xiv-p14"></span>**16.** Et super exercitum tribus filiorum
Zabulon erat Eliab filius Helon.

<span id="vii.xiv-p15"></span>**17.** And the tabernacle was taken down;
and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the
tabernacle.

<span id="vii.xiv-p16"></span>**17.** Depositum autem fuerat
tabernaculum: et profecti sunt filii Gerson et filii Merari portantes
illum.

<span id="vii.xiv-p17"></span>**18.** And the standard of the camp of
Reuben set forward, according to their armies: and over his host *was*
Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="vii.xiv-p18"></span>**18.** Deinde profectum est vexillum
castrorum Ruben per exercitus suos: et super exercitum ejus erat Elisur
filius Sedeur.

<span id="vii.xiv-p19"></span>**19.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Simeon, *was* Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="vii.xiv-p20"></span>**19.** Super exercitum vero tribus
filiorum Simeon erat Selumiel filius Surisaddai.

<span id="vii.xiv-p21"></span>**20.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Gad *was* Eliasaph the son of Denel.

<span id="vii.xiv-p22"></span>**20.** Et super exercitum tribus filiorum
Gad erat Eliasaph filius Deuel.

<span id="vii.xiv-p23"></span>**21.** And the Kohathites set forward,
bearing the sanctuary; and *the* *other* did set up the tabernacle
against they came.

<span id="vii.xiv-p24"></span>**21.** Et progredi eccperunt Cehathitae
portantes sanctuarium: erexerunt autem tabernaculum donec venerint ipsi.

<span id="vii.xiv-p25"></span>**22.** And the standard of the camp of
the children of Ephraim set forward, according to their armies: and over
his host *was* Elishmna the son of Ammihud.

<span id="vii.xiv-p26"></span>**22.** Postea profectum est vexilium
castrorum filiorum Ephraim per exercitus suos: et super exercitum ejus
erat Elisama filius Ammihud.

<span id="vii.xiv-p27"></span>**23.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Manasseh *was* Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="vii.xiv-p28"></span>**23.** Super exercitum vero tribus
filiorum Manasse erat Gamliel filius Pedahsur.

<span id="vii.xiv-p29"></span>**24.** And over the host of the tribe the
children of Benjamin *was* Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="vii.xiv-p30"></span>**24.** Et super exercitum tribus filiorum
Benjamin erat Abidan filius Gidoni.

<span id="vii.xiv-p31"></span>**25.** And the standard of the camp of
the children of Dan set forward, *which* *was* the rere-ward of all the
camps throughout their hosts: and over his host *was* Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai.

<span id="vii.xiv-p32"></span>**25.** Profectum est insuper vexillum
castrorum filiorum Dan, recolligens onmia castra per exercitus suos: et,
super exercitum ejus erat Ahiezer filius Ammisaddai.

<span id="vii.xiv-p33"></span>**26.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Asher *was* Pagiel the son of Ocran.

<span id="vii.xiv-p34"></span>**26.** Super exercitum tribus filiorum
Aser erat Pagiel filius Ochran.

<span id="vii.xiv-p35"></span>**27.** And over the host of the tribe of
the children of Naphtali *was* Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="vii.xiv-p36"></span>**27.** Et super exercitum tribus filiorum
Nephthali erat Ahira filius Enan.

<span id="vii.xiv-p37"></span>**28.** Thus *were* the journeyings of the
children of Israel, according to their armies, when they set forward.

<span id="vii.xiv-p38"></span>**28.** Istm sunt profectiones filiorum
Israel per exercitus suos: ac ita profecti sunt.

<span id="vii.xiv-p39"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiv-p40"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p41"></span>**11.** *And it came to pass on the
twentieth day* Moses records that after leaving Mount Sinai, the camp
was first pitched in the wilderness of Paran; and although the distance
was not great, — being, as we shall soon see, a three days’ journey, —
still the fatigue was sufficient to harass and weary the people. It is
mentioned in praise of their obedience that they were expeditious in
setting forth “according to the commandment of God;” but presently,
through failure of the spirit of perseverance, their levity and
inconstancy betrayed itself.

<span id="vii.xiv-p42"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p42.1"></span>When it is
said that “they journeyed by their journeyings,” *(profectos* *esse*
*per* *suas* *profectiones,)*<span id="vii.xiv-p42.2"></span> it refers
to their whole progress through the desert. As to the word, I know not
why Jerome translated it *turmas,*<span id="vii.xiv-p42.3"></span>
(troops,) for its root; is the verb <span id="vii.xiv-p42.4"></span>נסע
*nasang,*<span id="vii.xiv-p42.5"></span> which is used with it; and
according to its constant use in Scripture, it plainly means stations,
 <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) <span
id="vii.xiv-p44.1"></span> or halting-places. We say in Frealch
*journees,*<span id="vii.xiv-p44.2"></span> or *gistes.*

<span id="vii.xiv-p45"></span><span id="vii.xiv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p46"></span>**14.** *In the first place went the
standard of the camp* The actual order of march is here described. The
whole people, with the exception of the Levites, is divided into four
hosts, or parts, since four of the tribes were set over the others, so
as to have two under the command of each. And this was the mode of
proceeding, that whenever they halted anywhere, the four standards
encompassed the sanctuary and the Ark of the Covenant from the four
quarters of the world; whilst on the march, the Levites carrying the
tabernacle, according to the burdens respectively imposed upon them,
were mixed with the several bands. The Ark, borne upon the shoulders of
the Levites, preceded the whole army, in order that all might more
confidently follow, God thus manifestly shewing them the way. Nahshon,
of the tribe of Judah, led the first host; Elizur, of the tribe of
Reuben, the second; Elishama, of the tribe of Ephraim, the third; and
Ahiezer, of the tribe of Dan, the fourth. It is obvious that in the
precedency given to the tribe of Judah, God in some degree afforded an
anticipation of the prophecy of Jacob; for the Reubenites, being
descended from the first-born, would not have willingly abandoned their
position, unless that right had been transferred to the tribe of Judah
by God’s decree, pronounced through the mouth of Jacob. Not that the
sovereignty and royal power was actually his before the time of David,
but because God would have a single spark to shine in the midst of the
thick darkness, whereby He might cherish the hope of the promised
salvation in every heart; and that thus the dignity of this tribe might
at length more readily reduce all to obedience. Herein, however, it
appeared how perverse and intractable was the spirit of that greater
portion of them who strove against the divine decree in their rejection
of David.

<span id="vii.xiv-p47"></span>Reuben occupied the second place, as an
alleviation of his disgrace. Again, by the subjection of the tribe of
Manasseh to the posterity of Ephraim, in this respect, too, the prophecy
of the same patriarch was fulfilled. Nor does there seem to be any other
reason why the fourth standard should have been given to the tribe of
Dan, except because Jacob had declared, “Dan shall judge his people.”
(<span id="vii.xiv-p47.1"></span>[Ge
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xiv-p47.1"></span>,) by which expression his pre-eminence was
denoted.

<span id="vii.xiv-p48"></span>Although it may be that the four
standard-bearing tribes were chosen from their strength and the numbers
of their people, still, unless the children of Reuben and Manasseh had
been thoroughly persuaded that their degradation was in accordance with
the command of God, their jealousy would never have suffered them calmly
to submit themselves to others, whose superiors they were by the
ordinary rules of nature. Their self-restraint, therefore, was
praiseworthy, in that voluntary subjection kept them within bounds,
without the application of any power of compulsion; and at the end,
Moses records that it was not once only that they thus advanced, but
that they observed the same order and regulations during the whole
course of their travel, and that their camp was always so arranged that
no contention arose to disturb them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc05073.htm#fr_426) <span
id="vii.xiv-p42.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p43"></span> “Stationibus, vel auspiciis;” the latter
being evidently a misprint for *hospitiis.* — *Lat.* *“Gistum,*
hospitium, susceptio; Gall, *giste;* jus, quod dominis feudalibus
competebat in vassallorum suorum praediis, qui staffs ae condietis
vicibus eos in domibus suis hospitio, et conviviis excipere tenebantur.
Quod quidem jus *Mansionaticum* sub prima et secunda Regum Francorum
stirpe, sub tertia vero *Gistum,* *Procuratio,* *Coenaticum,*
*Comestio,* *Pastus,* *Prandium* dictum suis locis observamus.” —
Adelung’s Du Cange.

<span id="vii.xiv-p44"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc05074)
