[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05042)  [Next](cc05044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000)<span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span><span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
28:15-68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>**15.** But it shall come to pass, if thou
wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do
all his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day,
that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span>**15.** Et erit, si non obedieris voci Jehovae
Dei tui, ut custodias faciendo omnia praecepta ejus, et statuta ejus
quae ego praecipio tibi hodie, venient super te onmes maledictiones
istae, et apprehendent te.

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span>**16.** Cursed *shalt* thou *be* in the city,
and cursed *shalt* thou *be* in the field.

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span>**16.** Maledictus eris in urbe, et maledictus
in agro.

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span>**17.** Cursed *shall* *be* thy basket and thy
store.

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>**17.** Maledictum canistrum tuum, et
conspersio tua.

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>**18.** Cursed *shall* *be* the fruit of thy
body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep.

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span>**18.** Maledictus fructus ventris tui, et
fructus terrae tuae, foetus boum tuorum, et greges ovium tuarum.

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span>**19.** Cursed *shalt* thou *be* when thou
comest in, and cursed *shalt* thou *be* when thou goest out.

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>**19.** Maledictus eris in ingressu, et
maledictus in egressu.

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span>**20.** The Lord shall send upon thee
cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto
for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly;
because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span>20 Mittet Jehova in te maledictionem,
contritionem, (*vel*, tumultum,) et perditionem, (*vel*, increpationem,)
in omnibus ad quae applicueris manum tuam, et feceris: donec delearis,
et pereas velociter, propter malitiam operum tuorum quibus dereliquisti
me.

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span>**21.** The Lord shall make the pestilence
cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land whither
thou goest to possess it.

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span>**21.** Adhaerere faciet Jehova tibi
pestilentiam, donec consumat te de terra ad quam tu ingrederis ut
possideas eam.

<span id="v.ix-p17"></span>**22.** The Lord shall smite thee with a
consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with all
extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew;
and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.

<span id="v.ix-p18"></span>**22.** Percutiet te Jehova phthisi, et
febri, et ardore, et aestu, et gladio, et ariditate, et rubigine: et
persequentur te donec pereas.

<span id="v.ix-p19"></span>**23.** And thy heaven that *is* over thy
head shall be brass, and the earth that *is* under thee *shall* *be*
iron.

<span id="v.ix-p20"></span>**23.** Eruntque coeli tui qui sunt supra
caput tuam, aerei: et terra, quae est subter te, ferrea.

<span id="v.ix-p21"></span>**24.** The Lord shall make the rain of thy
land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until
thou be destroyed.

<span id="v.ix-p22"></span>**24.** Dabit Jehova pluviam terrae tuae
pulverem et cinerem: et e coelis descendet super te, donec disperdaris.

<span id="v.ix-p23"></span>**25.** The Lord shall cause thee to be
smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them,
and flee seven ways before them; and shalt be removed into all the
kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="v.ix-p24"></span>**25.** Dabit te Jehova caesum coram inimicis
tuis: per viam unam ingredieris ad illum, et per septem vias fugies
coram eo: erisque in commotionem omnibus regnis terrae.

<span id="v.ix-p25"></span>**26.** And thy carcase shall be meat unto
all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall
fray *them* away.

<span id="v.ix-p26"></span>**26.** Erit praterea cadaver tuum esca omni
volucri coeli et animali terrae, nec erit qui absterreat.

<span id="v.ix-p27"></span>**27.** The Lord will smite thee with the
botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the
itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.

<span id="v.ix-p28"></span>**27.** Percutiet te Jehova ulcere Aegypti,
et morbis ani, et scabie, et prurigine, quibus non possis curari.

<span id="v.ix-p29"></span>**28.** The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:

<span id="v.ix-p30"></span>**28.** Percutiet te Jehova amentia et
caecitate, et stupore cordis.

<span id="v.ix-p31"></span>**29.** And thou shalt grope at noonday, as
the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways;
and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save *thee*

<span id="v.ix-p32"></span>**29.** Palpabisque in meridie, quemadmodum
palpat caecus in caligine, neque secundabis vias tuas: et eris
tantummodo oppressus, et direptus omnibus diebus, nec erit servator.

<span id="v.ix-p33"></span>**30.** Thou shalt betroth a wife, and
another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou
shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not
gather the grapes thereof.

<span id="v.ix-p34"></span>**30.** Uxorem desponsabis, et vir alius
dormiet cum ea: domum aedificabis, et non habitabis in ea: vineam
plautabis, nec vindemiabis eam.

<span id="v.ix-p35"></span>**31.** Thine ox *shall* *be* slain before
thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass *shall* *be*
violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to
thee: thy sheep *shall* *be* given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt
have none to rescue *them*

<span id="v.ix-p36"></span>**31.** Bos tuus mactabitur in oculis tuis:
et non comedes ex eo: asinus tuus rapietur a facie tua, nec revertetur
ad te: pecudes tuae tradentur inimicis tuis, nec erit servatot.

<span id="v.ix-p37"></span>**32.** Thy sons and thy daughters *shall*
*be* given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail
*with* *longing* for them all the day long; and *there* *shall* *be* no
might in thine hand.

<span id="v.ix-p38"></span>**32.** Filii tui et filiae tuae tradentur
populo alteri, et oculi tui videbunt, ac deficient propter illos, tota
die: nec erit fortitudo in manu tua.

<span id="v.ix-p39"></span>**33.** The fruit of thy land, and all thy
labors, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be
only oppressed and crushed alway:

<span id="v.ix-p40"></span>**33.** Fructum terrae tuae, et omnem laborem
tuum comedet populus quem non noveras: et eris tantummodo oppressus, et
confractus omni tempore:

<span id="v.ix-p41"></span>**34.** So that thou shalt be mad for the
sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="v.ix-p42"></span>**34.** Et obstupesces propter ea quae
videbunt oculi tui.

<span id="v.ix-p43"></span>**35.** The Lord shall smite thee in the
knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from
the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.

<span id="v.ix-p44"></span>**35.** Percutiet te Jehova ulcere pessimo in
genibus et in coxis, ita ut non possis curari, a planta pedis tui usque
ad verticem tuum.

<span id="v.ix-p45"></span>**36.** The Lord shall bring thee, and thy
king, which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou
nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood
and stone.

<span id="v.ix-p46"></span>**36.** Abducet Jehova te et regem tuum quem
constitues super te, ad gentem quam non nosti tu et patres tui: colesque
ibi deos alienos, lignum et lapidem.

<span id="v.ix-p47"></span>**37.** And thou shalt become an
astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the
Lord shall lead thee.

<span id="v.ix-p48"></span>**37.** Et eris in stuporem, et parabolam, et
fabulam, omnibus populis ad quos deducet te Jehova.

<span id="v.ix-p49"></span>**38.** Thou shalt carry much seed out into
the field, and shalt gather *but* little in: for the locust shall
consume it.

<span id="v.ix-p50"></span>**38.** Semen multum educes ad agrum, et
parum colliges: quia absumet illud locusta.

<span id="v.ix-p51"></span>**39.** Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress
*them*, but shalt neither drink *of* the wine, nor gather *the*
*grapes*: for the worms shall eat them.

<span id="v.ix-p52"></span>**39.** Vineas plantabis, et coles: et vinum
non bibes, neque colliges: quia devorabit illud vermis.

<span id="v.ix-p53"></span>**40.** Thou shalt have olive-trees
throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint *thyself* with the
oil: for thine olive shall cast *his* *fruit*

<span id="v.ix-p54"></span>**40.** Olivae erunt tibi in omni termino
tuo, at oleo non unges te, quia decidet oliva tua.

<span id="v.ix-p55"></span>**41.** Thou shalt beget sons and daughters,
but thou shalt not enjoy them: for they shall go into captivity.

<span id="v.ix-p56"></span>**41.** Filios et filias generabis, et non
erunt tibi: quia ibunt in captivitatem.

<span id="v.ix-p57"></span>**42.** All thy trees, and fruit of thy land,
shall the locust consume.

<span id="v.ix-p58"></span>**42.** Omnem arborem tuam, et fructum terrae
tuae absumet locusta.

<span id="v.ix-p59"></span>**43.** The stranger that *is* within thee
shall get up above thee very high, and thou shalt come down very low.

<span id="v.ix-p60"></span>**43.** Peregrinus qui est in medio tui
ascendet super to superne, superne: et tu descendes inferne, inferne.

<span id="v.ix-p61"></span>**44.** He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt
not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

<span id="v.ix-p62"></span>**44.** Ipse mutuabit tibi, et tu non
mutuabis ei: ipse erit in caput, et tu eris in caudam.

<span id="v.ix-p63"></span>**45.** Moreover, all these curses shall come
upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be
destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee.

<span id="v.ix-p64"></span>**45.** Venient autem super te omnes
maledictiones istae, teque persequentur, et apprehendent te, donec
disperdaris: eo quod non obedieris voci Jehovae Dei tui, custodiendo
praecepta ejus, et statuta ejus quae praecepit tibi.

<span id="v.ix-p65"></span>**46.** And they shall be upon thee for a
sign, and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

<span id="v.ix-p66"></span>**46.** Et erunt in te in signum et in
portentum, et in semine tuo usque in saeculum.

<span id="v.ix-p67"></span>**47.** Because thou servedst not the Lord
thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance
of all *things*;

<span id="v.ix-p68"></span>**47.** Propterea quod non colueris Jehovam
Deum tuum in laetitia, et in hilaritate cordis, propter abundantiam
omnium rerum.

<span id="v.ix-p69"></span>**48.** Therefore shalt thou serve thine
enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in
thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all *things*: and he shall put
a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="v.ix-p70"></span>**48.** Et servies inimicis tuis quos
immiserit Jehova contra te in fame, et siti, et nuditate, et penuria
omnium rerum, ponetque jugum ferreum super collum tuum, donec disperdat
te.

<span id="v.ix-p71"></span>**49.** The Lord shall bring a nation against
thee from far, from the end of the earth, *as* *swift* as the eagle
flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand;

<span id="v.ix-p72"></span>**49.** Adducet Jehova adversum to gentem e
longinquo, ab extremo terrae sicuti volat aquila, gentema cujus non
intelliges linguam:

<span id="v.ix-p73"></span>**50.** A nation of fierce countenance, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favor to the young:

<span id="v.ix-p74"></span>**50.** Gentem duram facie, quae non attollet
faciem suam ad senem, nec puero parcet.

<span id="v.ix-p75"></span>**51.** And he shall eat the fruit of thy
cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which *also*
shall not leave thee *either* corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy
kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="v.ix-p76"></span>**51.** Et devorabit fructum jumenti tui, et
fructum terrae tuae, donec disperdaris: non relinquet tibi frumentum,
mustum, et oleum, foetus boum tuorum, nec greges ovium tuarum, donec
perdat te.

<span id="v.ix-p77"></span>**52.** And he shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou
trustedst, throughout all thy land; and he shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, throughout all thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee.

<span id="v.ix-p78"></span>**52.** Et obsidebit te in omnibus urbibus
tuis, donec concidant muri tui excelsi et muniti, quibus tu confidis, in
tota terra tua: obsidebit inquam te in omnibus urbibus tuis, in tota
terra tua quam tibi dedit Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="v.ix-p79"></span>**53.** And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine
own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy
God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith
thine enemies shall distress thee:

<span id="v.ix-p80"></span>**53.** Et comedes fructum ventris tui,
carnem filiorum tuorum et filiarum tuarum, quos dederit tibi Jehova Deus
tuus, in obsidione, et coartatione qua coartabit te inimicus tuus.

<span id="v.ix-p81"></span>**54.** *So* *that* the man *that* *is*
tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his
brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his
children which he shall leave:

<span id="v.ix-p82"></span>**54.** Viri teneri et delicati apud te
valde, oculus invidebit fratri suo, et uxori sinus sui, et reliquis
filiis suis, quos residuos fecerit,

<span id="v.ix-p83"></span>**55.** So that he will not give to any of
them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat; because he hath
nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine
enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates.

<span id="v.ix-p84"></span>**55.** Ne det illis de carne filiorum suorum
quos comedet: eo quod nihil ei relictum fuerit in obsidione, et
coartatione qua coartabit te inimicus tuus in omnibus urbibus tuis.

<span id="v.ix-p85"></span>**56.** The tender and delicate woman among
you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the
ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the
husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,

<span id="v.ix-p86"></span>**56.** Tenerae apud te et delicatae, quae
non tentavit plantam pedis sui firmare super terram, prae deliciis et
teneritudine, invidebit oculus viro sinus sui, filio et filiae suae.

<span id="v.ix-p87"></span>**57.** And toward her young one that cometh
out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear:
for she shall eat them for want of all *things* secretly in the siege
and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

<span id="v.ix-p88"></span>**57.** Dum secundinas suas quae egressae
fuerint e pedibus suis, et filios suos quos pepererit, comedet clam prae
egestate omnium rerum in obsidione, et coartatione qua coartabit te
inimicus tuus in urbibus tuis.

<span id="v.ix-p89"></span>**58.** If thou wilt not observe to do all
the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest
fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God;

<span id="v.ix-p90"></span>**58.** Nisi custodieris ut facias omnia
verba Legis hujus quae scripta sunt in hoc libro, ad timendum nomen
gloriosum istud et terribile, Jehovam Deum tuum:

<span id="v.ix-p91"></span>**59.** Then the Lord will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, *even* great plagues, and of
long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

<span id="v.ix-p92"></span>**59.** Admirabiles reddet Jehova plagas
tuas, et plagas seminis tui, plagas magnas et certas, (*vel*,
constantes,) et morbos malos et certos, (*vel*, constantes.)

<span id="v.ix-p93"></span>**60.** Moreover, he will bring upon thee all
the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave
unto thee:

<span id="v.ix-p94"></span>**60.** Convertesque in teomnes morbos
Aegypti, a quibus timuisti tibi, et adhaerebunt tibi.

<span id="v.ix-p95"></span>**61.** Also every sickness, and every
plague, which *is* not written in the book of this law, them will the
Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

<span id="v.ix-p96"></span>**61.** Omnem morbum, et omnem plagam quae
non est scripta in libro Legis hujus, inducet Jehova super te, donec tu
perdaris.

<span id="v.ix-p97"></span>**62.** And ye shall be left few in number,
whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou
wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God.

<span id="v.ix-p98"></span>**62.** Et relinquemini pauci numero pro eo
quod eratis sicut stellae coeli in multitudinem: quia non obedisti voci
Jehovae Dei tui.

<span id="v.ix-p99"></span>**63.** And it shall come to pass, *that*, as
the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the
Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought:
and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess
it.

<span id="v.ix-p100"></span>**63.** Et erit praeterea, quemadmodum
laetatus est Jehova super vos benefaciendo vobis, et multiplicando vos:
sic laetabitur Jehova super vos, perdendo et delendo vos: evelleminique
e terra ad quam ingredimini ut possideatis eam.

<span id="v.ix-p101"></span>**64.** And the Lord shall scatter thee
among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and
there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers
have known, *even* wood and stone.

<span id="v.ix-p102"></span>**64.** Et disperget to Jehova in omnes
populos, ab uno extremo terrae usque ad alterum extremum terrae,
colesque ibi deos alienos quos non nosti tu, neque patres tui, lignum et
lapidem.

<span id="v.ix-p103"></span>**65.** And among these nations shalt thou
find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord
shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow
of mind:

<span id="v.ix-p104"></span>**65.** Neque in gentibus ipsis requiesces,
neque erit requies plantae pedis tui: dabit item illic Jehova tibi cor
pavidum, et defectum oculorum, et moerorem animi.

<span id="v.ix-p105"></span>**66.** And thy life shall hang in doubt
before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none
assurance of thy life:

<span id="v.ix-p106"></span>**66.** Et erit vita tua suspensa tibi e
regione, ac pavebis nocte et die, neque credes vitae tuae.

<span id="v.ix-p107"></span>**67.** In the morning thou shalt say, Would
God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning!
for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight
of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="v.ix-p108"></span>**67.** Mane dices, Quis dabit vesperam? et
in vespera dices, Quis dabit mane? prae pavore cordis tui quo pavebis,
et prae visione oculorum tuorum quam videbis.

<span id="v.ix-p109"></span>**68.** And the Lord shall bring thee into
Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt
see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for
bond-men and bond-women, and no man shall buy *you*

<span id="v.ix-p110"></span>**68.** Reducetque te Jehova in Aegyptum
navibus per viam de qua dixi tibi, Non addes adhuc ut videas illam: et
vendetis vos illic inimicis vestris in servos et in ancillas: et non
erit qui emat.

<span id="v.ix-p111"></span> 

<span id="v.ix-p112"></span><span id="v.ix-p112.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p113"></span>**15.** *But it shall come to pass, if thou
wilt not hearken*. This list of curses is longer than the previous one
which was proclaimed from Mount Sinai, undoubtedly because the Spirit of
God foresaw that the sluggishness of the people had need of sharper
stimulants. If they had been only moderately teachable, what they had
already heard would have been even more than sufficient to alarm them;
but now God redoubles His threatenings against them in their inertness
and forgetfulness, that they might not only be compelled to fear, but
also aroused by constant reminding. For this reason, He declares that
they should be “cursed in the city and in the field,” *i* *e*., at home
and abroad, in the house or out of the house; and again, that their food
should be cursed in the seed and in the meal. Afterwards, He enumerates
three kinds of fruit in which they should be cursed, viz., their own
offspring, the produce of the soil, and the young of their animals; for
all these Scripture embraces in the word *fruit*, as sufficiently
appears from this passage.

<span id="v.ix-p114"></span><span id="v.ix-p114.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p115"></span>**19.** *Cursed shalt thou be when thou
comest in*<span id="v.ix-p115.1"></span>. God here pronounces that all
their undertakings should meet with ill success; for going out and
coming in signifies their various actions, and the whole course of their
life; and this is more clearly expressed in the next verse, where He
denounces against them misfortune in all their affairs, in that God
would confound and mar whatever they should undertake. The words  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) <span
id="v.ix-p117.6"></span>מהומה<span id="v.ix-p117.7"></span>,
*mehumah*<span id="v.ix-p117.8"></span>, and <span
id="v.ix-p117.9"></span>מגערת<span id="v.ix-p117.10"></span>,
*migegnereth*<span id="v.ix-p117.11"></span>, are indeed variously
explained. Still the sum comes to this, that God would be against them,
so as to discomfit and overthrow all their counsels and labors. Hence we
are taught that all men’s endeavors are useless and vain, unless they
seek for success from God.

<span id="v.ix-p118"></span><span id="v.ix-p118.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p119"></span>**21.** *The Lord shall make the pestilence
cleave unto thee*. He now proceeds to diseases which are as it were the
lictors of God; and finally, His executioners, if men pertinaciously
continue in their ungodliness. He does not, therefore, merely declare
that He will send the pestilence, but that He will cause it to cleave to
them, and when it shall have once laid hold of them, that it shall be
impossible to remove it. It might also be translated, The Lord shall
cause that the pestilence should seize thee; but with the same meaning,
viz., that the pestilence should be fixed, or glued (*agglutinatam*)
upon them, until it should consume them in the Holy Land itself. He adds
*phthisis*, or consumption, which disease emaciates the body, and
gradually exhausts its juices. It is superfluous to speak particularly
of the other diseases, only let us learn that, whilst the multitude of
diseases is almost innumerable, they are all so many ministers
(*satellites*) prepared to execute God’s vengeance. It is true, indeed,
that diseases are contracted in various ways, and especially by
intemperance; still, this does not prevent God from smiting the
transgressors of the Law with them, although no natural cause may be
apparent. He adds war, which He designates by the name of “the sword,”
but of this curse He will soon speak more fully.

<span id="v.ix-p120"></span>He then unfolds in more distinct detail what
He had before adverted to with respect to the curse on the produce of
the land. And, first, He names two blights of the corn, which destroy it
just as it is ripening, and snatch the bread, as it were, out of men’s
mouths; for *dryness*  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) is not
here used for all want of moisture in the soil, but for that emptying of
the ears, which is caused by the east wind. *Mildew* occurs from the
sudden heat of the sun, if it strikes upon the corn when moistened with
cold dew. Now, although these evils arise from natural causes, still
God, the Author of nature, in His supreme power, so controls the
atmosphere, that its unwholesomeness is His undoubted scourge.  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)

<span id="v.ix-p123"></span><span id="v.ix-p123.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p124"></span>**23.** *And thy heaven that is over thy
head*. He enumerates other causes of barrenness, and especially drought.
Often does God by the Prophets, desirous of giving a token of His favor
towards the people, promise them the rain of autumn and of spring: the
one immediately following the sowing, the other giving growth to the
fruits before they begin to ripen; whilst in many passages He also
threatens that it should be withheld. To this refers what He now says,
that the heavens shall be of brass, and the earth of iron, because
neither shall the moisture descend from heaven to fertilize the earth,
whilst the earth, bound up and hardened, shall have no juice or dampness
in order to production. Whence we gather, that not even a drop of rain
falls to the earth except distilled by God, and that whenever it rains,
the earth is irrigated as if by His hand. It must, however, be observed,
as we have seen before, that the land of Canaan was not like Egypt,
which was watered by the care and industry of man, but fertilized by the
bounty of heaven. Thus God, by the Prophet, marks the degrees which are
worthy of observation, viz., that when He is reconciled to His people,
He will “hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil;” so that, finally, all
these things shall hear starving men.  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) (<span id="v.ix-p125.2"></span>[Hos.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022)<span id="v.ix-p125.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p126"></span>It is not superfluous that He should
expressly speak of the “heaven over our head,” and the earth that is
“under our feet,” for He thus indicates that His weapons are prepared
both above and below to execute His vengeance, so as to assail the
people on all sides. Another Prophet confirms this, although only in a
brief allusion:

<span id="v.ix-p127"></span>“Therefore the heaven over you is stayed
from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit; and I called for a
drought,” etc. (<span id="v.ix-p127.1"></span>[Hag.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011)<span id="v.ix-p127.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p128"></span>Another mode of expression is then used to
make the same thing more sure, viz., that the rain should be turned into
“powder and dust;” still this clause may be explained in two ways,
either that the rain shall no more fertilize the ground than as if it
were ashes; or that, instead of rain, dust should fall, as though God
would dry up the rich soil by scattering ashes on it.

<span id="v.ix-p129"></span><span id="v.ix-p129.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p130"></span>**25.** *The Lord shall cause thee to be
smitten before thine enemies*. What He had briefly threatened in His
mention of “the sword,” He now more fully pursues, that they should be
given up to the will of their enemies, so as to be indiscriminately
slaughtered. We have previously seen that those who execute punishment
on the transgressors of the Law, are stirred up and armed by the just
judgment of God; Moses does not now touch on that point, but merely
declares that the enemies of the people should be their conquerors,
should cruelly entreat them and pursue them in their flight. Moreover,
in order that God’s judgment might be more conspicuous, He says, that
when they have gone out to battle by one way, *i* *e*., with their army
in regular order, they should return by seven ways, because, in the
confusion of their flight, they should be dispersed in all directions.
Hence we gather that the bravery of men is in God’s power, so that He
can make cowards of the boldest whenever He so pleases. And we must bear
in mind what we shall see elsewhere, “How should one chase a thousand,
and two put ten thousand to flight, except *God* had sold them and had
shut them up” under their hand? (<span id="v.ix-p130.1"></span>[De
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)<span id="v.ix-p130.1"></span>.)
And for this reason God calls Himself the God of hosts, in order that
believers may live securely under His guardianship; whilst the wicked,
and the despisers of the Law, should dread the slightest motion when He
is wroth with them.

<span id="v.ix-p131"></span>What follows, that they should be “for
 <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) a removing in all the kingdoms
of the earth,” some take to mean that they should be a laughing-stock;
because we usually shake or move our heads by way of insult; but others
explain it, that they should be wanderers and vagabonds in unknown
places of exile. The first exposition is the one I prefer. In Ezekiel
 <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) (<span
id="v.ix-p133.1"></span>[Eze
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#046)<span id="v.ix-p133.1"></span>,)
it is used for a tumultuous rout; nor am I indisposed to understand it
in this way, that whatever nations shall assail them, they should be
shaken by their slightest attacks.

<span id="v.ix-p134"></span><span id="v.ix-p134.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p135"></span>**26.** *And thy carcase shall be meat*. The
punishment is here doubled by the disgrace which is added to death; for
it is ignominious to be deprived of burial, and justly reckoned amongst
the curses of God; whilst it is a sign of His paternal favor that we
should be distinguished from the brutes, inasmuch as the rites of burial
arouse us to the hope of resurrection and everlasting life. Wherefore,
on the contrary, God deprives of burial those whom He curses. But as we
have said that punishments affecting the body are common to the pious
and the reprobate, so also we must think of being deprived of sepulture,
since it sometimes happens that the reprobate are honorably buried, as
Christ relates of the luxurious Dives, (<span
id="v.ix-p135.1"></span>[Lu 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span
id="v.ix-p135.1"></span>,) whilst the bodies of the pious are
ignominiously cast a prey for birds and beasts; as the Prophet complains
in <span id="v.ix-p135.2"></span>[Ps
79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002)<span id="v.ix-p135.2"></span>.
Still such an interchange does not prevent God from avenging the
contempt of His Law by this mode of punishment, as by pestilence,
famine, or sword.

<span id="v.ix-p136"></span><span id="v.ix-p136.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p137"></span>**27.** *The Lord will smite thee with the
botch of Egypt*. Whether you understand this passage of the
extraordinary plagues which God inflicted on the Egyptians at the time
of His people’s deliverance, or of the ordinary diseases which had
before prevailed among them, though the latter is more probable, still
Moses signifies, that whilst the Egyptians were smitten with these
plagues, God’s people escaped them, in order that this distinction might
more clearly represent His favor. For it could not happen naturally that
in the same place the diseases, from which the Israelites were free,
should afflict the Egyptians alone. God therefore threatens, that if
they should despise His Law, He would deal with them as they had seen
Him deal with heathen nations. And assuredly, since God then chose to
multiply His people miraculously, it can be by no means doubted but that
He wonderfully privileged them by the bestowment of health and rigor. It
is doubtful whether by diseases of the fundament He signifies
hemorrhoids or *prolapsus*, or some other secret disease, such as that
which attacked the Philistines when they captured the ark of the
covenant. (<span id="v.ix-p137.1"></span>[1Sa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p137.1"></span>.) He
subjoins other diseases, in which there appear special marks of God’s
wrath; for although they sometimes affect the children of God also,
still I have shewn elsewhere that the same punishments are so dealt out
to them respectively, that they widely differ from each other. When Job
was smitten with terrible ulcers, so as to become corrupt, he seemed for
a time to present the marks of a reprobate person; but what in that holy
man was an exercise of patience, is in the transgressors of the Law the
just reward of their crimes by the curse of God.

<span id="v.ix-p138"></span><span id="v.ix-p138.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p139"></span>**28.** *The Lord shall smite thee with
madness and blindness*. This punishment is very often referred to by the
Prophets, when God is said to smite the wicked with a spirit  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) of giddiness and madness, to make them
drunk with astonishment. Now, whatever God declares respecting this
blindness or fury of mind, has a wide application; for hence it arises
that the wicked rush willfully into vile lusts, shudder at no crime, are
hurried headlong to destruction, are utterly deprived of discretion,
throw away the remedies which are in their hands; and although  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) the carnal sense is not greatly
disturbed by this form of vengeance, still it is much more severe and
awful than any bodily disease. The Poets imagined that wicked men were
agitated and terrified by the furies, because experience taught them
that it was not without a secret impulse from God that they became so
senseless, when, their minds being affected, they were like beasts in
the shape of men. Even heathens, then, perceived that when the wicked
are given over to a reprobate mind, God thus manifests Himself as the
just Avenger of their crimes. And so it is in all cases of
“astonishment;” for it is plain that those who are thus stupified by
their miseries, are prostrated by the hand of God.

<span id="v.ix-p142"></span><span id="v.ix-p142.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p143"></span>**30.** *Thou shalt betroth a wife, and
another man*. He here denounces that all they possessed should be rifled
and plundered by their enemies. He, however, puts the most painful thing
of all in the first place, viz., that they shall be despoiled of their
wives, and magnifies the enormity of the evil, by saying, that not only
shall the wife be torn from her husband’s bosom, but that the betrothed
virgin shall be defiled. The same denunciation is extended to their
houses and vineyards. It is grievous indeed to see the fruit of our
labors seized on by our enemies before we have been permitted to enjoy
them; since the frustration of our hope does not slightly increase our
pain. He then passes on to their flocks and their herds: then to their
children, and in their case heightens the calamity, in that their sons
and their daughters should be taken from them in their very sight, so
that their eyes should fail with grief, and their hands, as if dead,
should be unable to afford them assistance. For two reasons He says that
the robbers, who shall strip them of everything, should be unknown to
them; both because they might expect less consideration and kindness
from strangers and barbarians than from neighbors; and also that the
Jews might be alarmed by this threat, so as not to suppose that they
only had to deal with neighboring nations; inasmuch as it was in God’s
power to fetch nations from afar. Finally, He adds that there shall be
no end to their affliction, until the magnitude of their calamities
 <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) shall stupify them.

<span id="v.ix-p145"></span><span id="v.ix-p145.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p146"></span>**35.** *The Lord shall smite thee in the
knees*. Since death is common to the whole human race, they must needs
also be all subject to disease; nor is it a matter of surprise that the
whole posterity of Adam, which is infected with the taint of sin, should
so be liable to many afflictions, which are the wages of sin. But, since
the offenses of all are not alike, God also maintains a just proportion
in the execution of His various punishments; thus, in this passage He
does not speak only of common maladies, but of those whereby He openly
shews His vengeance against the transgressors of the Law; of which sort
are incurable diseases.

<span id="v.ix-p147"></span><span id="v.ix-p147.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p148"></span>**36.** *The Lord shall bring thee, and thy
king*. The fulfillment of this prophecy at length taught the Jews,
though too late, that it was no empty threat, merely for the purpose of
frightening them; and this also applies to the other predictions. For,
on account of the great distance from them, the Jews would never have
supposed that the Assyrians and Chaldeans were God’s scourges, as they
actually found them to be; because they placed no faith in the words of
Moses. Much less credible was it to them that the king, whom they had
appointed, should be dragged as a prisoner to distant countries. And
surely this was a very sad and formidable punishment, since all their
safety depended on the stability of their kingly government. Thus
Jeremiah magnifies this evil above all others, that the Christ of God,
who was the breath of the Church, and under whose shadow they hoped to
be everywhere safe, should be taken.  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) (<span id="v.ix-p149.2"></span>[La
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="v.ix-p149.2"></span>.)
And this was fulfilled in the case of Jeconiah, as well as in that of
Jehoiachin and Zedekiah. Let us, therefore, learn not to measure God’s
judgments by our own reason, but to tremble at them, although they are
hidden from us. All aggravation of their captivity is also added, *i*
*e*., that they should be oppressed by such tyranny as to be compelled
to serve wood and stone. Dull and stupid as they were, still they ought
to have retained their abomination of such gross wickedness. Hence it
might be gathered that they would not be reduced to such a necessity
except by the terrible vengeance of God. For although they had been
attracted by the superstitions of the Gentiles, so as eagerly to run
after them, still, after they were deprived of the worship of God, and
had undergone the yoke of the wretched and ungodly servitude which was
imposed on them, the foulness of idolatry must have been more fully
understood. There is also an antithesis implied in these words, viz.,
that because they had refused to submit themselves to the true God, and
to obey His Law, they should become the slaves of idols.

<span id="v.ix-p150"></span><span id="v.ix-p150.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p151"></span>**37.** *And thou shalt become an
astonishment*. The climax of their miseries is here added, that they
should be so far from receiving consolation from men, that on every side
their misery should meet with taunts and insults; for nothing more
bitterly wounds the wretched than this indignity of being harassed by
reproaches and sarcasms; and thus to be a laughing-stock and byword to
all nations, is a dreadful infliction. Again, there is an implied
antithesis between the ignominy to which God condemns His ungrateful
people, and the extraordinary dignity with which He had honored them, so
that they should be illustrious before the whole world. Hence the
Prophets have often imitated this mode of expression; I will not quote
the instances of it which everywhere occur.

<span id="v.ix-p152"></span><span id="v.ix-p152.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p153"></span>**38.** *Thou shalt carry much seed out into
the field*. He again makes mention of the scarcity of wine, of wheat,
and all sorts of corn; but He assigns different causes for it. He
proclaims that the harvest shall be scanty, notwithstanding an abundant
sowing, because the locust shall consume the seed; that the vintage
shall be poor, nay, almost nothing, because the worms shall devour the
bunches; that the oil produced should be little, because the olives
should wither on the trees and fall of themselves. Thus He admonishes
them that He has at hand innumerable ministers (*satellites*) wherewith
to destroy by famine the transgressors of His Law. Thus, whenever we see
beetles, and locusts, and other insects attacking the fruits, we should
remember that God, as it were, puts forth His arm to take away the food
which He had given: thus Joel reminds us, that when the locust eats that
which the palmer-worm hath left, and another insect that which the
locust hath left, the curse of God is sufficiently conspicuous.  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) (<span id="v.ix-p154.1"></span>[Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)<span id="v.ix-p154.1"></span>.)
Philosophers discover the reason why more of these little creatures are
generated in one year than another; but we must remember the teaching of
Moses, that they never trouble us except by God’s command. For if we
were submissive to God, as we ought to be, such a prodigy would never
happen as that vile and filthy insects should devour the fruits of the
earth which He Himself has provided for the sustenance of His children.

<span id="v.ix-p155"></span><span id="v.ix-p155.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p156"></span>**43.** *The stranger that is within thee
shall get up above thee*. This also was no doubtful mark of God’s wrath,
that the sojourners who dwelt in the land of Canaan by sufferance should
in a manner become its masters; for we know how those who are in debt
are under the power of their creditors. In fact, what Solomon says is
found to be true, that

<span id="v.ix-p157"></span>“the rich ruleth over the poor, and the
borrower is servant  
to the lender.” (<span id="v.ix-p157.2"></span>[Pr
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#007)<span id="v.ix-p157.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p158"></span>The Israelites, therefore, must have felt
that God was contrary to them, when they were suppliants to their own
guests, especially since He had promised that He would so enrich them
that they should lend to others. This revolution of affairs, then,
plainly convinced them of their iniquities. Meanwhile, it must be
observed that poverty as well as wealth is in God’s hands, and that
whilst the latter is a proof of God’s favour the former is reckoned
amongst His curses; still, however, in such a manner that God often
chastises His own children with want, or proves and exercises their
patience without ceasing to be their Father, whilst he bestows abundance
upon the reprobate, wherewith they may gorge themselves to their own
destruction. God’s blessing, however, shines forth in the elect, as far
as it is expedient for them; nor is it said in vain in the Psalm,
“Wealth and riches are in the house (of the just,”) in order that he may
lend and be bountiful. (<span id="v.ix-p158.1"></span>[Ps
112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003)<span id="v.ix-p158.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p159"></span><span id="v.ix-p159.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p160"></span>**45.** *Moreover, all these curses shall
come upon thee*. He not only confirms what he has already said, but
takes away all hope of alleviation, since God’s scourges shall not cease
until they have repented. He declares that all the curses shall come
upon them; for although they are not always congregated into a single
band, still it is true that God pays the wages of the transgressors of
His Law with this multitude of miseries which Moses has recounted. By
the word *pursue*, he takes away all hope of escape, whilst to
*overtake* is equivalent to laying hold of them tenaciously, till, as it
is further said, they *be* *destroyed*. The sum is, that the ungodly by
their subterfuges only bring it to pass that they accumulate upon
themselves heavier punishments, which will never cease to afflict them
until they are destroyed by them. For this reason, he says that they
shall be “for a sign and a wonder,” *i* *e*., that they shall awaken
astonishment in all men; for those who are but little moved by the
common and ordinary judgments of God, are compelled, whether they will
or no, to give attention to these prodigies. Thus, notable punishments,
and such as are worthy of special observation, are “for a sign and a
wonder.”

<span id="v.ix-p161"></span>Their ingratitude is also reproved as well
as their contempt of the Law, because they served not God “with
joyfulness and gladness of heart,” when He had been so abundantly
generous to them; for it is the fault of a corrupt and malignant nature,
that it should not be possible to bring it to serve God joyfully, when
He invites us by His liberality. But Moses takes it for granted that,
since God will prevent the Israelites with His favor, before He proceeds
to inflict punishments upon them, they will be guilty of this brutal
sin, not to allow themselves to be liberally sustained by Him.

<span id="v.ix-p162"></span><span id="v.ix-p162.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p163"></span>**49.** *The Lord shall bring a nation
against them from far*. He enforces the same threatenings in different
words, viz., that unknown and barbarous enemies should come, who shall
attack them with great impetuosity and violence. And still further to
aggravate their cruelty, He says that their language shall be a strange
one; for, when there can be no oral communication, there is no room for
entreaties, which sometimes awaken the most savage to mercy. But
Jeremiah shews that this was fulfilled in the case of the Chaldeans;

<span id="v.ix-p164"></span>“Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from
far, O house of Israel; it is a mighty nation, a nation whose language
thou howest not, neither understandest what they say.” (<span
id="v.ix-p164.1"></span>[Jer 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015)<span
id="v.ix-p164.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p165"></span>On the other hand, when Isaiah promises them
deliverance, he mentions this among the chief of their blessings, that
the Jews should “not see a fierce people,” that they should not hear

<span id="v.ix-p166"></span>“a people of deeper speech than they could
perceive, of a stammering tongue  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) that they could not understand.”
(<span id="v.ix-p167.1"></span>[Isa
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#019)<span id="v.ix-p167.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p168"></span>For, as I have elsewhere said, the Prophets
were careful to take their form of expression from Moses, lest the Jews
should, according to their custom, proudly despise the threats which God
had interwoven with His Law.

<span id="v.ix-p169"></span>Lest the distance of their countries should
lull them into security, He says that they should be like eagles in
swiftness, so as suddenly to overwhelm them, just as God often compares
the ministers of His wrath to the whirlwind and the storm. Jeremiah has
also imitated this similitude, where he declares that the slaughter
which the Jews in their false imagination had supposed to be far away
from them, should come suddenly upon them. (<span
id="v.ix-p169.1"></span>[Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013)<span
id="v.ix-p169.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ix-p170"></span>Moses adds, that this nation shall be
“strong of face,  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) which shall
not regard the person of the old, nor shew favor to the young,” whereby
he signifies their extreme ferocity. I have already expounded what
follows respecting their rapine and plunder.

<span id="v.ix-p172"></span><span id="v.ix-p172.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p173"></span>**52.** *And he shall besiege thee in thy
gates*. He overthrows every ground of false confidence. The number of
their towns inspired them with courage, because they never would have
supposed that their enemies would undergo so much fatigue as not to
cease from fighting till they were all taken. He therefore includes all
their towns, in reliance upon whose multitude they despised hostile
aggression. He adds, that in vain they trust in their high and fortified
walls, which will be either overthrown by military engines, or shall
voluntarily surrender from the length of their besiegal; for the passage
may be explained in both ways, either that the enemies shall overthrow
and lay prostrate all their fortresses, or that by their perseverance
they shall pass over the walls however high. It seems to me that the
length of the siege as well as their valiant fighting is indicated. The
repetition which follows magnifies the evil, viz., that they shall be
thus sorely pressed in their own land given them by God; for the very
associations of the place only increased the indignity.

<span id="v.ix-p174"></span><span id="v.ix-p174.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p175"></span>**53.** *And thou shalt eat the fruit of
thine own body*. This is one of those portents which was mentioned a
little while ago; for it is an act of ferocity detestable and more than
tragical, that fathers and mothers should eat their own offspring, so
great love of which is naturally implanted in every heart, that parents
often forget themselves in their anxiety for their children; and many
have not hesitated to die to insure their safety. Nay, when the brute
animals so carefully cherish their young, what can be more disgusting or
abominable than that men should cease to care for their own blood? But
this is the most monstrous of all atrocities, when fathers and mothers
devour the offspring which they have procreated, and yet this threat by
no means failed of its fulfillment, as we have elsewhere seen. We ought
then to be the more alarmed when we see that God thus terribly punished
the sins of those whom He had deigned to choose for His own. Still, it
was not without very just cause that this wrath was so greatly kindled
against the Jews who had left no kind of iniquity undone, so that their
wickedness was altogether intolerable. Never, then, must it be forgotten
that those of the household of the Church to whom God’s truth is
revealed, are on that account the less excusable, because they knowingly
and willfully provoke His wrath, whilst their continued perseverance in
sin is altogether unworthy of pardon. The monstrous brutality of the act
is heightened, when He says that men, in other respects tender and
accustomed to delicacies, should be so savage through hunger that they
shall refuse to give a share of this horrible food to their wives and
surviving children; as also Jeremiah expressly says, the pitiful women
shall be so maddened by hunger as to cook their own children. (<span
id="v.ix-p175.1"></span>[La 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010)<span
id="v.ix-p175.1"></span>.) What follows as to the after-birth is still
more horrible, for thus they call the membrane by which the foetus is
covered in the womb, with all its excrements. That they should dress for
food a filthy skin, the very look of which is disgusting, plainly
demonstrates the awfulness of God’s vengeance.

<span id="v.ix-p176"></span><span id="v.ix-p176.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p177"></span>**58.** *If thou wilt not observe to do all
the words of this law*<span id="v.ix-p177.1"></span>. Inasmuch as even
believers, although they are disposed to a willing obedience to the Law,
and earnestly apply themselves to it, are still impeded and withheld by
the infirmity of their flesh from fulfilling their duty, care and
attention is here demanded of them; for “to observe (*custodire*<span
id="v.ix-p177.2"></span>) to do” is equivalent to giving sedulous and
diligent heed. Now, God declares that, unless the Israelites thoroughly
devote themselves to the keeping of the Law, vengeance is prepared for
their neglect. It is indeed a harsh and severe threat whereby
transgression in any respect is without remission; for perfect obedience
is required by the words, “to do all the words that are written in the
Law.” But it is necessary that we should bear in mind what I have
already shewn, that Moses was thus severe in his exactions, in order
that the people, being convinced of their condemnation, should betake
themselves to the mercy of God; for no one longs after Christ, unless he
first abandons all confidence in his works, and rests all his hope of
salvation in gratuitous pardon. The curse here recorded so awaits the
transgressors of the Law, that, whilst God pardons His children, He at
the same time sometimes chastises them, and executes upon the reprobate
the vengeance they deserve. The fountain-head of obedience is indicated
when it is said, “that thou mayest fear the Lord;” for all virtues are
but smoke, which do not spring from the fear of God. Moreover, in order
that their contempt may be without excuse, God’s name is called
“glorious and fearful;” for it is a mark of gross stupidity, when God’s
majesty and glory are openly set before us, not to be affected with
becoming reverence so as to humble ourselves before Him. He, however,
threatens something more terrible than before, when he says that the
plagues shall be *wonderful*<span id="v.ix-p177.3"></span> not only on
the parents but on their children and descendants; instead of which some
construe it,  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) <span
id="v.ix-p178.1"></span>He shall increase in a wonderful manner; and
others, He shall separate; but this is too constrained and obscure. The
word <span id="v.ix-p178.2"></span>פלא<span id="v.ix-p178.3"></span>,
*phela*<span id="v.ix-p178.4"></span>, signifies to be wonderful, or
secret and hidden: thus, in my opinion, he means extraordinary and
incredible modes of vengeance which shall surpass the comprehension of
the human mind. He puts plagues and sicknesses in apposition with each
other, as explaining by the latter of what nature the plagues shall be;
unless, perhaps, it may be rather thought that the *species*<span
id="v.ix-p178.5"></span> is appended to the *genus*<span
id="v.ix-p178.6"></span>, which seems to be more probable. Further, he
calls the plagues veritable, or faithful; either because they shall
certainly occur, or because they shall continue to the end; for the
Hebrew word <span id="v.ix-p178.7"></span>נאמנית<span
id="v.ix-p178.8"></span>,  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)
*neumanoth*<span id="v.ix-p179.6"></span>, is explained in both ways;
and undoubtedly it sometimes signifies veracious, or what does not
deceive, sometimes firm and stable, or perpetual; and this sense appears
to me to suit it best here, so that continued duration should be added
to the greatness of the plagues.

<span id="v.ix-p180"></span>He again mentions “the diseases of Egypt,”
not those which they had themselves suffered in Egypt, but those under
which they had seen the Egyptians laboring. He says, therefore, that the
severity of God against unbelievers, of which they had been spectators,
should fall upon their own heads, if they should be followers of their
ungodliness; for it was natural that they should tremble at the
judgments of God, whereof they had been eye-witnesses; and not only so,
but at which they had trembled for fear.

<span id="v.ix-p181"></span><span id="v.ix-p181.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p182"></span>**61.** *Also every sickness and every
plague*. This passage confirms what I have said about the plague and the
sickness, for the sickness stands first as the *species*, and then the
plague follows, which has a wider meaning, and comprehends all the
curses in itself. Still, after he has enumerated so many forms of
punishment, he declares that God is armed with yet other weapons to
smite them; and assuredly as His blessings are endless and innumerable,
so also His power is incomprehensible for avenging the contempt of His
Law. Posterity has experienced, and we also even now partly perceive how
true these threatenings were; for, as the obstinacy of men has burst
forth and exalted itself more and more, so new and unheard of
punishments have abounded from God, like a deluge.

<span id="v.ix-p183"></span><span id="v.ix-p183.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p184"></span>**62.** *And ye shall be left few in
number*. Since it had been promised to Abraham that his seed should be
like the stars of heaven in multitude, it was a signal token of God’s
wrath that his posterity should be reduced  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) to so small a number; thus the
comparison which is here made for the purpose of heightening their
calamity, must not simply be referred to the “multitude” or great band,
and the “fewness in number,” but must be extended to the promise, the
truth of which had been clearly manifested; so that, on the other hand,
they might perceive that their former populousness could only have been
put an end to, like waters dried up by the excessive heat of the sun,
through the wrath of God.

<span id="v.ix-p186"></span><span id="v.ix-p186.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p187"></span>**63.** *And it shall come to pass, that as
the Lord rejoiced over you*. The wonderful and inestimable love of God
towards His people is here set forth, via, that He had rejoiced in
heaping blessings upon them; wherefore their depravity was all the more
base and intolerable, in that God, though voluntarily disposed to be
bountiful, was obliged by it to lay aside His affection for them. But
although it is only by a metaphor that God is said to rejoice in
destroying the wicked, yet it is not without good reason that this
expression is applied to him; that we may know that He can no more fail
to be the defender of His Law, and the Avenger of its contempt, than
deny Himself. He complains, indeed, by Isaiah, (<span
id="v.ix-p187.1"></span>[Isa
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024)<span id="v.ix-p187.1"></span>)
that He is unwillingly forced to punish the Jews; but these two things
are quite consistent, that He rejoices in His just judgment, and at the
same time is mindful of His clemency and indulgence, so that He would
rather pardon, if the wickedness of men would allow Him. But this
expression of Moses, that God receives consolation from punishing the
wicked, constantly occurs in the Prophets.

<span id="v.ix-p188"></span><span id="v.ix-p188.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p189"></span>**64.** *And the Lord shall scatter thee
among all people*. At the end of the preceding verse, he had threatened
them with banishment, which was far more painful to the people of Israel
than to other nations. Inasmuch as affection for our country is natural
to all, it is disagreeable to be away from it; but the condition of the
Israelitish people was peculiar, for to them the inheritance of Canaan
was promised them by God, and they could not be expelled from it without
being renounced by their heavenly Father. But he now proceeds a second
and third step further; for he adds to banishment a miserable
scattering, and to scattering, trembling and wanderings full of
disquietude. For, if they had been expelled all together into any one
corner of the world, their banishment would have been more tolerarable
from their very association with each other. Their calamity is,
therefore, augmented when the storm of God’s wrath scatters them hither
and thither like chaff, so that they should be dispersed, and dwell in
widely different countries. Another kind of servitude, which I have
elsewhere noticed, is incidentally added, *i* *e*., that He would
enslave them not only to men, but to idols also. The third step is their
want of rest, for there was to be no fixed abode for them in their
captivity; and this is far the most wretched state of all, to serve
tyrannical conquerors as captives, and to have no certain master. Still
it was a most just reward of the people’s ingratitude, that they should
nowhere find a fixed resting-place, because they had rejected the rest
offered them by God, as we read in Isaiah (<span
id="v.ix-p189.1"></span>[Isa
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012)<span id="v.ix-p189.1"></span>)
He, however, extends the evil, bitter as it was in itself, still
further, for they were not only to be compelled to wander in confusion,
and immediately to pass onwards, but, wheresoever they should come,
inward perturbation of mind was to follow them as their inseparable
companion. Now, it is more sad to be agitated within with secret fear,
than to be oppressed by external violence; for believers, although they
too may be unsettled and tossed by many troublesome waves, still repose
with tranquil minds on God; whilst the wicked, however they may desire
to lull themselves in security, are nevertheless always without true
peace; and if, for a while, they sink into lethargy, are still soon
compelled to arouse themselves by God whether they will or not. Surely
as the repose of a well-regulated mind is a signal mark of God’s favor,
so a constant and irremediable fear, such as is here referred to, is one
of His terrible punishments.

<span id="v.ix-p190"></span>Since the fear of spiritual punishments but
lightly affects ungodly men, Moses magnifies in many words what the
Israelites would else have carelessly passed over. Especially he points
out what dreadful torments of anxiety would affect the wicked, when he
says that their life should hang in suspense, as it were, before their
eyes, so that they should fear day and night. An amusing device is
related of Dionysius,  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) who
commanded an exquisite supper, supplied with every delicacy, to be
prepared for a courtly flatterer by whom his happiness had been lauded;
he placed him in his own seat, so  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) that he might feast pleasantly, but
ordered a sword to be suspended by a thread so as to overhang his head,
insomuch that he who had pronounced the tyrant to be happy, when he saw
that death was so near him every moment, did not dare to taste either of
meat or drink. Dionysius, therefore, confessed, and not without shame to
himself, that he and all other tyrants, whilst they are formidable to
others, are tormented by perpetual fear. Now, this same disquietude is
common to all the despisers of God; for the more wantonly they rage in
forgetfulness of His fear, the more deservedly they dread their own
shadow. Besides, when we look around us and see by how many forms of
death our lives are beset, it cannot be but that innumerable anxieties
should naturally possess us; how, then, can the wicked help being
harassed by miserable and perplexing doubts when they perceive
themselves to be shut out from the protection of God, and exposed to so
many evils? Tranquillity of mind, therefore, can only arise from having
God as our Keeper, and from resting under His protection.

<span id="v.ix-p193"></span>By the words, “the sight of thine eyes,” I
have no doubt but that Moses designates those spectres  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) and bug-bears whereby death is set
before the eyes of the reprobate.

<span id="v.ix-p195"></span><span id="v.ix-p195.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p196"></span>**68.** *And the Lord shall bring thee into
Egypt again with ships*. We know that the people were so driven about in
the desert amidst divers perils, that they only escaped from it in
safety by extraordinary miracles. It was therefore a thing most highly
to be desired by their posterity, that they should never be carried back
into those mighty depths. He who had once rescued them from those deaths
might indeed often be their deliverer; but in order to make His blessing
at that time more memorable, He had provided that they should never
return into that wilderness. To bring them back into it again, was,
then, in a manner to blot out the grace of redemption. If any object
that it was impossible that the people should be conveyed in ships
through dry places, the reply is easy, that since mention is made of the
captivity, there is no absurdity in their being carried in ships and
landed on the shore which  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)
belongs to the plain of Moab, so as to finish their journey by wandering
through the desert on foot.

<span id="v.ix-p198"></span>Finally, he shews how melancholy their
condition would be, since they would desire to sell themselves to their
enemies, and would find none to buy them on account of their vileness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc05043.htm#fr_236) <span
id="v.ix-p115.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p116"></span> <span id="v.ix-p116.1"></span>מהומה<span
id="v.ix-p116.2"></span>, “Vexation.” — *A* *V*<span
id="v.ix-p116.3"></span>. “Bruising, trampling, destruction.” —
Robertson, Clavis Pentateuchi.

<span id="v.ix-p117"></span><span id="v.ix-p117.1"></span>מגערת<span
id="v.ix-p117.2"></span>, “Rebuke.” — *A* *V*<span
id="v.ix-p117.3"></span>. “Reproach,” from <span
id="v.ix-p117.4"></span>גער<span id="v.ix-p117.5"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc05043.htm#fr_237) <span
id="v.ix-p120.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p121"></span> “*Ariditas*.” — *Lat*. “Blasting.” —
*A*.*V*.; “*i*.*e*., (says Ainsworth,) of corn and fruit with a dry
wind, <span id="v.ix-p121.1"></span>[2Ki
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#026)<span id="v.ix-p121.1"></span>,
for the original word signifieth *dryness*; and such was the east wind
that blasted in those parts, <span id="v.ix-p121.2"></span>[Ge
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p121.2"></span>.
Therefore the Greek translateth it *corruption* *with* *wind*.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc05043.htm#fr_238) <span
id="v.ix-p121.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p122"></span> “Un certain signe de son ire;” a certain
sign of His wrath. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc05043.htm#fr_239) <span
id="v.ix-p124.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p125"></span> *See* *C*. *in* *loco*. Calvin Society’s
edit., vol. 1, p. 118.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc05043.htm#fr_240) <span
id="v.ix-p131.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p132"></span> See Margin, *A*.*V*. “In commotionem.” —
*Lat*. The first exposition, approved by *C*., is that of *S*.*M*. and
Malvenda, who refers to <span id="v.ix-p132.1"></span>[Ps
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008)<span id="v.ix-p132.1"></span>,
and <span id="v.ix-p132.2"></span>[Ps
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p132.2"></span>.
See Poole’s Synopsis *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc05043.htm#fr_241) <span
id="v.ix-p132.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p133"></span> This reference is omitted altogether in
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc05043.htm#fr_242) <span
id="v.ix-p139.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p140"></span> *C* gives no references here. It is
probable that the passage, which he most had in his mind, was <span
id="v.ix-p140.1"></span>[Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014)<span id="v.ix-p140.1"></span>,
“The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit;” in *V*., “Dominus miscuit in
medio ejus *spiritrum* *vertiginis*, etc.” His own Commentary on these
words is, “The expression is metaphorical, as if one were to mix wine in
a cup, that the Lord thus intoxicates the wise men of this world so that
they are stunned and amazed, and can neither think nor act aright.”
Calvin Soc. edit., vol. 2, p. 64. He also might refer to <span
id="v.ix-p140.3"></span>[Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017)<span id="v.ix-p140.3"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p140.4"></span>[Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p140.4"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p140.5"></span>[Ps
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003)<span id="v.ix-p140.5"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc05043.htm#fr_243) <span
id="v.ix-p140.6"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p141"></span> “L’apprehension commune des hommes;” the
ordinary apprehension of men. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc05043.htm#fr_244) <span
id="v.ix-p143.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p144"></span> <span id="v.ix-p144.1"></span>[De
28:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#034)<span id="v.ix-p144.1"></span>.
“Obstupesces.” — *Lat*. “Thou shalt be mad.” — *A*.*V*. The former is
the rendering of Pagninus, the Samaritan text, and *LXX*.; the latter of
Vatablus, Munster, Oleaster, Malvenda, and the Arabic Version. See
Poole’s Synopsis, *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc05043.htm#fr_245) <span
id="v.ix-p148.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p149"></span> “The breath of our nostrils, the anointed
of the Lord, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow
we shall lie among the heathen.” — <span id="v.ix-p149.1"></span>[La
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="v.ix-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc05043.htm#fr_246) <span
id="v.ix-p153.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p154"></span> “Que la main de Dieu est toute evidente;”
that God’s hand is quite evident. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc05043.htm#fr_247) <span
id="v.ix-p166.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p167"></span> “Cui lingua stridet absque intelligentia.”
— *Lat*. “Lesquels grondent sans intelligence.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc05043.htm#fr_248) <span
id="v.ix-p170.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p171"></span> See margin, *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc05043.htm#fr_249) <span
id="v.ix-p177.4"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p178"></span> So *V*. The translation, “He shall
separate, or shall make distinct from all others, because they shall be
greater and worse,” is that of Oleaster, quoted in Poole’s Synopsis.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc05043.htm#fr_250) <span
id="v.ix-p178.9"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p179"></span><span id="v.ix-p179.1"></span> Root <span
id="v.ix-p179.2"></span>אמן<span id="v.ix-p179.3"></span>, *amen*<span
id="v.ix-p179.4"></span>; and here rendered by Taylor, *fidoe*<span
id="v.ix-p179.5"></span>, *constantes*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc05043.htm#fr_251) <span
id="v.ix-p184.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p185"></span> “A une pongnee de gens;” to a handful of
people. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc05043.htm#fr_252) <span
id="v.ix-p190.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p191"></span> This well-known story of Dionysius of
Syracuse and his courtier Damocles, is beautifully told by Cicero. —
*Tusc*. *Quoest*. 5. 21.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc05043.htm#fr_253) <span
id="v.ix-p191.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p192"></span> “Pour reciter ceste felicite, qu’il avoit
tant preschee;” to make a rehearsal of this felicity, which he had so
greatly praised. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc05043.htm#fr_254) <span
id="v.ix-p193.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p194"></span> “Toutes illusions, fantasmes, et
espouvantails, qui nous menacent de la mort;” all illusions, phantoms,
and horrors, which threaten us with death. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc05043.htm#fr_255) <span
id="v.ix-p196.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p197"></span> There appears to be some oversight here.
The Latin is “littus, quod planitiem Moah respicit;” and the *Fr*.
sufficiently removes any difficulty which the latter word would present,
by simply translating it “pour les jetter en la plaine de Moab;”
*i*.*e*., to put them ashore *on* the plain of Moab. Now, the only
shores of the plain of Moab would be formed by the Dead Sea, and this
would, of course, be inapplicable in the circumstances referred to. The
very impossibility of crossing the desert in ships, clearly proves that
the word *way* must not be understood as indicating the line of route.
Thus Holden paraphrases the words: “Thou shalt be taken there in ships,
and not by the way in which I appeared and spake to thee;” and Dathe’s
translation is, “Navibus Jova vos deportari sinet in Aegyptum, quam
terram nunquam a vobis revisendam dixerat.” The wonderful fulfillment of
the prophecy is thus well summed up by Dr. Kitto: “This was accomplished
on several occasions. It is related both by Aristeas and Josephus, that
in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, there were vast numbers of Hebrew
slaves in Egypt, and that the king himself bought above 100,000 of them
from their masters, and set them free. Egypt, indeed, was the great
slave-mart of ancient times; and several of the conquerors and
oppressors of the Jews sent at least a portion of their captives thither
to be sold. Titus had 90,000 captives after Jerusalem was taken. Those
above seventeen years of age were sent to different parts of the Roman
empire to labor on the public works, besides great numbers who perished
in compulsory combats with wild beasts. Those under seventeen were
doomed to be sold for slaves; but in such deep contempt and detestation
was the nation held, that few were willing to buy them; and the Jews who
remained at large, were too few and poor to be able to redeem their
brethren. The market was also glutted with their numbers, so that they
were sold at a mere nominal price, — sometimes thirty for a small piece
of money. Those who remained unpurchased were sent into confinement,
where they perished by hundreds and by thousands together, from neglect
and hunger. Egypt received a large proportion of these slaves, who were
probably sent thither in *ships*, as the Romans had a fleet in the
Mediterranean, and this was a much easier and safer way of transporting
them than by land across the desert. The same things precisely took
place on the final desolation of Israel by Hadrian, who may be said to
have consummated their doom by decreeing, with the concurrence of the
Roman Senate, that no Jew should ever, on pain of death, enter the land
of his fathers.” — Illust. Comment. *in* *loco*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 4:25-31](cc05044)
