[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05003)  [Next](cc05005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p1"></span>ITS REPETITION

<span id="ii.i.ii-p2"></span>DEUTERONOMY 5

<span id="ii.i.ii-p3"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p4"></span>**16.** Honor thy father and thy mother, as
the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged,
and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the Lord thy God
giveth thee.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p5"></span>**16.** Honora patrem tuum et matrem tuam,
quemadmodum praecepit tibi Jehova, Deus tuus: ut prorogentur dies tui et
ut bene sit tibi super terram quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.ii-p7"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p8"></span>I am not ignorant that the Tables of the
Law are usually divided in a different manner;  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) for those, who make only one of the first
two Commandments, are obliged finally to mangle the last. Thus the
prohibition of God to covet either our neighbor’s wife or his house, is
foolishly separated into two parts, whereas it is quite clear that only
one thing is treated of, as we gather from the words of Paul, who quotes
them as a single Commandment. (<span id="ii.i.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ro
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="ii.i.ii-p9.2"></span>..md)
There is, however, no need of a lengthened discussion here, since the
fact itself explains how one error has grown out of another; for, when
they had improperly hidden the Second Commandment under the First, and
consequently did not find the right number, they were forced to divide
into two parts what was one and indivisible. A frivolous reason is
assigned by Augustine why they comprised the First Table in three
commandments, viz., that believers might learn to worship God in the
Trinity, and thus to adore one God in three persons. By inconsiderately
trifling with such subtleties, they have exposed God’s law to the
mockeries of the ungodly. Josephus  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)
indeed rightly enumerates the Commandments themselves in their proper
order, but improperly attributes five Commandments to each Table; as if
God had had regard to arithmetic rather than to instruct His people
separately in the duties of charity, after having laid down for them the
rules of piety. For up to this point the rule of rightly serving God has
been delivered, *i*.*e*., the First Table embraces a summary of piety;
and now the Law will begin to show how men ought to live with each
other, otherwise one Table would have been enough, nor would God have
divided his Law without a purpose. But whereas piety  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) and justice comprise the perfect rule for
the direction of our lives, it was necessary to distinguish these two
parts, that the people might understand the object of the Law, of which
we shall again speak hereafter.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.i.ii-p12.2"></span>[Exodus
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.i.ii-p12.2"></span>.** *Honor thy father* Although charity (as
being “the bond of perfectness,” <span id="ii.i.ii-p12.3"></span>[Col
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span id="ii.i.ii-p12.3"></span>.md)
contains the sum of the Second Table, still, mutual obligation does not
prevent either parents or others, who are in authority, from retaining
their proper position. Nay, human society cannot be maintained in its
integrity, unless children modestly submit themselves to their parents,
and unless those, who are set over others by God’s ordinance, are even
reverently honored. But inasmuch as the reverence which children pay to
their parents is accounted a sort of piety, some have therefore
foolishly placed this precept in the First Table. Nor are they supported
in this by Paul, though he does not enumerate this Commandment, where he
collects the sum of the Second Table, (<span
id="ii.i.ii-p12.4"></span>[Ro
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009)<span id="ii.i.ii-p12.4"></span>;.md)
for he does this designedly, because he is there expressly teaching that
obedience is to be paid to the authority of kings and magistrates.
Christ, however, puts an end to the whole controversy, where, among the
precepts of the Second Table, He enumerates this, that children should
honor their parents. (<span id="ii.i.ii-p12.5"></span>[Mt
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.i.ii-p12.5"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i.ii-p13"></span>The name of the mothers is expressly
*introduced*, lest their sex should render them contemptible to their
male children.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p14"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p14.1"></span>It will be
now well to ascertain what is the force of the word “honor,” not as to
its grammatical meaning, (for <span id="ii.i.ii-p14.2"></span>כבד<span
id="ii.i.ii-p14.3"></span>, *cabad*<span id="ii.i.ii-p14.4"></span>,
<span id="ii.i.ii-p14.5"></span>is nothing else but to pay due honor to
God, and to men who are in authority,) but as to its essential
signification. Surely, since God would not have His servants comply with
external ceremonies only, it cannot be doubted but that all the duties
of piety towards parents are here comprised, to which children are laid
under obligation by natural reason itself; and these may be reduced to
three heads, *i* *e*<span id="ii.i.ii-p14.6"></span>., <span
id="ii.i.ii-p14.7"></span>that they should regard them with reverence;
that they should obediently comply with their commands, and allow
themselves to be governed by them; and that they should endeavor to
repay what they owe to them, and thus heartily devote to them themselves
and their services. Since, therefore, the name of Father is a sacred
one, and is transferred to men by the peculiar goodness of God, the
dishonoring of parents redounds to the dishonor of God Himself, nor can
any one despise his father without being guilty of an offense against
God, (*sacrilegium*<span id="ii.i.ii-p14.8"></span>.) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p14.9"></span>If any should object that there are many
ungodly and wicked fathers whom their children cannot regard with honor
without destroying the distinction between good and evil, the reply is
easy, that the perpetual law of nature is not subverted by the sins of
men; and therefore, however unworthy of honor a father may be, that he
still retains, inasmuch as he is a father, his right over his children,
provided it does not in anywise derogate from the judgment of God; for
it is too absurd to think of absolving under any pretext the sins which
are condemned by His Law; nay, it would be a base profanation to misuse
the name of father for the covering of sins. In condemning, therefore,
the vices of a father, a truly pious son will subscribe to God’s Law;
and still, whatsoever he may be, will acknowledge that he is to be
honored, as being the father given him by God.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p15"></span>*Obedience* comes next, which is also
circumscribed by certain limits. Paul is a faithful interpreter of this
Commandment, where he bids “children obey their parents.” (<span
id="ii.i.ii-p15.1"></span>[Eph
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.ii-p15.2"></span>[Col
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#020)<span id="ii.i.ii-p15.2"></span>..md)
Honor, therefore, comprises subjection; so that he who shakes off the
yoke of his father, and does not allow himself to be governed by his
authority, is justly said to despise his father; and it will more
clearly appear from other passages, that those who are not obedient to
their parents are deemed to despise them. Still, the power of a father
is so limited as that God, on whom all relationships depend, should have
the rule over fathers as well as children; for parents govern their
children only under the supreme authority of God. Paul, therefore, does
not simply exhort children to obey their parents, but adds the
restriction, “in the Lord;” whereby he indicates that, if a father
enjoins anything unrighteous, obedience is freely to be denied him.
Immoderate strictness, moroseness, and even cruelty must be born, so
long as a mortal man, by wickedly demanding what is not lawful, does not
endeavor to rob God of His right. In a word, the Law so subjects
children to their parents, as that God’s right may remain uninfringed.
An objection here arises in the shape of this question: It may sometimes
happen that a son may hold the office of a magistrate, but that the
father may be a private person, and that thus the son cannot discharge
his private duty without violating public order. The point is easily
solved: that all things may be so tempered by their mutual moderation as
that, whilst the father submits himself to the government of his son,
 <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) yet he may not be at all defrauded of
his honor, and that the son, although his superior in power, may still
modestly reverence his father.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p17"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p17.1"></span>The third
head of honor is, that children should take care of their parents, and
be ready and diligent in all their duties towards them. This kind of
piety the Greeks call <span id="ii.i.ii-p17.2"></span>ἀντιπελαργία<span
id="ii.i.ii-p17.3"></span>,  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p19.1"></span> because storks supply food to their parents
when they are feeble and worn out with old age, and are thus our
instructors in gratitude. Hence the barbarity of those is all the more
base and detestable, who either grudge or neglect to relieve the poverty
of their parents, and to aid their necessities.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p20"></span>Now, although the parental name ought, by
its own sweetness, sufficiently to attract children to ready submission,
still a promise is added as a stimulus, in order that they may more
cheerfully bestir themselves to pay the honor which is enjoined upon
them. Paul, therefore, that children may be more willing to obey their
parents, reminds us that this “is the first commandment with promise,”
(<span id="ii.i.ii-p20.1"></span>[Eph
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002)<span id="ii.i.ii-p20.1"></span>;.md)
for although a promise is annexed to the Second Commandment, yet it is
not a special one, as we perceive this to be. The reward, that the days
of children who have behaved themselves piously to their parents shall
be prolonged, aptly corresponds with the observance of the commandment,
since in this manner God gives us a proof of His favor in this life,
when we have been grateful to those to whom we are indebted for it;
whilst it is by no means just that they should greatly prolong their
life who despise those progenitors by whom they have been brought into
it. Here the question arises, since this earthly life is exposed to so
many cares, and pains, and troubles, how can God account its
prolongation to be a blessing? But whereas all cares spring from the
curse of God, it is manifest that they are accidental; and thus, if life
be regarded in itself, it does not cease to be a proof of God’s favor.
Besides, all this multitude of miseries does not destroy the chief
blessing of life, viz., that men are created and preserved unto the hope
of a happy immortality; for God now manifests Himself to them as a
Father, that hereafter they may enjoy His eternal inheritance. The
knowledge of this, like a lighted lamp, causes God’s grace to shine
forth in the midst of darkness. Whence it follows, that those had not
tasted the main thing in life,  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) who
have said that the best thing was not to be born, and the next best
thing to be cut off as soon as possible; whereas God rather so exercises
men by various afflictions, as that it should be good for them
nevertheless to be created in His image, and to be accounted His
children. A clearer explanation also is added in Deuteronomy, not only
that they should live, but that it *may* *go* *well* with them; so that
not only is length of life promised them, but other accessories also.
And in fact, many who have been ungrateful and unkind to their parents
only prolong their life as a punishment, whilst the reward of their
inhuman conduct is repaid them by their children and descendants. But
inasmuch as long life is not vouchsafed to all who have discharged the
duties of piety towards their parents, it must be remembered that, with
respect to temporal rewards, an infallible law is by no means laid down;
and still, where God works variously and unequally, His promises are not
made void, *because* *a* better compensation is secured in heaven for
believers, who have been deprived on earth of transitory blessings.
Truly experience in all ages has shown that God has not in vain promised
long life to all who have faithfully discharged the duties of true piety
towards their parents. Still, from the principle already stated, it is
to be understood that this Commandment extends further than the words
imply; and this we infer from the following sound argument, viz., that
otherwise God’s Law would be imperfect, and would not instruct us in the
perfect rule of a just and holy life.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p24"></span>The natural sense itself dictates to us
that we should obey rulers. If servants obey not their masters, the
society of the human race is subverted altogether. It is not, therefore,
the least essential part of righteousness  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) that the people should willingly submit
themselves to the command of magistrates, and that servants should obey
their masters; and, consequently, it would be very absurd if it were
omitted in the Law of God. In this commandment, then, as in the others,
God by *synecdoche* embraces, under a specific rule, a general
principle, viz., that lawful commands should obtain due reverence from
us. But that all things should not be distinctly expressed, first of all
brevity itself readily accounts for; and, besides, another reason is to
be noticed, *i*.*e*. that God designedly used a homely style in
addressing a rude people, because He saw its expediency. If He had said
generally, that all superiors were to be obeyed, since, pride is natural
to all, it would not have been easy to incline the greater part of men
to pay submission to a few. Nay, since subjection is naturally
disagreeable, many would have kicked against it. God, therefore,
propounds a specific kind of subjection, which it would have been gross
barbarism to refuse, that thus, their ferocity being gradually subdued,
He might accustom men to bear the yoke. Hence the exhortations are
derived, that people should “honor the king;” that “every soul should be
subject unto the higher powers;” that “servants should obey their
masters, even the froward and morose.” (<span
id="ii.i.ii-p25.1"></span>[Pr
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.2"></span>[1Pe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.3"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.4"></span>[Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.4"></span>;
<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.5"></span>[1 Pet.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018)<span id="ii.i.ii-p25.5"></span>..md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc05004.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p9"></span> See Becon’s Catechism, part 3, (Parker
Society’s edition,) p. 60, *et* *seq*. See also Bullinger’s Decades,
(Parker Society,) vol. 1, p. 212; and Hooper’s Early Writings, (Parker
Society,) pages 349-351; and Calvin’s Institutes, lib. 2. cap. 8,
Section 12. It appears that this error may be traced to Augustine,
(Quaest. in <span id="ii.i.ii-p9.1"></span>Exodus 71<span
id="ii.i.ii-p9.1"></span>, and Ep. ad. Jan. 119,) who, without omitting
the Second Commandment, divided the precepts of the First Table into
three, on the supposition that their number was allusive to the Trinity.
He, however, contradicts himself elsewhere, (Quaest. Vet. et Novi Test.,
lib. 1:7;) but Peter Lomb. adopts his erroneous division, and separates
the Tenth Commandment into two parts. (Lib. 3, Distinct. 37 and 40.)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc05004.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p10"></span> See Jewish Antiq., book 3. chap. 5.
Section 5. In sect. 8 it is added: “When he had said this he showed them
two tables, with the ten commandments engraven upon them, five upon each
table; and the writing was by the hand of God.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc05004.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p11"></span> “La piete que nous devons a Dieu, et
l’equite que nous devons a nos prochains;” the piety which we owe to
God, and the equity which we owe to our neighbors. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc05004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p16"></span> There is a delightful illustration of
this point, which will occur to many, related in *More*’*s* *Life* *of*
*Sir* *Thomas* *More*, ch. 6. Section 5, — “Now it was a comfortable
thing for ante man to behold how two great rooms of Westminster-hall
were taken up, one with the son, the other with the father, which hath
as yet never been heard of before or since, the son to be Lord
Chancellor, and the father, *Sir* *John* *More*, to be one of the
ancientest Judges of the King’s Bench, if not the eldest of all; for now
he was near 90 year old. Yea, what a grateful spectacle was it, to see
the son ask the father’s blessing every day upon his knees, before he
sat in his own seat, a thing expressing rare humility, exemplar
obedience, and submissive piety.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc05004.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p18"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p18.1"></span> “Let us
consider what is meant by the Gentiles’ <span
id="ii.i.ii-p18.2"></span>ἀντιπελαργεῖν<span id="ii.i.ii-p18.3"></span>,
which is to requite one good turn with another; and especially to
nourish and cherish them, by whom thou thyself in thy youth was brought
up and tendered. There is among the Gentiles a law extant, worthy to be
called the mistress of piety, whereby it is enacted that the children
should either nourish their parents or else lie fast lettered in prison.
This law many men do carelessly neglect, which the stork alone, among
all living creatures, doth keep most precisely. For other creatures do
hard, and scarcely know or look upon their parents, if peradventure they
need their aid to nourish them; whereas the stork doth mutually nourish
them, being stricken in age, and bear them on her shoulders, when for
feebleness they cannot fly.” — Bullinger’s Second Decade, Serm. 5,
Parker Society’s edit., vol. 1, p. 272. See also Hooper’s Early
Writings, Parker Society’s edit., p. 359. “Follow the nature of the
cicone, that in her youth nourisheth the old days of her parents.” —
Plin., lib. 10 cap. 23, Nat. Hist.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p19"></span>The *Fr*. concludes the sentence thus: “et
ainsi nous sont comme maistresses pour nous apprendre a recognoistre le
bien que nous avons receu de ceux qui nous ont mis au monde et elevez;”
and so are, as it were, our mistresses to teach us to repay the benefits
of those who have brought us into the world and reared us.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc05004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p21"></span> This famous sentiment of antiquity is
found in the Elegies of Theognis, some 500 years B.C., —

<span id="ii.i.ii-p22"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p22.1"></span>Pa&gt;ntwn
me&lt;n mh&lt; fu\~nai ejpicqoni&gt;oisin a\]riston,  
Mhd j ejsidei\~n aujgav ojxe&gt;ov hjeli&gt;v.  
Fu&gt;nta d j o\[pwv w\]kiva pu&gt;lav aji\`&gt;daw perh\~sai  
Kai&lt; kei+sqai pollh&lt;n gh\~n ejpamhsa&gt;menon.<span
id="ii.i.ii-p22.5"></span> — 425-428.

<span id="ii.i.ii-p23"></span><span id="ii.i.ii-p23.1"></span>It is also
reported by Plutarch, in his <span
id="ii.i.ii-p23.2"></span>Παραμυθητικὸς προς Απολλώνιον<span
id="ii.i.ii-p23.3"></span>, by whom, as well as by Cicero, it is called
the reply of Silenus to Midas, — “Affertur etiam de Sileno fabella
quaedam: qui cum a Mida captus esset, hoc ei muneris pro sua missione
dedisse scribitur: docuisse regem, non nasci homini longe optimum esse;
proximum autem, quamprimum mori.” — *Tusc* *Quaest*<span
id="ii.i.ii-p23.4"></span>. 1:48. “Ex quo intelligi licet, non nasci
longe optimum esse, nec in hos scopulos incidere vitae; proximum autem,
si natus sis, quamprimum mori, et tanquam ex incendio effugere fortunae.
Sileni quae fertur fabula, etc.” — *Consolatio*<span
id="ii.i.ii-p23.5"></span>. Lactantius refers to the latter passage,
*De* *falsa* *sapientia*<span id="ii.i.ii-p23.6"></span>, Section 19.
“Hinc nata est inepta illa sententia, etc.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc05004.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.i.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.ii-p25"></span> “Pars justiciae non postrema.” — *Lat*.
“Une partie de la justice, qui nous devons tous garder;” a part of
righteousness which we ought all to observe. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exposition of the Commandment (Lev. 19)](cc05005.md)
