[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05059)  [Next](cc05061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#000)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span><span id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
9:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)<span id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>,
25-29

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**7.** Remember, *and* *forget* not, how thou
provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day
that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this
place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**7.** Memento, ne obliviscaris quod ad iram
provocasti Jehovam Deum tuum in deserto, a die qua egressus es e terra
*A*Egypti, donec ingressi estis ad hunc locum, rebelles fuistis Jehovae.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**8.** Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to
wrath, so that the Lord was angry with you, to have destroyed you.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**8.** Nam in Horeb provocastis Jehovam: et
excanduit Jehova in vos ad perdendum vos.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**9.** When I was gone up into the mount, to
receive the tables of stone, *even* the tables of the covenant which the
Lord made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty
nights; I neither did eat bread nor drink water:

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**9.** Quum ascendissem in montem ut
acciperem tabulas lapideas, tabulas faederis quod pepigerat Jehova
vobiscum, tunc mansi in monte quadraginta noctes, ubi panem non comedi,
et aquam non bibi.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**10.** And the Lord delivered unto me two
tables of stone, written with the finger of God: and on them *was*
*written* according to all the words which the Lord spake with you in
the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**10.** Et dedit mihi Jehova duas tabulas
lapideas scriptas digito Dei, et in ipsis *erat* juxta omnia verba qum
loquutus fuerat Jehova in monte e medio ignis, in die conventus.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**11.** And it came to pass, at the end of
forty days and forty nights, *that* the Lord gave me the two tables of
stone, *even* the tables of the covenant.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**11.** Et factum est a fine quadraginta
dierum et quadraginta noc tium, ut daret Jehova mihi duas tabulas
lapideas, tabulas foederis.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**12.** And the Lord said unto me, Arise,
get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought
forth out of Egypt have corrupted *themselves;* they are quickly turned
aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a
molten image.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**12.** Dixit autem mihi Jehova, Surge,
descende hinc celeriter: quia corrupit se populus tuus quem eduxisti ex
*A*Egypto: recesserunt cito e via quam praeceperam illis: feterunt sibi
conflatile.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>**13.** Furthermore the Lord spake unto me,
saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it *is* a stiff-necked
people.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>**13.** Tunc dixit mihi Jehova, Vidi populum
hunc, et ecce, populus est durae cervicis.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span>**14.** Let me alone, that I may destroy
*them,* and blot out their name from under heaven: and I will make of
thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**14.** Sine me ut perdam eos, deleamque
nomen eorum sub coelo, et faciam to in gentem potentiorem, et majorem
illa.

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span>**15.** So I turned, and came down from the
mount, and the mount burned with fire; and the two tables of the
covenant *were* in my two hands.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**15.** Tunc verti me, et descendi e monte
(mons autem ipse ardebat igni) et duae tabulae foederis in manibus meis
erant.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>**16.** And I looked, and, behold, ye had
sinned against the Lord your God, *and* had made you a molten calf: ye
had turned aside quickly out of the way which the Lord had commanded
you.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>**16.** Et vidi, et ecce, peccaveratis in
Jehovam Deum vestrum, foceratis vobis vitulum conflatilem, recesseratis
cito de via quam paeceperat Jehova vobis.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**17.** And I took the two tables, and cast
them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>**17.** Tunc apprehendi duas tabulas, et
projeci eas e manibus meis, confregique in oculis vestris.

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>**18.** And I fell down before the Lord, as
at the first, forty days and forty nights: I did neither eat bread nor
drink water, because of all your sins, which ye sinned, in doing
wickedly in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>**18.** Et procidi coram Jehova sicut prius,
quadraginta dies et quadraginta noctes: panem non comedi, et aquam non
bibi, propter omne peccatum vestrum quod peccaveratis, impie agendo in
oculis Jehovae ad ipsum provocandum.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>**19.** (For I was afraid of the anger and
hot displeasure wherewith the Lord was wroth against you to destroy
you.) But the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**19.** Timui enim propter excandescentiam
et tram qua excanduerat Jehova contra vos ad perdendum vos: et exaudivit
me Jehova etiam hac vice.

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>**20.** And the Lord was very angry with
Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span>**20.** Contra Aharon quoque excanduit
Jehova vehementer ad perdendum eum, et oravi etiam pro Aharon tempore
illo.

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>**21.** And I took your sin, the calf which
ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, *and* ground *it*
very small, *even* until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust
thereof into the brook that descended out of the mount.

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>**21.** Porro peccatum vestrum quod
feceratis, nempe vitulum, accepi, et combussi ilium igni, et contrivi
bene molendo, donec comminutus esset in pulverem: ae projeci pulverem
ejus in torrentem qui descendebat e monte illo.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>**25.** Thus I fell down before the Lord
forty days and forty nights, as I fell down *at* *the* *first;* because
the Lord had said he would destroy you.

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>**25.** Et procidi coram Jehova quadraginta
diebus et quadraginta noctibus, quibus procidi: quia dixerat Jehova se
perditurum vos.

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>**26.** I prayed therefore unto the Lord,
and said, O Lord God, destroy not thy people, and thine inheritance,
which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought
forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>**26.** Oravi igitur Jehovam, et dixi,
Dominator Jehova, ne perdas populum tuum, et haereditatem tuam quam
redemisti magnitudine tua, quem eduxisti ex *A*Egypto manu valida.

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>**27.** Remember thy servants, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to
their wickedness, nor to their sin;

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>**27.** Memento servorum tuorum, Abrahae,
Isaac et Jacob, ne respicias ad duritiem populi hujus, et ad impietatem
ejus et peccatum.

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>**28.** Lest the land whence thou broughtest
us out say, Because the Lord was not able to bring them into the land
which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them
out to slay them in the wilderness.

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>**28.** Ne forte dicant in terra, unde
eduxisti nos, Propterea quod non potuit Jehova introducere eos in terram
quam dixerat illis, vel quia oderat filius, eduxit eos ut interficeret
in deserto.

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>**29.** Yet they *are* thy people, and thine
inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power, and by thy
stretched-out arm.

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>**29.** Ipsi autem sunt populus tuus, et
haereditas tua, quam eduxisti fortitudine tua magna, et brachio tuo
extento.

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span><span id="vii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>**7.** *Remember, and forget not, how thou
provokedst* In order to reprove the ingratitude of the people, Moses
here briefly refers to some of their offenses; but he principally
insists on the history of their revolt, in which their extreme and most
detestable impiety betrayed itself. He therefore narrates this crime in
almost the identical words which he had previously used in Exodus. He
begins by urging them often to reflect upon their sins, lest they should
ever be forgotten; and this constant recollection of them not only
tended to humiliate them, but also to teach them at length to lay aside
their depraved nature, and to accustom themselves to become obedient to
God. Afterwards he proceeds to the history itself, shewing that God had
been provoked by their idolatry to destroy them. If a question be here
put, how it was that God was prevailed upon by Moses to change His
intention, our curiosity must be repressed, lest we should dispute more
deeply than is fitting respecting the secret and incomprehensible decree
of God. Sure it is that God did not act otherwise than He had
determined; but Moses goes no deeper than the sentence that was revealed
to him; just as we must assuredly conclude that destruction is prepared
for us when we transgress; and that God’s anger is appeased when we fly
to His mercy in true faith, and with sincere affections. The rest has
been already expounded.

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span><span id="vii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span>**17.** *And I took the two tables, and cast
them out* Moses here accuses himself of no transgression; he does not,
therefore, give us to understand that he was urged to break the tables
by the impetuosity of excessive anger; but rather he again repeats what
they had deserved, and consequently that he discharged the office of a
herald,  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) so as to denounce, not
by word of mouth only, but by a solemn rite also, that God’s Covenant
was broken and made void by their perfidiousness. For which reason also
he cast down and broke the tables before their eyes, in order that being
alarmed by so awful a punishment, they might more earnestly betake
themselves to the expiation of their sins.

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span><span id="vii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>**18.** *And I fell down before the Lord*
The order of the narrative is confused; for this fact of which he speaks
did not precede his second ascent into the mount, when he was commanded
to prepare the second tables. If so, he would have fasted three times,
which we gather from other passages not to have been the case; but we
must not be surprised that the same thing should be often repeated, as
we shall see at the beginning of chapter 10, as well as shortly
afterwards. The mention of it here, however, is seasonable, because the
Covenant was to be renewed, and therefore, as if nothing had been done,
he again abstained from meat and drink for forty days. Yet we have
elsewhere seen that there were other prayers which had intervened before
He ascended the mount a second time; but He does not here distinctly
record the details, nay, he mixes up the prayers, whereby he interceded
with God, with the second fast, because this was the point most worthy
of observation, that the first promulgation of the Law had failed of its
effect, and the Covenant which they had violated was to be repeated, as
it were, from its very commencement.

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span>Although he says that “because of their
sins” he had not eaten bread nor drunk water, he does not signify that
this fast was a sign of grief and mourning, like as Joel invites the
people to sackcloth and ashes, and urges them to weeping and fasting for
the purpose of testifying their repentance. (<span
id="vii.i-p51.1"></span>[Joe 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.i-p51.1"></span>.) For abstinence, as I have already shewn, was
no more difficult or grievous to Moses than to the angels. But he simply
reminds them that so great a sin could not be expiated, unless he had
again renounced the life of men and had been taken up to God. Meanwhile,
it must be borne in mind that previously to this, he had already made
entreaty for the people, and had also been accepted; inasmuch as it was
a token that God was reconciled and appeased, when He called up Moses to
receive the Law, and to bring it down to them a second time. To this
refers what he adds in the next verse, “For I was afraid of the anger,”
etc., for he was still in anxiety as to the welfare of the people, since
God did not cease to menace them. We see, therefore, that this fear and
anxious earnestness in prayer are separated from the fast, as different
things; and assuredly he had already propitiated God, when, by His
command he hewed out the new tables whereon the Covenant was to be
renewed. Still, I do not deny that he labored also in the mount in the
cause of obtaining pardon, just as believers, by continuing the requests
which have already been granted, confirm their faith more and more. I
only warn my readers to observe the distinction of time which I have
noticed.

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span><span id="vii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>**20.** *And the Lord was very angry with
Aaron* It hence appears how vain are the pretexts whereby men endeavor
to conceal their faults, until they are subdued by genuine fear of God
to acknowledge their guilt. Although Aaron did not boast that he was
altogether innocent, still he endeavored to blot out, or at any rate to
extenuate the enormity of his crime by alleging that he was under
compulsion. But Moses declares that God was very angry with him. Whence
it follows that he was guilty of a very gross sin, which is also more
certainly declared by the greatness of its punishment; for God would
never have been thus moved even to destroy him, unless because he was
worthy of this condemnation.

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>In the next verse, the word *sin* is not
applied to the act; itself,  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) but
is transferred by metonymy to the calf, as its apposition shews. Again,
by saying that he had thoroughly broken the calf to pieces by grinding
it till it was reduced to powder, he signifies once more how abominable
this idol was, especially when he adds, that the powder was cast into
the stream, lest any memorial of it should continue in existence.

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span><span id="vii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span>**25.** *Thus I fell down before the Lord
forty days* Again the narrative is blended together; for it is certain
that this prayer was offered before he remained fasting in the mount
during the second forty days. But inasmuch as then also, being still in
anxiety, he continued the same prayers, it is not to be wondered at that
he should include in the forty days’ fast whatever had been done before.
For there is no absurdity in supposing that after having obtained the
safety of the people, for which he had petitioned, he should still be in
trepidation. Moreover, that this fast was posterior to the prayer which
he mentions at the same time, may be inferred from the beginning of the
next chapter, where he records that the second tables were given to him,
but says not a word of the fast. I have stated why he so often repeats
his allusion to the forty days, viz., because it would not have been
sufficient merely to intercede, unless this reconciliation had followed,
which he obtained when he received the new covenant. The rest I have
already expounded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc05060.htm#fr_390) <span
id="vii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span> *Lat.* “Fecialis munere;” alluding
doubtless to the custom of the Roman *Feciales,* in throwing a bloody
spear into the territories of others as a declaration of war. See *Liv.*
1:32.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc05060.htm#fr_391) <span
id="vii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span> “Il appelle le veau Peche du *peuple,*
pource qu’il avoit este la matiere et object de leur idolatrie;” he
calls the calf the Sin of the people, because it had been the matter and
object of their idolatry. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 10:1-5,10,11](cc05061)
