[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05005)  [Next](cc05007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv-p1"></span>The Supplements of the Fifth Commandment

<span id="ii.i.iv.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.i-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p3"></span>**15.** And he that smiteth his father or
his mother shall be surely put to death.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p4"></span>**15.** Qui percusserit patrem suum aut
matrem, morte moriatur.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p5"></span>**17.** And he that curseth his father or
his mother shall surely be put to death.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p6"></span>**17.** Qui maledixerit patri suo vel
matri suae, morte moriatur.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p7"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p7.1"></span>[Leviticus
20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p8"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p8.1"></span>[Leviticus
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009)<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p9"></span>**9.** For every one that curseth his
father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath cursed his
father or his mother; his blood *shall* *be* upon him.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p10"></span>**9.** Qui maledixerit patri suo aut
matri suae morte moriatur: qui patri suo et matri suae maledixit,
sanguis ejus super eum.

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p12"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p13"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.i-p13.1"></span>The
commandment is now sanctioned by the denunciation of capital punishment
for its violation, *yet*<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p13.2"></span> not so as to
comprehend all who have in any respect sinned against their parents, but
sufficient to show that the rights of parents are sacred, and not to be
violated without the greatest criminality. We know that parricides
 <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) <span id="ii.i.iv.i-p14.1"></span> as
being the most detestable of all men, were formerly sewn up in a
leathern sack and cast into the water; but God proceeds further, when He
commands all those to be exterminated who have laid violent hands on
their parents  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) <span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.1"></span> or addressed them in abusive language. For
to *smite*<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.2"></span> does not only mean to kill,
but refers to any violence, although no wound may have been inflicted.
If, then, any one had struck his father or mother with his fist, or with
a stick, the punishment of such an act of madness was the same as for
murder. And, assuredly, it is an abominable and monstrous thing for a
son not to hesitate to assault those from whom he has received his life;
nor can it be but that impunity accorded to so foul a crime must
straightway produce cruel barbarism. The second law avenges not only
violence done to parents, but also, abusive words, which soon proceed to
grosser insults and atrocious contempt. Still, if any one should have
lightly let drop some slight reproach, as is often the case ill a
quarrel, this severe punishment was not to be inflicted upon such, all
inconsiderate piece of impertinence: and the word <span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.3"></span>קלל<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.4"></span>,
*kalal*<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.5"></span>, from which the participle
used by Moses is derived, not only means to reproach, but also to curse,
as well as to esteem lightly, and to despise. Whilst, therefore, not
every insult, whereby the reverence due to parents was violated,
received the punishment of death, still God would have that impious
pride, which would subvert the first principles of nature, held in
abhorrence. But, inasmuch as it might seem hard that a word,  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) <span id="ii.i.iv.i-p16.1"></span> however
unworthy of a dutiful son, should be the cause of death; this objection
is met, by what is added by God in Leviticus, “his blood shall be upon
him, *because*<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p16.2"></span> he hath cursed his
father or mother:” as if He would put a stop to what men might otherwise
presume to allege in mitigation of the severity of the punishment.

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)<span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p3"></span>**18.** If a man have a stubborn and
rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the
voice of his mother, and *that*, when they have chastened him, will not
hearken unto them;

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p4"></span>**18.** Quum quis habuerit filium
perversum et rebellem, non obedientem voci patris sui et matris suae, et
castigaverint illum, nec paruerit illis:

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p5"></span>**19.** Then shall his father and his
mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city,
and unto the gate of his place:

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p6"></span>**19.** Tum apprehendent cum pater eius
et mater eius, educentque ad seniores urbis suae et portam loci sui:

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p7"></span>**20.** And they shall say unto the
elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not
obey our voice; *he* *is* a glutton and a drunkard.

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p8"></span>**20.** Dicentque senioribus urbis,
Filius iste noster perversus et rebellis est, non obediens voci nostrae,
epulo est ac comessator.

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p9"></span>**21.** And all the men of his city
shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away
from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p10"></span>**21.** Tunc lapidabunt eum omnes
homines urbis suae lapidibus, et morietur: atque ita auferes malum e
medio tui, universusque Israel audiet, et timebit.

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p13"></span>**18.** *If* *a* *man* *have* *a*
*stubborn*. What God had previously adverted to in two clauses, tie now
embraces in a general law, for it cannot be doubted but that by
rebellious children all are designated who are abusive or insulting to
their father and mother. For if it be a capital crime to be disobedient
to parents, much more is it to strike, or beat them, and to assail them
with reproachful words. In sum, Moses declares that those are deserving
of death who are of such a stubborn and intractable disposition as to
reject the authority of their father and mother, and to hold them in
contempt. Whence also we infer what it is to honor our father and
mother, for the punishment is only denounced for the transgression of
the Commandment. When, therefore, the law delivers over to death all who
contumaciously rebel against the discipline of their parents, it follows
that they have refused them their due honor. An admirable means,
however, of moderating the severity of the law is introduced, when God
requires the case to be decided on the evidence of the father and
mother; and commands that it should be publicly heard, so that none may
be condemned at the will of private individuals. By the Roman law the
power of life and death over his children  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) was given to the father, because it was
not probable that fathers would be carried away by such senseless
inhumanity as to deal cruelly with their own bowels; but, since
sometimes fathers are found who are not unlike wild beasts, and examples
show us that many, blinded by hate or avarice, have not spared their own
children, this concession of the Roman law is justly to be repudiated. I
allow, indeed, that those who desired to inflict punishment on their
children called their friends into council; but, whereas, the walls of a
private dwelling conceal many disgraceful things, God imposed a much
better restraint on parents when He did not suffer them to go further
than to lay the information and to give their testimony. For, although
he would have credit given to their testimony, still, when the children
were brought to the tribunal of the judges, a legal trim undoubtedly
ensued; and this form of proceeding is prescribed, viz., that the father
and mother should bring their son and make their complaint before the
judges of his incorrigible stubbornness. It is true that the sentence is
immediately subjoined; yet we must infer, nevertheless, that the judges
pronounced it before the criminal was stoned, else it would have been
ridiculous that they should sit there like cyphers. The very mention of
a trial, therefore, implies that the son was heard in his defense, so as
to clear himself of the crime, if he was not guilty of it: for, suppose
the moroseness of the father and mother were notorious; or that the
father accused the son by the instigation of a stepmother; or that any
unworthy spite were discovered; or that the father and mother had
conspired to destroy their son in a fit of passion: the defense of the
cause is, therefore, implied in the adverb *then*,  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) for it would have been more than absurd
that the son should be condemned without being heard. Especially, when
he was to be stoned by the whole people, it was necessary that he should
be first convicted; and on this ground he was brought forth publicly,
that he might be allowed to plead his cause. But although those were
condemned who were addicted to other vices also, yet Moses expressly
mentions *gluttons* and *drunkards*, *to* show that, although no capital
crime were alleged, still, dissolute profligacy was sufficient, if the
son could not be corrected by his parents; for it is plain that those
are in a desperate state who have so east away submissiveness and shame
as to receive no profit from the admonitions of their parents. From the
end of the verse we gather what was the twofold object of the punishment
— that the earth should be purged of the sins whereby it was in a
manner, polluted, and that the death of him who had transgressed might
be an example to all.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p3"></span>**28.** Thou shalt not revile the gods,
nor curse the ruler of thy people.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p4"></span>**28.** Diis non detrahes, et principi
populi tui non maledices.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p5"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p6"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#009)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p7"></span>**9.** And it shall be, when the
officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall
make captains of the armies to lead the people.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p8"></span>**9.** Quum finem fecerint praefecti
militares loquendi ad populum, constituent principes turmarum in capite
populi.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p10"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>[Exodus
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>.** *Thou* *shalt* *not* *revile* *the*
*gods*. These four passages confirm what I have said, that in the: Fifth
Commandment are comprised, by *synecdoche* all superiors in authority.:
For it was not the design of God to add to the Two Tables, as if
something better and more perfect had afterwards come into His mind;
which it is sinful to suppose. He was therefore content with the rule
once laid down, although He afterwards spoke in a more explanatory
manner. But the precepts here given would be unconnected with the Law,
if they were not an adjunct, and therefore a part, of the Fifth
Commandment.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p12"></span>First of all, He commands that we
should think and speak reverently of judges, and others, who exercise
the office of magistrate: nor is it to be questioned, that, in the
ordinary idiom of the Hebrew language, He repeats the same thing twice
over; and consequently that the same persons are called “gods,” and
“rulers of the people.” The name of God is, figuratively indeed, but
most reasonably, applied to magistrates, upon whom, as the ministers of
His authority, He has inscribed a mark of His glory. For, as we have
seen that honor is due to fathers, because God has associated them with
Himself in the possession of the name, so also here His own dignity is
claimed for judges, in order that the people may reverence them, because
they are God’s representatives, as His lieutenants, and vicars. And so
Christ, the surest expositor, explains it, when He quotes the passage
from <span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>, “I have said, Ye are gods, and all of
you are children of the Most High,” (<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p12.2"></span>[Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p12.2"></span>,) viz., “that they are called gods, unto
whom the word of God came,” which is to be understood not of the general
instruction addressed to all God’s children, but of the special command
to rule.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p13"></span>It is a signal exaltation of
magistrates, that God should not only count them in the place of
parents, but present them to us dignified by His own name; whence also
it clearly appears that they are not to be obeyed only from fear of
punishment, “but also for conscience sake,” (<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>,) and to be reverently honored, lest God
should be despised in them. If any should object, that it would be wrong
to praise the vices of those whom we perceive to abuse their power; the
answer is easy, that although judges are to be borne with even if they
be not the best,  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) still that the
honor with which they are invested, is not a covering for *vice*. Nor
does God command us to applaud their faults, but that the people should
rather deplore them in silent sorrow, than raise disturbances in a
licentious and seditious spirit, and so subvert political government.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032)<span
id="ii.i.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p3"></span>**32.** Thou shalt rise up before the
hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am
the Lord.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p4"></span>**32.** Ante canitiem assurge, et honora
faciem senis, metueque Deum tuum: ego Jehova.

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p6"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p7"></span>**32.** *Thou* *shalt* *rise* *up*
*before* *the* *hoary* *head*. God teaches us that some sparks of His
majesty shine forth in old men, whereby they approach to the honor of
parents. It is not my purpose to gather quotations from profane authors
in reference to the honor due to the old; let it *suffice* that what God
here commands is dictated by nature itself. This appeared at Athens,
 <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) when an old man had come into the
theater, and found no place among his fellow-citizens; but, when at
length he was admitted with honor by the Spartan ambassador, (because
old age is greatly reverenced among the Lacedemonians,) applause was
raised on all sides; and then the Lacedemonian exclaimed, that “the
Athenians knew what was right, but would not do it.” It was surely
manifested by this universal consent of the people that it is a natural
law in the hearts of all to reverence and honor old men. Many old men,
indeed, either by their levity, or lewdness, or sloth, subvert their own
dignity; yet, although gray hairs may not always be accompanied by
courteous wisdom, still, in itself, age is venerable, according to God’s
command.

<span id="ii.i.iv.v"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p1"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p2"></span><span
id="ii.i.iv.v-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018)<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p3"></span>**18.** Judges and officers shalt thou
make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just
judgment.

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p4"></span>**18.** Judices et praefectos constitues
tibi intra omnes portas tuas quas Jehova Deus tuus dabit tibi per tribus
tuas, qui judicent populum judicio justitiae, hoc est recto.

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p6"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p7"></span>**18.** *Judges* *and* *officers* *shalt*
*thou* *make*. I have placed this passage among the Supplements of the
Fifth Commandment, for, if it pleases God that judges should be
appointed for ruling the people, it follows that their laws and edicts
should be obeyed; and thus the parental authority extends also to them.
But, in order that the people may more readily submit themselves to
judges, God reminds them that the human race could not otherwise be
preserved. Public utility, therefore, renders the authority of
magistrates pleasant and agreeable, though it would else be hateful.
But, although it be not conceded to all to elect their judges, because
God honored His chosen people with this prerogative, still he here
recommends in general a regular government, since He signifies that
human society cannot hold together unless the lawful rulers have
authority to execute justice. Whether, then, magistrates are appointed
by the suffrages of the people, or imposed in any other way, let us
learn that they are the necessary ministers of God, to confine all men
under the yoke of the laws. The latter passage, which I have annexed
from <span id="ii.i.iv.v-p7.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.iv.v-p7.1"></span>,
refers to the same thing, viz., that even in war discipline is
necessary, lest all things should be thrown into confusion. Now, if it
pleases God that certain superior officers should have the command, it
follows that they must be obeyed; for it would be ridiculous to appoint
governors, if it were lawful to despise them with impunity. When,
therefore, God sets military commanders over the people, He enforces the
duty of humble submission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc05006.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p14"></span> By the Roman law parricides were sewn
up in a leathern sack with a dog, a cock, a viper, and a monkey, and
east into the *sea*, or the nearest river. — *Vide* Cicero pro Rose.
Amer., 2:25, 26.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc05006.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p15"></span> “Ceux qui auront outrage pere ou mere,
soit de faict, soit de parole;” those who shall have outraged father or
mother either by act or word. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc05006.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.i.iv.i-p15.6"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.i-p16"></span> “Une injure verbale;” a verbal injury.
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc05006.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p14"></span> “A father among the Romans had the
power of life and death over his children. He could not only expose them
when infants, but, even when his children were grown up, he might
imprison, scourge, send them bound to work in the country, and also put
them to death by any punishment he pleased, if they deserved it. Sall.
Cat., 39.; Liv., 2:41; 8:7; Dionys., 8:79.” — Adam’s Rom. Antiq.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc05006.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p15"></span><span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p15.1"></span> The
particle <span id="ii.i.iv.ii-p15.2"></span>ו<span
id="ii.i.iv.ii-p15.3"></span> sometimes has this force, but is here
translated in *A* *V* *and*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc05006.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.i.iv.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iii-p14"></span> “Encore qu’ils ne sont pas tels
qu’ils devroyent;” even though they be not what they should. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc05006.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.i.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.iv.iv-p8"></span> Cicero, de Senectute, 18; and Val.
Max., lib. 4:5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Law: The Sixth Commandment](cc05007)
