[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05070)  [Next](cc05072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
3](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#000.md)<span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span><span id="vii.xii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
3:1-51](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>**1.** These also *are* the generations of
Aaron and Moses, in the day *that* the Lord spake with Moses in mount
Sinai.

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span>**1.** Hae sunt generationes Aharon et
Mosis ex quo loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen in monte Sinai.

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span>**2.** And these *are* the names of the
sons of Aaron; Nadab the first-born, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span>**2.** Hac autem sunt nomina filiorum
Aharon: primogenitus Nadab, et Ahihu, Eleazar et Ithamar.

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span>**3.** These *are* the names of the sons of
Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister
in the priest’s office.

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span>**3.** Ista sunt nomina filiorum Aharon
sacerdotum unctorum, quorum consecraverat manum ut sacerdotio
fungerentur.

<span id="vii.xii-p9"></span>**4.** And Nadab and Abihu died before the
Lord, when they offered fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of
Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in
the priest’s office in the sight of Aaron their father.

<span id="vii.xii-p10"></span>**4.** Mortuus est autem Nadab et Abihu
eoram Jehova, quando obtulerunt ignem externum coram Jehova in deserto
Sinai: et filii non fuerunt eis, ae sacerdotio functus est Eleazar et
Ithamar coram Aharone patre suo.

<span id="vii.xii-p11"></span>**5.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.xii-p12"></span>**5.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vii.xii-p13"></span>**6.** Bring the tribe of Levi near, and
present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.

<span id="vii.xii-p14"></span>**6.** Appropinquare fac tribum Levi, et
stare facias eam coram Aharone sacerdote, ut ministrent ei,

<span id="vii.xii-p15"></span>**7.** And they shall keep his charge, and
the charge of the whole congregation, before the tabernacle of the
congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.xii-p16"></span>**7.** Et custodiant custodiam ejus, et
custodiam universi coetus coram tabernaculo ecelesiae, ut exequantur
cultum tabernaculi.

<span id="vii.xii-p17"></span>**8.** And they shall keep all the
instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the
children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.xii-p18"></span>**8.** Custodiant quoque omnia utensilia
tabernaculi ecclesiae, custodiamque filiorum Israel, et exequantur
cultum tabernaculi.

<span id="vii.xii-p19"></span>**9.** And thou shalt give the Levites
unto Aaron, and to his sons: they *are* wholly given unto him out of the
children of Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p20"></span>**9.** Da inquam Levitas ipsi Aharon et
illils ejus: dati, daft *namque* *aunt* illi a filiis Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p21"></span>**10.** And thou shalt appoint Aaron and
his sons, and they shall wait on their priest’s office; and the stranger
that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

<span id="vii.xii-p22"></span>**10.** Aharon autem et filios ejus
praeticies, custodientque sacerdotium suum: externus sane qui
accesserit, morietur.

<span id="vii.xii-p23"></span>**11.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.xii-p24"></span>**11.** Loquutus est praeterea Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="vii.xii-p25"></span>**12.** And I, behold, I have taken the
Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the first-born
that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the
Levites shall be mine;

<span id="vii.xii-p26"></span>**12.** Ego quidera tuli Levitas e medio
filiorum Israel loco omnis primogeniti quod aperit vulvam a filiis
Israel: eruntque mei Levitae.

<span id="vii.xii-p27"></span>**13.** Because all the first-born *are*
mine: *for* on the day that I smote all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the first-born in Israel, both man and
beast; mine they shall be: I am the Lord.

<span id="vii.xii-p28"></span>**13.** Meum namque est omne primogenitum:
a die quo percussi omne primogenitum in terra *A*Egypti, sanctificavi
mihi omne primogenitum in Israel: tam ex hominibus quam ex animalibus:
mea erunt: ego Jehova.

<span id="vii.xii-p29"></span>**14.** And the Lord spake unto Moses in
the wilderness of Sinai, saying,

<span id="vii.xii-p30"></span>**14.** Loquutus est insuper Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="vii.xii-p31"></span>**15.** Number the children of Levi, after
the house of their fathers, by their families: every male from a month
old and upward shalt thou number them.

<span id="vii.xii-p32"></span>**15.** Numera filius Levi per domos
patrum suorum, per familias suas: omnem masculum ab uno meuse et supra,
numerabis.

<span id="vii.xii-p33"></span>**16.** And Moses numbered them, according
to the word of the Lord, as he was commanded.

<span id="vii.xii-p34"></span>**16.** Numeravit itaque eos Moses juxta
sermonem Jehovae, quemadmodum jussus fuerat.

<span id="vii.xii-p35"></span>**17.** And these were the sons of Levi,
by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.

<span id="vii.xii-p36"></span>**17.** Et fuermir isti filii Levi per
nomina sua, Gerson, Cehath et Merari.

<span id="vii.xii-p37"></span>**18.** And these *are* the names of the
sons of Gershon, by their families; Libni, and Shimei.

<span id="vii.xii-p38"></span>**18.** Haec autem sunt nomina filiorum
Gerson per familias suas, Libni et Semei.

<span id="vii.xii-p39"></span>**19.** And the sons of Kohath, by their
families; Amram, and Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.

<span id="vii.xii-p40"></span>**19.** Porro filii Cehath per familias
suas, Amram, et Jehor, Hebron et Uzziel.

<span id="vii.xii-p41"></span>**20.** And the sons of Merari, by their
families; Mahli, and Mushi: these *are* the families of the Levites,
according to the house of their fathers.

<span id="vii.xii-p42"></span>**20.** Filii vero Merari per familias
suas, Mahali, et Muzi. Istae sunt familiae Levi per domos patrum suorum.

<span id="vii.xii-p43"></span>**21.** Of Gershon *was* the family of the
Libnities, and the family of the Shimites: these *are* the families of
the Gershonites,

<span id="vii.xii-p44"></span>**21.** De Gerson, familia Libnitica, et
familia Simitica: istte sunt familiae Gersoniticae.

<span id="vii.xii-p45"></span>**22.** Those that were numbered of them,
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward,
*even* those that were numbered of them, *were* seven thousand and five
hundred.

<span id="vii.xii-p46"></span>**22.** Numerati eorum secundmu numerum
onmis masculi, a filio mensis et supra, numerati eormn, septem millia et
quingenti.

<span id="vii.xii-p47"></span>**23.** The families of the Gershonites
shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.

<span id="vii.xii-p48"></span>**23.** Familiae Gersonitiem post
tabernaculum castrametabuntur ad occidentem.

<span id="vii.xii-p49"></span>**24.** And the chief of the house of the
father of the Gershonites *shall* *be* Eliasaph the son of Lad.

<span id="vii.xii-p50"></span>**24.** Et princeps domus patris
Gersonitarum erit Eliasaph filius Lael.

<span id="vii.xii-p51"></span>**25.** And the charge of the sons of
Gershon, in the tabernacle of the congregation, *shall* be the
tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation,

<span id="vii.xii-p52"></span>**25.** Custodia autem filiorum Gerson in
tabernaculo conventionis erit tabernaculum, et tentorium, operimentum
ejus, aulaeum ostii tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="vii.xii-p53"></span>**26.** And the hangings of the court, and
the curtain for the door of the court, which *is* by the tabernacle, and
by the altar round about, and the cords of it, for all the service
there*of.*

<span id="vii.xii-p54"></span>**26.** Cortinae item atrii, et aulaeum
ostii atrii quod erat juxta tabernaculum, et juxta altare per circuitum,
funes quoque ejus pro omni ministerio ejus.

<span id="vii.xii-p55"></span>**27.** And of Kohath *was* the family of
the Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the
Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these *are* the families
of the Kohathites.

<span id="vii.xii-p56"></span>**27.** Et ipsius Cehath erit familiae
Amramitica, et familia Isharitica, et familia Hebronitica, et familia
Uzzielitica: istae sunt familiae Cehathiticae.

<span id="vii.xii-p57"></span>**28.** In the number of all the males,
from a month old and upward, *were* eight thousand and six hundred,
keeping the charge of the sanctuary.

<span id="vii.xii-p58"></span>**28.** Secundum numerum omn masculi a
filio mensis et supra, fuerunt octo millia sexcenti, custodiente
custodiam sanctuarii.

<span id="vii.xii-p59"></span>**29.** The families of the sons of Kohath
shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward.

<span id="vii.xii-p60"></span>**29.** Familiae filiorum Cehath
castrametabuntur ad latus tabernaculi ad meridiem.

<span id="vii.xii-p61"></span>**30.** And the chief of the house of
father of the families of the Kohathites *shall* *be* Elizaphan the son
of Uzziel.

<span id="vii.xii-p62"></span>**30.** Et princeps domus patris
familiarum Cehathitarum erit Elisaphan filius Uzziel.

<span id="vii.xii-p63"></span>**31.** And their charge *shall* *be* the
ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels
of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the
service thereof.

<span id="vii.xii-p64"></span>**31.** Custodia autem eorum erit arca, et
mensa, et candelabrum, et altaria, et vasa sanctitatis in quibus
ministrabunt, et aulaeum, et universum opus ejus.

<span id="vii.xii-p65"></span>**32.** And Eleazar the son of Aaron the
priest *shall* *be* chief over the chief of the Levites, *and* *have*
the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary.

<span id="vii.xii-p66"></span>**32.** Porro princeps principum Levitarum
erit Eleazar filius Aharon sacerdotis: praefectura custodientium
custodiam sanctitatis erit el.

<span id="vii.xii-p67"></span>**33.** Of Merari *was* the family of the
Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these *are* the families of
Merari.

<span id="vii.xii-p68"></span>**33.** Ipsius Merari erit familia
Mahalitica, et familia Musitica. Istae sunt familiae Merari.

<span id="vii.xii-p69"></span>**34.** And those that were numbered of
them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and
upward, *were* six thousand and two hundred.

<span id="vii.xii-p70"></span>**34.** Numerati autem eorum secundum
numerum ordinis masculi, ab uno mense et supra, sex millia et ducenti.

<span id="vii.xii-p71"></span>**35.** And the chief of the house of the
father of the families of Merari *was* Zuriel the son of Abihael:
*these* shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward.

<span id="vii.xii-p72"></span>**35.** Et princeps domus patris
familiarum Merari erit Suriel filius Abihael: atque hi ad latus
tabernaculi castrametabuntur ad Aquilonem.

<span id="vii.xii-p73"></span>**36.** And under the custody and charge
of the sons of Merari *shall* *be* the boards of the tabernacle, and the
bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all
the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto,

<span id="vii.xii-p74"></span>**36.** Praefectura autem custodia
filiorum Merari, tabulum tabernaculi, et vectes ejus, et columnae ejus,
et bases qius, omniaque vasa ejus, et universum opus ejus.

<span id="vii.xii-p75"></span>**37.** And the pillars of the court round
about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

<span id="vii.xii-p76"></span>**37.** Columnae quoque atrii per
circuitum, et bases earum, et clavi earum, et funes earum.

<span id="vii.xii-p77"></span>**38.** But those that encamp before the
tabernacle toward the east, *even* before the tabernacle of the
congregation eastward, *shall* *be* Moses, and Aaron and his sons,
keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of
Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

<span id="vii.xii-p78"></span>**38.** Qui vero castrametabuntur ante
tabernaculuun, ad Orientem, in parte anteriore tabernaculi conventionis,
ad orientem erunt Moses et Aharon, filiique ejus custodientes custodiam
sanctuarii, pro custodia filiorum Israel: externus certe qui accesserit
morietur.

<span id="vii.xii-p79"></span>**39.** All that were numbered of the
Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the Lord,
throughout their families, all the males, from a month old and upward,
*were* twenty and two thousand.

<span id="vii.xii-p80"></span>**39.** Omnes numerati Levitarum, quos
numeravit Moses et Aharon juxta sermonem Jehovae per familias eorum,
omnes mares ab uno mense et supra, duo et viginti millia.

<span id="vii.xii-p81"></span>40 And the Lord said unto Moses, Number
all the first-born of the males of the children of Israel, from a month
old and upward, and take the number of their names.

<span id="vii.xii-p82"></span>**40.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Numera
omne primogeniture masculmn filiorum Israel ab uno meuse et supra, et
accipe humerum nominum eorum.

<span id="vii.xii-p83"></span>**41.** And thou shalt take the Levites
for me, (I *am* the Lord,) instead of all the first-born among the
children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the
firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p84"></span>**41.** Capiesque Levitas mihi (ego
Jehova) loco omnium primogenitorumn filiorum Israel, et bestias
Levitatum loeo omnium primogenitorum ex bestits filiorum Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p85"></span>**42.** And Moses numbered, as the Lord
commanded him, all the first-born among the children of Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p86"></span>**42.** Numeravit itaque Moses quemadmodum
ei paeceperat Jehova, omnem primogeniture in filiis Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p87"></span>**43.** And all the first-born males, by
the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were
numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and
threescore and thirteen.

<span id="vii.xii-p88"></span>**43.** Fueruntque omnia primogenita
mascula, secundum numerum nominum, ab uno filio mensis, et supra, per
numeratos eorum, duo et viginti millia, et ducenti septuaginta tres.

<span id="vii.xii-p89"></span>**44.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.xii-p90"></span>**44.** Loquutusque est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vii.xii-p91"></span>**45.** Take the Levites instead of all
the first-born among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the
Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am the
Lord.

<span id="vii.xii-p92"></span>**45.** Cape Levitas loco omnium
primogenitorum in filiis Israel, et bestias Levitatum pro bestiis eorum,
eruntque mei Levitae: ego Jehova.

<span id="vii.xii-p93"></span>**46.** And for those that are to be
redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen of the
first-born of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites;

<span id="vii.xii-p94"></span>**46.** Porro redemptiones ducentorum
septuaginta trium redundant ultra Levitas, a primogenitis filiorum
Israel.

<span id="vii.xii-p95"></span>**47.** Thou shalt even take five shekels
apiece by the poll; after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take
*them:* (the shekel *is* twenty gerahs:)

<span id="vii.xii-p96"></span>**47.** Capies quinos siclos in singuls;
capita, secundum siculum sanctuarii capies: viginti obolorum est siclus.

<span id="vii.xii-p97"></span>**48.** And thou shalt give the money,
wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron, and to
his sons.

<span id="vii.xii-p98"></span>**48.** Dabisque pecuniam illam Aharoni et
filiis ejus, redemptiones eorum qui exuperant in illis.

<span id="vii.xii-p99"></span>**49.** And Moses took the
redemption-money of them that were over and above them that were
redeemed by the Levites.

<span id="vii.xii-p100"></span>**49.** Accepit ergo Moses pecuniam
redemptionis ab its qui superabant ultra redemptos Levitarum:

<span id="vii.xii-p101"></span>**50.** A primogenitis filiorum Israel
accepit pecuniam mille trecentos sexaginta quinque siclos, secundum
siclum sanctuarii.

<span id="vii.xii-p102"></span>**50.** Of the first-born of the children
of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and three score
and five *shekels,* after the shekel of the sanctuary:

<span id="vii.xii-p103"></span>**51.** And Moses gave the money of them
that were redeemed unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to the word of
the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.xii-p104"></span>**51.** Deditque Moses pecuniam
redemptionum Aharoni et filiis ejus, juxta sermonem Jehovae, quemadmodum
praeceperat illi Jehova.

<span id="vii.xii-p105"></span> 

<span id="vii.xii-p106"></span><span id="vii.xii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p107"></span>**1.** *These also are the generations of
Aaron and Moses* He now separately enumerates the Levites; but, before
he proceeds to state their number, he first shortly refers to what he
had just before more fully narrated, that of the four sons of Aaron only
two survived their father, inasmuch as Nadab and Abihu had suffered the
penalty of their negligence in their defilement of the sacrifice. The
six verses  <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) which Moses inserts
respecting the office of the priests have been expounded in their proper
place. The dignity of the tribe of Levi is here exalted, when God
compares the Levites to the first-born; the distribution of their
charges is also touched upon,  <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md)
but, since these things are connected with the *census* of the people,
and the mode of pitching the camp, I have thought it best to annex them
to what has just preceded, inasmuch as otherwise the history would be
interrupted. And, in fact, in the order that I have followed, the office
of each family is only incidentally treated of, so that all might know
their proper station.

<span id="vii.xii-p110"></span><span id="vii.xii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p111"></span>**12.** *And I, behold, I have taken the
Levites* A little further on we shall see more clearly why God claims
one tribe for Himself; He now only shews that the Levites rightfully
belong to Him, because by special privilege the first-born of the people
were preserved in the destruction of the Egyptians. God, therefore,
declares that those, whose lives were thus gratuitously spared, were
purchased to Himself. Since, then, He had the free option of devoting to
Himself the first-born of every tribe, He was no less at liberty to take
 <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md) only the twelfth part of the
people from one tribe. Thus He cuts off all handle for complaint,
inasmuch as it would have been intolerable ingratitude to withdraw from
His control those whom He had miraculously redeemed; therefore He says
that they did not perish in the general slaughter, in order that tie
might subject them to ttimself.

<span id="vii.xii-p113"></span><span id="vii.xii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p114"></span>**15.** *Number the children of Levi
after the house of their fathers* The enumeration of the tribe now
follows, commencing with the three sons of Levi, Kohath, Gershon, and
Merari, from whom many families afterwards descended. It must, however,
be observed, that all were numbered down to the youngest infants,
whereas of the rest of the people only those who had passed their
twentieth year were taken into account; whence it appeared that this was
the smallest tribe; but by causing the infants to be reckoned, God
intended to maintain a just proportion, as we shall see; for, if He had
only taken them above their twentieth year, it would not have been known
how many first-born there were, and thus the compensation to be made for
them would have been uncertain. By this indulgence the people should
have been induced to pay the tribute for the surplus with more
readiness; for since, after the computation was made, it appeared how
much their number came short of the required amount, God justly willed
that those should be redeemed for money, who would else have been
transferred to that tribe which represented the first-born, and it would
have been an act of malignity to refuse God what he demanded, when He
had spontaneously condescended to so just a compact. There was also
another reason why the Levites were included in the *census* from their
earliest childhood, rather than the others, viz., because it was not
necessary that they should be fit for war, when God enrolled from the
rest of the people soldiers for Himself who might afterwards bear arms.

<span id="vii.xii-p115"></span><span id="vii.xii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p116"></span>**17.** *And these were the sons of Levi
by their names* Hence it appears that the tribe of Levi, like the
others, had made an astonishing progress from a small and contemptible
beginning; for whereas he himself had only begotten three sons, Gershon
and Merari only two each, and Kohath four; who would have expected such
an increase, that twelve men in so short a time should have grown into
so many thousands? But thus powerfully does God work under the semblance
of weakness, that thus His glory may be the more conspicuous. But that
He promoted the family of Kohath above the others, not only in the
priesthood of Aaron, but also in their common ministry, proceeded from
the same source of His gratuitous good pleasure, as the calling of
Moses. He then, who had dignified also by so honorable an office, was,
for his sake, gracious also to the family of Kohath. Neverthless, lost
he should be suspected of ambition, or lest occasion of calumny should
be given to the ungodly, God chose that the sons of Moses should remain
in the ordinary station of the Levites.

<span id="vii.xii-p117"></span><span id="vii.xii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p118"></span>**45.** *Take the Levites instead of all
the first-born* The compensation of which I have spoken follows; for,
since the complete portion of God was not found in the tribe of Levi, it
must needs be supplied from elsewhere. Since, then, the Levites, infants
as well as men, were less by two hundred and seventy-three than the
first-born of the twelve tribes of Israel, God required that five
shekels of the sanctuary should be paid for every head. We have
elsewhere seen that the shekel of the sanctuary was double, amounting to
two ordinary ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc05071.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="vii.xii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p108"></span> Viz., verses 5-10. See *ante,* vol. 2,
p. 220.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc05071.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="vii.xii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p109"></span> “Quant a ce que Moyse touche ici des
charges particulieres de chacune famille, combien que cela concerne le
service duquel il a este traitte sur le Seconde Precepte, toutefois je
n’ay peu aucunement faire, que de la mettre ici, afin que le fil de
l’histoire ne fust point rompu;” with respect to the reference here made
by Moses to the peculiar charge of each family, although it relates to
the service which has been treated of under the Second Commandment,
nevertheless I could not do otherwise than introduce it here, in order
that the thread of the history might not be interrupted. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc05071.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="vii.xii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p112"></span> “Moins que la douzieme partie;” less
than the twelfth part. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 4:1-3,21-23,29,30,34-49](cc05072.md)
