[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05067)  [Next](cc05069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#000)<span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span><span id="vii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
1:1-54](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)<span id="vii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses in the
wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation, on the first
*day* of the second month, in the second year after they were come out
of the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen in
deserto Sinai, in tabernaculo conventionis, in primo mensis secundi,
anno secundo ex quo egressi sunt e terra *A*Egypti, dicendo:

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span>**2.** Take ye the sum of all the
congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the
house of their fathers, with the number of *their* names, every male by
their polls;

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span>**2.** Capite summam totius coetus filiorum
Israel per familias eorum, per domos patrum eorum, juxta numerum
nominum, onmem masculum per capita eorum.

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span>**3.** From twenty years old and upward, all
that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and Aaron shall number
them by their armies.

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span>**3.** A filio viginti armorum et supra,
Omnem egredientem ad bellum in Israele numerabitis eos per excreitus
suos tu et Aharon.

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>**4.** And with you there shall be a man of
every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers.

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span>**4.** Sintque vobiseum viri de singulis
tribubus, quorum quilibet caput domus sit patrum suorum.

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span>**5.** And these *are* the names of the men
that shall stand with you: *Of* *the* *tribe* *of* Reuben; Elizur the
son of Shedeur.

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span>**5.** Haec sunt autem nomima virorum qui
stabunt vobiscum: de Ruben, Elisur, filius Sedeur.

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span>**6.** Of Simeon; Shehmiel the son of
Zurishaddai.

<span id="vii.ix-p14"></span>**6.** De Simeon, Selumiel filius
Surisaddai.

<span id="vii.ix-p15"></span>**7.** Of Judah; Nahshon the son of
Amminadab.

<span id="vii.ix-p16"></span>**7.** De Jehudah, Nahason filius
Amminadab.

<span id="vii.ix-p17"></span>**8.** Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of
Zuar.

<span id="vii.ix-p18"></span>**8.** De Issachar, Nethanel filius Suar.

<span id="vii.ix-p19"></span>**9.** Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="vii.ix-p20"></span>**9.** De Zebulon, Eliab filius Helon.

<span id="vii.ix-p21"></span>**10.** Of the children of Joseph: of
Ephraim; Elishame the son of Ammihud: of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of
Pedabzur.

<span id="vii.ix-p22"></span>**10.** De filiis Joseph, de Ephraim,
Elisamama filius Ammihud: de Manasses, Gamliel illius Pedahsur.

<span id="vii.ix-p23"></span>**11.** Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of
Gideoni.

<span id="vii.ix-p24"></span>**11.** De Benjamin, Abidan filius Gidoni.

<span id="vii.ix-p25"></span>**12.** Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai.

<span id="vii.ix-p26"></span>**12.** De Dan, Ahiezer filius Ammisaddai.

<span id="vii.ix-p27"></span>**13.** Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.

<span id="vii.ix-p28"></span>**13.** De Aser, Pagiel filius Ochran.

<span id="vii.ix-p29"></span>**14.** Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="vii.ix-p30"></span>**14.** De Gad, Eliasaph filius Deuel.

<span id="vii.ix-p31"></span>**15.** Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="vii.ix-p32"></span>**15.** De Nephthali, Ahira filius Ellan.

<span id="vii.ix-p33"></span>**16.** These *were* the renowned of the
congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands
in Israel.

<span id="vii.ix-p34"></span>**16.** Hi sunt nobilissimi synagogae,
principes tribuum patrum suorum: capita millium Israelis erant.

<span id="vii.ix-p35"></span>**17.** And Moses and Aaron took these men
which are expressed by *their* names:

<span id="vii.ix-p36"></span>**17.** Accepit igitur Moses et Aharon
viros istos qui expositi sunt per nomina.

<span id="vii.ix-p37"></span>**18.** And they assembled all the
congregation together on the first *day* of the second month; and they
declared their pedigrees after their fanlilies, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and
upward, by their polls.

<span id="vii.ix-p38"></span>**18.** Et universam synagogam
congregaverunt primo mensis secundi, et secundum genealogiam recensiti
sunt per familias suas: per domos patrum suorum, juxta numerum numerum
per capita sua, omnis masculus a filio viginti armorum et supra, onmis
egrediens ad pugnam.

<span id="vii.ix-p39"></span>**19.** As the Lord commanded Moses, so he
numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="vii.ix-p40"></span>**19.** Quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi
Mosi, numeravit eos in deserto Sinai.

<span id="vii.ix-p41"></span>**20.** And the children of Reuben,
Israel’s eldest son, by their generations, after their families, by the
house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, by their
polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able
to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p42"></span>**20.** Fuerunt itaque filii Ruben
primogeniti lsrael per generationes suas, per familias suas, per domes
patrum suorum, juxta numerura nominum per capita sua, omnis masculus a
filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugham,

<span id="vii.ix-p43"></span>**21.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Reuben, *were* forty and six thousand and five
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p44"></span>**21.** Numerati eorum de tribu Ruben, sex
et quadraginta millia, atque quingenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p45"></span>**22.** Of the children of Simeon, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, those
that were numbered of them, according to the number of the names, by
their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were
able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p46"></span>**22.** De filiis Simeon per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domos patrum suorum, munerati ejus, juxta
humerum niminum, per capita sua, omnis masculus a filio viginti armorum
et supra, omnis; egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p47"></span>**23.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Simeon, *were* fifty and nine thousand and three
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p48"></span>**23.** Numerati inquam eorum de tribu
Simeon, novera et quinquaginta millia, atque trecenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p49"></span>**24.** Of the children of Gad, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p50"></span>**24.** De filiis Gad per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domus patrum suorum, juxta numerum nominum,
a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam.

<span id="vii.ix-p51"></span>**25.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Gad, *were* forty and five thousand six hundred
and fifty.

<span id="vii.ix-p52"></span>**25.** Numerati eorum de tribu Gad,
quinque et quadraginta milliae, atque sexcenti et quinquaginta.

<span id="vii.ix-p53"></span>**26.** Of the children of Judah, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p54"></span>**26.** De filiis Jehudah per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domus patrum suorum, juxta numerum nominum,
a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p55"></span>**27.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Judah, *were* threescore and fourteen thousand
and six hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p56"></span>**27.** Numerati eorum de tribu Jehudah,
quatuor et septuaginta millia, atque sexcenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p57"></span>**28.** Of the children of Issachar, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p58"></span>**28.** De filiis Issachar per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domum patrum suorum, juxta nuroerum
nominum, a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad putnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p59"></span>**29.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Issachar, *were* fifty and four thousand and four
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p60"></span>**29.** Numerati eorum de tribu Issachar,
quatuor et quinquaginta millia, atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p61"></span>**30.** Of the children of Zebulun, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p62"></span>**30.** De filiis Zebulon, per generationes
sues, per familias suas, per domos patrum suorum, juxta numerum niminum
a filio Viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p63"></span>**31.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Zebulun, *were* fifty and seven thousand and four
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p64"></span>**31.** Numerati corum de tribu Zebulon,
septem et quinquaginta millia, atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p65"></span>**32.** Of the children of Joseph,
*namely,* of the children of Ephraim, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p66"></span>**32.** De filiis Joseph, de filiis
Ephraim, per generationes suas, per familias suas, per domos patrum
suorum, juxta numerum nominum, a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis
egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p67"></span>**33.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Ephraim, *were* forty thousand and five hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p68"></span>**33.** Numerati eorum de tribu Ephraim,
quadraginta millius atque quingenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p69"></span>**34.** Of the children of Manasseh, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p70"></span>**34.** De filiis Manasse, per generationes
suas, per domos patrum suorum, juxta numerum nominum, a filio viginti
annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p71"></span>**35.** Those that were numbered of them,
even of the tribe of Manasseh, *were* thirty and two thousand and two
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p72"></span>**35.** Numerati corum de tribu Manasse,
duo et triginta raillid, atque ducenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p73"></span>**36.** Of the children of Benjamin, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p74"></span>**36.** De filiis Benjamin, per
generationes suas, per familias suam, per domum patrum suorum, juxta
numerum nominum, a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad
pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p75"></span>**37.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Benamin, *were* thirty and five thousand and four
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p76"></span>**37.** Numerati eorum de tribu Benjamin,
quinque et triginta millie, et quadringenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p77"></span>**38.** Of the children of Dan, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p78"></span>**38.** De filiis Dan, per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domos patrum suorum, juxta numerum nominum,
a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p79"></span>**39.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Dan, *were* threescore and two thousand and seven
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p80"></span>**39.** Numerati eorum de tribu Dan, duo et
sexaginta millia, atque septingenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p81"></span>**40.** Of the children of Asher, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p82"></span>**40.** De filiis Aser per generationes
suas, per familias suas, per domos patrum suorum, juxta humerum nominum,
a filio viginti armorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p83"></span>**41.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Asher, *were* forty and one thousand and five
hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p84"></span>**41.** Numerati eorum de tribu Aser, unum
et quadraginta millia, atque quingenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p85"></span>**42.** Of the children of Naphtali,
throughout their generations, after their families, by the house of
their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years
old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;

<span id="vii.ix-p86"></span>**42.** De filiis Nephthali, per
generationes suds, per familias suas, per domus patrum suorum, juxta
numerum nominum a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis egrediens ad
pugnam:

<span id="vii.ix-p87"></span>**43.** Those that were numbered of them,
*even* of the tribe of Naphtali, *were* fifty and three thousand and
four hundred.

<span id="vii.ix-p88"></span>**43.** Numerati eorum de tribu Nephthali,
tria et quinquaginta millia, atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.ix-p89"></span>**44.** These *are* those that were
numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel,
*being* twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers.

<span id="vii.ix-p90"></span>**44.** Isti sunt numerati illi quos
numeravit Moses et Aharon atque principes Israelis, duodecim viri:
singuli per domos patrum suorum erant.

<span id="vii.ix-p91"></span>**45.** So were all those that were
numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in
Israel;

<span id="vii.ix-p92"></span>**45.** Fueruntque omnes numerati filiorum
Israel per domos patrum suorum, a filio viginti annorum et supra, omnis
egrediens ad pugnam in Israele.

<span id="vii.ix-p93"></span>**46.** Even all they that were numbered,
were six hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and
fifty.

<span id="vii.ix-p94"></span>**46.** Fuerunt inquam omnes numerati,
sexcenta tria millia, et quingenti quinquaginta.

<span id="vii.ix-p95"></span>**47.** But the Levites, after the tribe of
their fathers, were not numbered among them.

<span id="vii.ix-p96"></span>**47.** At Levitin per tribum patrum suorum
non fuerunt numerati in medio eorum.

<span id="vii.ix-p97"></span>**48.** For the Lord had spoken unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.ix-p98"></span>**48.** Loquutus enim erat Jehova, ad Mosen
dicendo:

<span id="vii.ix-p99"></span>**49.** *Only* thou shalt not number the
tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of
Israel:

<span id="vii.ix-p100"></span>**49.** Veruntamen *(vel,* utique, *vel,*
tantummodo) tribum Levi non numerabis, neque summam eorum capies in
medio filiorum Israel.

<span id="vii.ix-p101"></span>**50.** But thou shalt appoint the Levites
over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and
over all things that *belong* to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and
all the vessels thereof: and they shall minister unto it, and shall
encamp round about the tabernacle.

<span id="vii.ix-p102"></span>**50.** Sed tu praefice Levitas
tabernaculo testimonii, et onmibus vasis ejus, et omnibus qum ad illud
pertinent: ipsi portabunt tabernaculum, et omnia vasa ejus, et ipsi
ministrabunt illi, et in circuitu tabernaculi castrametabuntur.

<span id="vii.ix-p103"></span>5l. And when the tabernacle setteth
forward, the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to
be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh
nigh shall be put to death.

<span id="vii.ix-p104"></span>**51.** Quando autem proficiscetur
tabernaculum, deponent illud Levitie: quum consistet tabernaculum,
erigent illud Levitae et extraneus qui accesserit, morietur.

<span id="vii.ix-p105"></span>**52.** And the children of Israel shall
pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own
standard, throughout their hosts.

<span id="vii.ix-p106"></span>**52.** Et castrametabuntur filil Israel
quisque in castris suis, et quisque juxta vexillum suum, et per
exercitus suos.

<span id="vii.ix-p107"></span>**53.** But the Levites shall pitch round
about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath upon the
congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the
charge of the tabernacle of testimony.

<span id="vii.ix-p108"></span>**53.** Levitae vero castrametabuntur in
circuitu tabernaculi testimoni et non erit ira super coetum filliorum
Israel: custodientque Levitiae custodiam tabernaculi testimonii.

<span id="vii.ix-p109"></span>**54.** And the children of Israel did
according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.

<span id="vii.ix-p110"></span>**54.** Fecerunt ergo filii Israel juxta
omnia quae praeceperat Jehova Most, sic fecerunt.

<span id="vii.ix-p111"></span> 

<span id="vii.ix-p112"></span><span id="vii.ix-p112.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p113"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses in
the wilderness of Sinai* Although this is the first numbering of the
people, of which we have an account, still, inasmuch as God had already
imposed a tax upon every person, the amount of which has been recorded,
we infer that it was in fact the second. But the reason for thus
numbering the people a second time was, because they were very soon
about to remove their camp from the wilderness of Sinai to take
posession of the promised land. Since, however, their impiety withheld
thmn from doing so, there was a third *census* taken just before their
actual entrance into the land, and with this object, that it might be
obvious, on comparison, how marvellously the people had been preserved
by the springing up of a new generation, in spite of so many plagues and
so much slaughter; for although a great proportion of them had been cut
off, almost as many persons were found as before.

<span id="vii.ix-p114"></span>Further, it must be observed, that the
people were not numbered except at God’s command, in order that He might
thus assert His supreme dominion over them; and also, that the mode of
taking the *census* was so arranged, that there should be no confusion
of ranks either through fraud or irregularity; for this was the reason
why each tribe had its superintendents, lest any one should slip into a
tribe to which he did not belong; and this is expressly mentioned by way
of assurance, since otherwise many might suspect that so great a
multitude could hardly be distinguished into classes with certainty, so
that the whole sum should be calculated without mistake.

<span id="vii.ix-p115"></span><span id="vii.ix-p115.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p116"></span>**20.** *And the children of Reuben,
Israel’s eldest son* If any disputatious person should contend that one
family could not increase in 250 years to so great an amount, and thus
should reject as nebulous what surpasses the ordinary rule of nature, we
must bear in mind what I have already stated, that, inasmuch as this
increase depended on the power of God, nothing is more absurd than to
measure it by ordinary rules. For the intention of the Spirit is to
represent to our eyes the incredible power of God in a conspicuous and
signal miracle. Meanwhile, if you compared the tribe of Reuben with some
of the others, it presents in its numbers some marks of the curse, so
that we may gather that Reuben was degraded from the honors of his
primogeniture; for the tribes of Simeon, Issachar, Zebulun, Dan, and
Naphtali were more numerous, whilst from Joseph alone, who was one of
the youngest, a posterity descended which almost doubled it in numbers.
God’s blessing, however, is most conspicuous in the tribe of Judah, in
correspondence with the prophecy of Jacob; for by this prerogative, as
it were, it was already called to the right of primogeniture and to
supremacy, inasmuch as it surpassed all the principal ones.

<span id="vii.ix-p117"></span><span id="vii.ix-p117.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p118"></span>**47.** *But the Levites, after the tribe
of their fathers* We shall indeed hereafter see that they also were
numbered, but Moses means that they were not included in the general
*census* of the people, because God had chosen them to be His own
property, and thus had severed them from the rest of the people. He
writes, therefore, that they “were not numbered in the midst of the
others,”  <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) *i.e.,* so as
promiscuously to form a part of the multitude. Now, lest any one should
object that Moses acted ambitiously in thus bestowing on his own tribe
extraordinary distinction, he declares that he did not do this
spontaneously, but that it was at God’s bidding that the Levites had a
separate class assigned to them; for translators render this passage
amiss, “And God said to Moses,”  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)
as if he stated that the tribe of Levi was then first set apart when the
sum of the people was taken, since it would have been absurd to omit a
part, unless God’s will had been already declared. Moses, therefore,
shews why he passed over his own tribe, via, because God had consecrated
the Levites for the keeping and service of the tabernacle. Now, if it
was not lawful for the tabernacle to be carried or set up by all persons
indiscriminately, its sanctity was enforced by this symbol; for religion
would not have been held in so much reverence, if it had been allowable
for all without distinction to meddle with the sacred things. Meanwhile,
the Israelites were reminded that all without, exception were unworthy
to present themselves before God, when they were forbidden from access
to the sanctuary; whereas the dignity which was conferred upon a single
tribe was no ground for boasting, since it depended merely on the good
pleasure of God. God, then, gave the Levites access to His tabernacle,
not because they had deserved that honor by any virtue of their own, but
in order to afford a testimony of His gratuitous favor. At the same
time, under this image He represented the future priesthood of Christ,
in order that believers might be assured that the Mediator, by whom
others might have access to God, was to be of the human race; and
therefore God declares by Isaiah that He would take the Levites under
the kingdom of Christ from the general and dispersed body of the people.
(<span id="vii.ix-p120.2"></span>[Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)<span
id="vii.ix-p120.2"></span>.) As to what relates to their *office,* let
it be sought in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc05068.htm#fr_418) <span
id="vii.ix-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p119"></span> Among them. — *A.* *V.*

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc05068.htm#fr_419) <span
id="vii.ix-p119.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p120"></span> So the Vulgate, <span
id="vii.ix-p120.1"></span>[Nu
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#048)<span id="vii.ix-p120.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 10:8,9](cc05069)
