[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05039)  [Next](cc05041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#000)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span><span id="v.vi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009)<span id="v.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**9.** Know therefore that the Lord thy God,
he *is* God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with
them that love him, and keep his commandments, to a thousand
generations;

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span>**9.** Scias quod Jehova Deus tuus, est Deus,
Deus fidelis, custodiens pactum et misericordiam diligentibus se, et
custodientibus praecepta sua, usque ad mille generationes:

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span>**10.** And repayeth them that hate him to
their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth
him, he will repay him to his face.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>**10.** Et rependens odio habenti ipsum, in
faciem ejus, ut perdat eum: neque tardabit, odio habenti ipsum, in
faciem ejus rependet ei.

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>**11.** Thou shalt therefore keep the
commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee
this day, to do them.

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>**11.** Custodias ergo praecepta, et statuta,
et judicia quae ego praecipio tibi hodie, ut ea facias.

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>**12.** Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye
hearken to these judgments, and keep and do them, that the Lord thy God
shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy
fathers.

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>**12.** Et erit, propterea quod audieritis
judicia ista, et custodieritis, feceritisque ea: custodiet Jehova Deus
tuus tibi pactum, et misericordiam de quo juravit patribus tuis.

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>**13.** And he will love thee, and bless
thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and
the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the
increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he
sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>**13.** Diliget quoque te, et benedicet tibi,
multiplicabitque te: benedicet namque fructui ventris tui, et fructui
terrae tuae, frumento tuo, et musto tuo, et oleo tuo, foetui boum
tuorum, et gregibus ovium tuarum, in terra quam juravit patribus tuis se
daturum tibi.

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>**14.** Thou shalt be blessed above all
people: there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among
your cattle.

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span>**14.** Benedictus eris prae cunctis populis:
non erit in te infoecundus, neque infoecunda, neque in jumentis tuis.

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span>**15.** And the Lord will take away from thee
all sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which
thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all *them* that hate
thee.

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span>**15.** Auferetque a te Jehova omnem morbum,
et onmes aegritudines Aegypti pessimas quas nosti: non ponet illas in
te, sed ponet eas in omnibus qui te oderint.

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span><span id="v.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span>**9.** *Know therefore that the Lord thy God,
he is God*. The verb  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) might have
been as properly translated in the future tense; and, if this be
preferred, an experimental knowledge, as it is called, is referred to,
as if he had said that God would practically manifest how faithful a
rewarder He is of His servants. But if the other reading is rather
approved, Moses exhorts the people to be assured that God sits in heaven
as the Judge of men, so that they may be both alarmed by the fear of His
vengeance, and also attracted by the hope of reward. This declaration,
however,  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) was appended to the
Second Commandment, and there expounded; for since it is comprehended in
the Decalogue, it was not right to separate it from thence; but since it
is now repeated in confirmation of the whole Law, it is fitly inserted
in this place. It will not be amiss, nevertheless, slightly to advert to
what I there more fully explained. The promise stands first, because God
chooses rather to invite His people by kindness than to compel them to
obedience from terror. The word *mercy* is coupled with the *covenant*,
that we may know that the reward which believers must expect, does not
depend on the merit of their works, since they have need of God’s mercy.
We may, however, thus resolve the phrase — keeping the covenant of mercy
— or the covenant founded on *mercy* — or the mercy which He covenanted.

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span>When it is required of believers that they
should love God before they keep His Commandments, we are thus taught
that the source and cause of obedience is the love wherewith we embrace
God as our Father. With respect to the “thousand generations,” it is
better that we should refer to the Second Commandment, because it is a
point which cannot be hurried over in a few words.

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span><span id="v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span>**10.** *And repayeth them that hate him*.
There is no mention here made of the vengeance “unto the third and
fourth generation?  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span>Those who expound the passage that God
confers kindnesses on the wicked, whilst they are living in this world,
 <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) that He may at length destroy
them in final perdition, wrest the words too violently. Nor is the
opinion of others probable, that God repays the wicked with the reward
of hatred, in His *face*, or anger. I therefore interpret it to mean the
face of those to whose disobedience God opposes Himself when He humbles
their arrogance; for He alludes to their pride and audacity, because
they do not hesitate to provoke God, as if He were without the courage
or the power to contend with them. He declares, then, that their
impudence and brazen front shall avail them nothing, but that He will
cast down the impertinence of their countenance, and the insolence of
their forehead; and signifies that they shall as certainly feel the
judgment which they despise, as if He presented it before their eyes. He
adds, moreover, that He will not deal towards the wicked with the
clemency which he uses towards His children; for He so chastises them
that His correction is always profitable for their salvation, whilst He
denounces deadly punishment against the former; for although He seems to
deal alike with both, when He inflicts temporal punishment, still, that
which is but a medicine for believers, is to the reprobate a foretaste
of their eternal destruction. What He says, however, as to taking
vengeance without delay, does not seem to accord with other passages of
Scripture, in which He declares Himself to be slow to anger, kind, and
long-suffering. Besides, it seems also to be contradicted by experience,
since He does not immediately hasten to inflict punishment, but proceeds
slowly, so as to compensate by His severity for the slowness with which
He acts. But we must remember what He says in <span
id="v.vi-p27.23"></span>[Ps 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004)<span
id="v.vi-p27.23"></span>, that a thousand years in His sight are but as
a single day; and consequently, when we think that He delays, He is, in
His infinite wisdom, hastening as much as is necessary. He seems,
indeed, to take no notice for a time, that He may thus invite men to
repent; but still He declares that He will not delay, but that He will
come suddenly, like a whirlwind, to hasten His judgments, lest the
ungodly should grow drowsy from their security. Let us, therefore, learn
quietly and patiently to wait for the fit season of His vengeance.

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span><span id="v.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p29"></span>**12.** *Wherefore it shall come to pass*.
God appears so to act according to agreement, as to leave (His people)
no hope of His favor, unless they perform their part of it; and
undoubtedly this is the usual form of expression in the Law, in which
the condition is inserted, that God will do good to His people if they
have deserved it by their obedience. Still we must remember what we have
elsewhere seen, that, after God has so covenanted with them, He Himself,
in order that His promise may not be made of none effect, descends to
the gratuitous promise of pardon, whereby He reconciles the unworthy to
Himself. Thus the original covenant only avails to man’s condemnation.
But when salvation is offered to them gratuitously, their works at the
same time become pleasing to God. Inasmuch, however, as the cause of
reward is unconnected with men and their works, all calculation of merit
is out of the question: still it is profitable to believers that a
reward should be promised them if they walk in the commandments of God;
since, in His inestimable liberality, He deals with them as if they did
something to deserve it.

<span id="v.vi-p30"></span>In conclusion, Moses enumerates some of the
proofs of God’s favor, such as fecundity, and an abundance of the fruits
of the earth. It is questionable whether by what is added at the end
respecting the diseases of Egypt, he means the boils which were
generated by the scattered ashes, (<span id="v.vi-p30.1"></span>[Ex
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008)<span id="v.vi-p30.1"></span>,) or
the lice which infested both man and beast, (<span
id="v.vi-p30.2"></span>[Ex 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#017)<span
id="v.vi-p30.2"></span>,) or whether he extends them to those diseases
which had prevailed long before the departure of the people. I am
disposed to embrace the latter opinion;  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) for in <span
id="v.vi-p31.1"></span>[De 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)<span
id="v.vi-p31.1"></span>, after mentioning “the botch of Egypt,” he adds
“emerods, and the scab, and the itch:” it is, therefore, probable that
the Egyptians were subject to various maladies, from which Moses
declares that the people should be free by special privilege, if only
they obeyed God’s Law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc05040.htm#fr_219) <span
id="v.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span> “*Heb*. And thou shalt know.” — Ainsworth.
“Et scies.” — *V*.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc05040.htm#fr_220) <span
id="v.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span> See on <span id="v.vi-p21.1"></span>[Deut.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#010)<span id="v.vi-p21.1"></span>, vol.
2, p. 110, *et* *seq*.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc05040.htm#fr_221) <span
id="v.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span> Added in *Fr*., “Mais seulement que Dieu
punira les delinquans;” but only that God will punish the transgressors.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc05040.htm#fr_222) <span
id="v.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span><span id="v.vi-p27.1"></span> The question is
as to the word <span id="v.vi-p27.2"></span>פניו<span
id="v.vi-p27.3"></span>, literally *his*<span id="v.vi-p27.4"></span> or
*their* *face*<span id="v.vi-p27.5"></span>. The first explanation
noticed by *C*<span id="v.vi-p27.6"></span>., *in* *their*
*lifetime*<span id="v.vi-p27.7"></span>, is that of the Chaldee and
Syriac versions, and also of the Hebrew Commentators; the second, *in*
*his* *anger*<span id="v.vi-p27.8"></span>, is attributed in Poole’s
Synopsis, amongst others, to *S* *M*<span id="v.vi-p27.9"></span>.
Dathe’s translation is, “praesentissima pernicie;” and his note “mihi
quidem videtur <span id="v.vi-p27.10"></span>פנים<span
id="v.vi-p27.11"></span> dictum esse pro nomine reciproco *ille*<span
id="v.vi-p27.12"></span>, *ipse*<span id="v.vi-p27.13"></span>, ut <span
id="v.vi-p27.14"></span>[Ex 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#015)<span
id="v.vi-p27.14"></span><span id="v.vi-p27.15"></span>; <span
id="v.vi-p27.16"></span>[De 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037)<span
id="v.vi-p27.16"></span><span id="v.vi-p27.17"></span>; <span
id="v.vi-p27.18"></span>[2Sa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011)<span
id="v.vi-p27.18"></span><span id="v.vi-p27.19"></span>. Vide
*Noldius*<span id="v.vi-p27.20"></span> sub hac voce, num. 2. Latine non
commode iisdem verbis exprimi potest. Igitur notionem, quae vocabulo
Hebraeo subisse videtur, cum sequenti <span
id="v.vi-p27.21"></span>להאבידו<span id="v.vi-p27.22"></span> conjunetim
indicavi.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc05040.htm#fr_223) <span
id="v.vi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p31"></span> “Certain diseases, peculiar to Egypt, are
meant; such as various diseases of the skin, as the scab, elephantiasis,
plague, etc. Pliny, Nat. Hist., 26., calls Egypt the mother of such
diseases. Even at the present day, there are in Egypt several peculiar
diseases, especially ophthalmia, variolous diseases, and plague.” —
*Rosenmuller*. Hengstenberg also, in his “Egypt and the Books of Moses,”
has an article on this subject, p. 454, confirmative of the above. He
quotes Wagner as calling Egypt, in his Natural History of Man, “a great
focus of the diseases in universal history.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 12:28](cc05041)
