[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc05008)  [Next](cc05010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1"></span>THE REPETITION OF THE SAME COMMANDMENT

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p3"></span><span
id="ii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>**17.** Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p5"></span>**17.** Non occides.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8"></span>The sum of this Commandment is, that we
should not unjustly do violence to any one. In order, however, that God
may the better restrain us from all injury of others, He propounds one
particular form of it, from which men’s natural sense is abhorrent; for
we all detest murder, so as to recoil from those whose hands are
polluted with blood, as if they carried contagion with them. Undoubtedly
God would have the remains of His image, which still shine forth in men,
to continue in some estimation, so that all might feel that every
homicide is an offense against Him, (*sacrilegium*.) He does not,
indeed, here express the reason, whereby He elsewhere deters men from
murder, *i* *e*., by asserting that thus His image is violated, (<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ge 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>;) yet, however precisely and authoritatively
He may speak as a Legislator, He would still have us consider, what
might naturally occur to everybody’s mind, such as the statement of
<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>[Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>,
that man is our “own flesh.” In order, then, that believers may more
diligently beware of inflicting injuries, He condemns a crime, which all
spontaneously confess to be insufferable. It will, however, more clearly
appear hereafter, that under the word *kill* is included by *synecdoche*
all violence, smiting, and aggression. Besides, another principle is
also to be remembered, that in negative precepts, as they are called,
the opposite affirmation is also to be understood; else it would not be
by any means consistent, that a person would satisfy God’s Law by merely
abstaining from doing injury to others. Suppose, for example, that one
of a cowardly disposition, and not daring to assail even a child, should
not move a finger to injure his neighbors, would he therefore have
discharged the duties of humanity as regards the Sixth Commandment? Nay,
natural common sense demands more than that we should abstain from
wrongdoing. And, not to say more on this point, it will plainly appear
from the summary of the Second Table, that God not only forbids us to be
murderers, but also prescribes that every one should study faithfully to
defend the life of his neighbor, and practically to declare that it is
dear to him; for in that summary no mere negative phrase is used, but
the words expressly set forth that our neighbors are to be loved. It is
unquestionable, then, that of those whom God there commands to be loved,
He here commends the lives to our care. There are, consequently, two
parts in the Commandment, — *first*, that we should not vex, or oppress,
or be at enmity with any; and, *secondly*, that we should not only live
at peace with men, without exciting quarrels, but also should aid, as
far as we can, the miserable who are unjustly oppressed, and should
endeavor to resist the wicked, lest they should injure men as they list.
Christ, therefore, in expounding the genuine sense of the Law, not only
pronounces those transgressors who have committed murder, but also that

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>“he shall be in danger of the judgment who
is angry with his brother without a cause; and whosoever shall say to
his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell-fire.” (<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Mt
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p10"></span>For He does not there, as some have
ignorantly supposed, frame t\~ new law, as if to east blame upon His
Father; but shows the folly and perversity of those interpreters of the
Law who only insist on the external appearance, and husk of things, as
is vulgarly said; since the doctrine of God must rather be estimated
from a due consideration of. His nature. Before earthly judges, if a man
have carried a weapon for the purpose of killing a man, he is found
guilty of violence; and God, who is a spiritual Lawgiver, goes even
further. With Him, therefore, anger is accounted murder; yea, inasmuch
as He pierces even to the most secret feelings, He holds even concealed
hatred to be murder; for so we must understand John’s words, “Whosoever
hateth his brother is a murderer,” (<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>[1Jo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>;) i.e., hatred conceived in the heart is
sufficient for his condemnation, although it may not openly appear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exposition of the Commandment](cc05010.md)
