[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp092)  [Next](arp094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

#### ANTAR AND ABLA'S MOTHER.

Antar was now become celebrated for his verses as well as for his
remarkable strength and courage; and, as may be readily supposed, he was
making considerable progress in winning the affection of his beloved
Abla. But in the eyes of the maiden's father, Malik, he was far from
being a desirable match; and even her mother ridiculed Antar's amorous
poetry, and his love for her daughter. One day she sneeringly asked him
to recite some of his verses about Abla, and he thus complied:

<span class="smallcaps">I love</span> thee with the love of a noble-born
hero; and I am content with thy imaginary phantom.

Thou art my sovereign in my very blood, and my mistress; and in thee is
all my confidence.

O Abla, my description cannot portray thee, for thou comprehendest every
perfection.

Were I to say thy face is like the full moon of heaven—where, in that
full moon, is the eye of the antelope?

Were I to say thy shape is like the branch of the erak tree: O thou
shamest it in the grace of thy form.

In thy forehead is my guide to truth; and in the night of thy tresses I
wander astray.

Thy teeth resemble stringed jewels; but how can I liken them to lifeless
pearls?

Thy bosom is created as an enchantment;—O may God protect it ever in
that perfection!

To be connected with thee is to be connected with every joy; but
separated from all my world is the bond of thy connection.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

Under thy veil is the rosebud of my life, and thine eyes are guarded
with a multitude of arrows: round thy tent is a lion-warrior, the
sword's edge, and the spear's point.

O thy face is like the full moon of heaven, allied to light, but far
from my hopes!

These eloquent verses so far mollified Abla's mother that she proposed
marrying Antar to her daughter's maid, Khemisa.

"No!" said Antar, boldly; "I shall marry only a freeborn woman: and no
one shall I marry but her whom my soul adores!"

"May God accomplish thy wishes," whispered Abla; "and may he grant thee
the woman thou lovest, and may thou live in peace and happiness!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antar Offends His Father](arp094)
