[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp005)  [Next](arp007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III.—GENUINENESS OF THE EARLY ARABIC POETRY.

<span id="img__06000"></span>

|                      |
|----------------------|
| ![L](img/_06000.jpg) |

LIKE the <span class="smallcaps">Iliad</span> of Homer, which was formed
from the songs of the Rhapsodists, the Qasīdas of the <span
class="smallcaps">Mu‘allaqāt</span> are not regular compositions, but
consist of short effusions and fragments strung together. But there is
this difference, remarks Von Hammer-Purgstall, that "the authorship of
the old Arab Prize Poems has been undisputed; and no Arabian wolf has
torn the <span class="smallcaps">Mu‘allaqāt</span>, like the <span
class="smallcaps">Iliad</span>, and thrown

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

the fragments to various authors." This "difference," however, no longer
exists; for, while the authenticity of the <span
class="smallcaps">Mu‘allaqāt</span> as a whole is still allowed, the
genuineness of certain passages is questioned by distinguished German
scholars. And if we consider that the songs of the pre-Islāmite Arabs,
like the Scottish Border Ballads, were preserved for many generations by
oral tradition alone (for the art of writing, although known among the
tribes of Arabia, was but little used), it will appear more than
probable that interpolations exist in the early Arabic poetry. When the
collectors, about the end of the seventh century, began to commit the
songs of the old Arabs to writing, they found only fragments—but very
numerous fragments—remaining among the desert tribes; and they were
exposed to very much the same kind of errors and even frauds as were our
own literary antiquaries when they went about the pastoral districts
gathering fragments of traditionary ballads from the lips of "oldest
inhabitants": verses of one particular song found their way into
another; and artful rhymesters, who had a fatal knack of imitating the
external form and language of the old Border Ballads, occasionally
imposed upon enthusiastic and all too credulous collectors of legendary
ballad lore. In like manner, it would seem that the collectors of early
Arab poetry were sometimes the dupes of knavish Rāwīs, or Reciters, many
of whom were themselves no mean poets, but could extemporaneously
compose verses

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

so like in style and sentiment to the genuine old poetry as to render
detection almost impossible. Nor are the collectors even above suspicion
of helping out the sense of an obscure fragment by interweaving, here
and there, a verse or two of their own composition.

Professor Ahlwardt, Herr Von Kremer, and other eminent German
Orientalists have of late years subjected the reliques of ancient Arabic
poetry to a thorough critical examination, with the object of separating
the spurious from the genuine verses. The sudden transition from one
subject to another, so common in the longer qasīdas, furnished most
favourable opportunities for interpolation. To distinguish such
interpolated passages must necessarily be a work of no small difficulty;
and very frequently the student can only detect errors and inaccuracies
by finding the rules of Qasīda composition violated. For instance, only
the hemistichs of the opening *bayt*, or couplet, should rhyme with each
other; and if two or more such couplets are found in the same poem, they
must be interpolations, or opening verses of other poems. Again, it is
the rule, with very few exceptions (for which there are always obvious
reasons), that a Qasīda begin with an address to a mistress—lamenting
her departure, generally; and where this is wanting the poem is
incomplete, if not altogether spurious. But errors of this kind must be
obvious to every student, and require no great critical acumen for their
discovery.

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A much more
difficult task is, the recognition and separation of verses which have
been ingeniously composed and inserted by the Reciters, or even by the
collectors, in order to connect fragments together. It is not easy to
bring to the investigation of such a subject as this a mind perfectly
unprejudiced. If the student brings to his task a pre-conceived notion
of what the old Arabs would (or should) say about certain things, and
finds in the poetry sentiments which go against his theory, he is prone
to consider them as interpolations; and thus, consciously or
unconsciously, the critic, in the process of investigation, will be more
disposed to establish his theory than to elicit the truth. But the
learned Orientalists who are engaged in sifting the early Arab poetry
are certainly actuated by no such narrow motives; and the importance of
the work they have undertaken can hardly be over-rated; since, without
being assured of the genuineness of the pre-Islāmite poetical remains,
accurate knowledge of the old Arabs themselves is impossible.
Nevertheless, some of the conclusions at which they have arrived have
been questioned by other scholars.

We are told that the collectors and critics were led by a strong
religious sentiment to eliminate from the early poetry all allusions to
pagan customs and false deities; yet in two of the Seven Prize Poems
references to pagan superstitions still remain. Lebīd, in verse 76 of
his Poem, alludes to the "camel doomed to die at her master's tomb"; and
‘Antara, verse 70,

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

refers to the pagan superstition of "birds of the brain," a belief
strictly forbidden by the Qur’ān. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)
In the Romance of ‘Antar, said to have been composed in the 8th century,
allusions to pagan deities and idolatrous customs of the old Arabs are
very frequent; but perhaps the "strong religious sentiment" had
evaporated on the introduction of profane science into Islām. However,
if the collectors were imbued with so fervent a religious spirit as to
eliminate references to idolatry from the early poetry, it seems strange
that they should have allowed the numerous allusions to wine-drinking to
remain: for the frequent mention of wine in modern Oriental poetry is to
be explained by its mystical meaning.

But the same pious critics, who so carefully eliminated from the poetry
all reference to pagan superstitions, substituted, it is said,
sentiments in consonance with the doctrines of the Qur’ān. This, it is
well known, was done by the authors of the *Thousand and One Nights*, in
the case of Tales

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

derived from Hindū sources; but it does not follow that the native
poetry of the old Arabs was treated after the same manner. Herr Von
Kremer takes exception to verses 27 and 28 of Zuhayr's Mu‘allaqa, in
which mention is distinctly made of the omniscience of <span
class="smallcaps">God</span> and of the Book of Reckoning, as being
alien from the spirit of the old poetry. The same objection, if just,
would also apply to verses 85 and 86 of Lebīd, where the dispensations
of Providence are recognised, and to verse 25 of Imra’u-’l-Qays, and
verse 81 of Tarafa, where the Creator is plainly mentioned. But, besides
their numerous false deities—for which the Arabs seem to have
entertained but small reverence about the period when Muhammad began his
great mission—there existed, more or less, among the several tribes of
the Peninsula a belief in <span class="smallcaps">Allah</span>—*the*
<span class="smallcaps">God</span>. Indeed, as Mr. C. J. Lyall has very
justly observed, <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) "without assuming
such a faith as already well known to the people, a great portion of the
Qur’ān would be impossible: that revelation is addressed to men who join
other gods with <span class="smallcaps">God</span>, not to those who
deny Him;" and to bring them back to the worship of the one sole <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>—to concentrate their faith in Him alone—was
the great object of the Prophet's mission.

That the remains of Ancient Arabic Poetry have been tampered
with—altered and interpolated—by the grammarians, collectors, critics,
and others, is

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

now, however, proved most clearly: such is also the case with our own
early traditionary poetry; and human nature is essentially the same in
Bussora and Kūfa, and in London and Edinburgh. But it is gratifying to
know, on the authority of so learned, acute, and painstaking a scholar
as Professor Ahlwardt, that, while much of the so-called Ancient Arabic
Poetry is decidedly spurious, and not a little doubtful, there still
remains much that is the genuine offspring of the untutored but
brilliant and vigorous genius of the pre-Islamite bards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[lxiv:\*](arp006.htm#fr_17) In verse 57 of his
Mu‘allaqa, Imra’u-’l-Qays, according to Sir W. Jones’ translation,
alludes to idolatrous rites: "virgins, in black trailing robes, who
dance round \[the idol\] Dewaar"; but this rendering seems to be
erroneous. The original

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*fa ‘anna la nà sirbun, ka-anna ni‘āja hu  
‘adhārà dawārin fi melā‘in mudhayyali*

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> is thus translated
by Mr. J. W. Redhouse:

"Then there appeared unto us a herd \[of wild oxen\], the heifers
whereof \[from their tails\] were, as it were, maidens of Dawār in
long-trained mantles."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[lxv:\*](arp006.htm#fr_18) In the interesting
and valuable Notes to his translation of Zuhayr's Mu‘allaqa: *Journal*
of the Bengal Asiatic Society, 1877.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV.—Arabian Literature Under the Khalifate](arp007)
