[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp115)  [Next](arp117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRINCE SHAS IN CAPTIVITY.

The friends of Antar were much troubled at his departure, and searched
for him in all directions; but his uncle was especially gratified, since
it left him free, as he thought, to dispose of Abla; and accordingly she
is again betrothed to Amarah—the contract being formed by Abla's father
and Amarah shaking hands. But Prince Malik, grieved at this great
injustice to his absent friend, vows that he will never permit Amarah to
marry Abla, while he lives to thwart his wicked plans, and those of the
maiden's sordid and crafty father; and he predicts that evil will befal
his brother Shas for his share in the infamous transaction.

When the Absians reached the lake of Zatul-irsad, Prince Shas with ten
horsemen went into the desert in pursuit of the antelope. There they are
met by a troop of warriors led by Maisoor, son of Zeead, of the clan of
Hazrej, a branch of Harith, and the little band of Absians are all
slain, with the exception of Shas, who is taken prisoner, and
barbarously treated by Maisoor, whose brother the Prince had killed in
the conflict.

Prince Malik and the others arrive in safety at the dwellings of their
tribe, and the King is indignant when he learns how the noble Antar has
been again deceived by Abla's father. He severely rebukes him for his
scandalous conduct, and causes Amarah to be scourged as a punishment for
espousing Abla, when he knew that she was already betrothed to Antar,
and that her father was in possession of the rich dowry which the hero
had brought from Irak. The absence of Prince Shas causes the King great
uneasiness. Having sent horsemen into the desert in quest of him without
success, his affliction increases,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

and he declares that if Shas is slain, he will strike off the head of
Amarah, and hang Malik, the son of Carad, because they had incited his
son to act basely towards Antar.

In the meantime Shas is a prisoner in the land of Harith, and daily
tortured by Maisoor, who "enclosed him between four bars of iron, and
stationed a guard of slaves over him; and whenever he went out he kicked
him, and whenever he entered he thumped him with his fists." The chief
of the clan, however, hearing of this shameful treatment of a noble
Arab, sends for Maisoor, and advises him to relax his severities towards
his prisoner, which he does, in this manner: he hastens back to Shas and
unties his hands, but binds his feet; then he kicks him in the rear, and
places a slave over him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antar Summoned From Mecca to Rescue Shas](arp117)
