[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp111)  [Next](arp113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANTAR'S GRIEF FOR THE LOSS OF ABLA.

"Fortune builds up, and throws down!"—Antar's cup of happiness, filled
to overflowing, was in an instant dashed from his lips, by the
mysterious disappearance of his beloved Abla, for whose sake he had
braved the perils of the deserts and the wastes, and fought with savage
lions, and with warriors all but invincible. This was a calamity for
which the heroic son of Shedad was totally unprepared; it fell upon him
with a force that threatened to deprive him of his reason. In vain the
kindhearted King Zoheir tried to soothe him with the assurance that

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

he would soon clear up the mystery. The grief-stricken lover bitterly
accused himself of having, in his anxiety to meet the King, carelessly
left his heart's idol in charge of slaves who knew not her worth. The
King sent forth parties to scour the country in every direction, but
they all returned without having obtained tidings of the beautiful
daughter of Malik. As to Antar himself, the calamity had quite unmanned
him: his "native hue of resolution was sicklied o’er with the pale cast
of thought;" and the slayer of heroes was for the time being unfit for
"enterprises of great pith and moment." He despatched his brother
Shiboob, however, in quest of his lost bride, and awaited his return
with anxious expectation, that banished sleep from his eyelids. The
heart of the hero was completely subdued; and thus, with many a sob and
sigh, he expressed his sorrow:

<span class="smallcaps">My</span> tears stand in drops on my eyelids,
and short is the sleep of my eyes.

For love there is no rest—no comfort when the railers advise.

We met, but our meeting quenched not the flame;—no, it did not cool the
boiling heat!

How long shall I mourn for the mate that grieves me?—tears and
lamentations avail not.

I have implored a peaceable life from Fortune, but her favours to me are
like the boons of a miser.

I am dying; and the most extraordinary forbearance aids me not in my
calamities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shiboob Brings Tidings of Abla](arp113)
