[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw105)  [Next](ataw201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

## CHAPTER VI.

### THE TESTIMONY OF THE FLORA AND FAUNA.

PROOFS are abundant that there must have been at one time uninterrupted
land communication between Europe and America. In the words of a writer
upon this subject,

"When the animals and plants of the Old and New World are compared, one
cannot but be struck with their identity; all or nearly all belong to
the same genera, while many, even of the species, are common to both
continents. This is most important in its bearing on our theory, as
indicating that they radiated from a common centre *after the Glacial
Period*. . . . The hairy mammoth, woolly-haired rhinoceros, the Irish
elk, the musk-ox, the reindeer, the glutton, the lemming, etc., more or
less accompanied this flora, and their remains are always found in the
post-glacial deposits of Europe as low down as the South of France. In
the New World beds of the same age contain similar remains, indicating
that they came from a common centre, and were spread out over both
continents alike." (*Westminster Review*, January, 1872, p. 19.)

Recent discoveries in the fossil beds of the Bad Lands of Nebraska prove
that the horse originated in America. Professor Marsh, of Yale College,
has identified the several preceding forms from which it was developed,
rising, in the course of ages, from a creature not larger than a fox
until, by successive steps, it developed into the true horse. How did
the wild horse pass from America to Europe and Asia if there was not
continuous land communication between the two continents? He seems to
have existed in Europe in a wild state prior to his domestication by
man.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The fossil remains of the camel are found in India, Africa, South
America, and in Kansas. The existing alpacas and llamas of South America
are but varieties of the camel family.

The cave bear, whose remains are found associated with the hones of the
mammoth and the bones and works of man in the caves of Europe, was
identical with the grizzly bear of our Rocky Mountains. The musk-ox,
whose relics are found in the same deposits, now roams the wilds of
Arctic America. The glutton of Northern Europe, in the Stone Age, is
identical with the wolverine of the United States. According to
Rutimeyer, the ancient bison (*Bos priscus*) of Europe was identical
with the existing American buffalo. "Every stage between the ancient
cave bison and the European aurochs can be traced." The Norway elk, now
nearly extinct, is identical with the American moose. The *Cervus
Americanus* found in Kentucky was as large as the Irish elk, which it
greatly resembled. The lagomys, or tailless hare, of the European eaves,
is now found in the colder regions of North America. The reindeer, which
once occupied Europe as far down as France, was the same as the reindeer
of America. Remains of the cave lion of Europe (*Felix speloæ*), a
larger beast than the largest of the existing species, have been found
at Natchez, Mississippi. The European cave wolf was identical with the
American wolf.

Cattle were domesticated among the people of Switzerland during the
earliest part of the Stone Period (Darwin's "Animals Under
Domestication," vol. i., p. 103), that is to say, before the Bronze Age
and the Age of Iron. Even at that remote period they had already, by
long-continued selection, been developed out of wild forms akin to the
American buffalo. M. Gervais ("Hist. Nat. des Mammifores," vol. xi., p.
191) concludes that the wild race from which our domestic sheep was
derived is now extinct. The remains of domestic sheep are found in the
debris of the Swiss lake-dwellings during the Stone Age. The domestic
horse, ass, lion, and goat also date back to a like great antiquity. We
have historical records 7000 years old,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and during that time no similar domestication of a wild animal has been
made. This fact speaks volumes as to the vast periods of time during
which man must have lived in a civilized state to effect the
domestication of so many and such useful animals.

And when we turn from the fauna to the flora, we find the same state of
things.

An examination of the fossil beds of Switzerland of the Miocene Age
reveals the remains of more than eight hundred different species of
flower-bearing plants, besides mosses, ferns, etc. The total number of
fossil plants catalogued from those beds, cryptogamous as well as
phænogamous, is upward of three thousand. *The majority of these species
have migrated to America*. There were others that passed into Asia,
Africa, and even to Australia. The American types are, however, in the
largest proportion. The analogues of the flora of the Miocene Age of
Europe now grow in the forests of Virginia, North and South Carolina,
and Florida; they include such familiar examples as magnolias,
tulip-trees, evergreen oaks, maples, plane-trees, robinas, sequoias,
etc. It would seem to be impossible that these trees could have migrated
from Switzerland to America unless there was unbroken land communication
between the two continents.

It is a still more remarkable fact that a comparison of the flora of the
Old World and New goes to show that not only was there communication by
land, over which the plants of one continent could extend to another,
but that man must have existed, and have helped this transmigration, in
the case of certain plants that were incapable of making the journey
unaided.

Otto Kuntze, a distinguished German botanist, who has spent many years
in the tropics, announces his conclusion that "In America and in Asia
the principal domesticated tropical plants *are represented by the same
species*." He instances the *Manihot utilissima*, whose roots yield a
fine flour; the tarro (*Colocasia esculenta*), the Spanish or red
pepper, the tomato,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the bamboo, the guava, the mango-fruit, and especially the banana. He
denies that the American origin of tobacco, maize, and the cocoa-nut is
proved. He refers to the *Paritium tiliaceum*, a malvaceous plant,
hardly noticed by Europeans, but very highly prized by the natives of
the tropics, and cultivated everywhere in the East and West Indies; it
supplies to the natives of these regions so far apart their ropes and
cordage. It is always seedless in a cultivated state. It existed in
America before the arrival of Columbus.

But Professor Kuntze pays especial attention to the banana, or plantain.
The banana is seedless. It is found throughout tropical Asia and Africa.
Professor Kuntze asks, "In what way was this plant, which cannot stand a
voyage through the temperate zone, carried to America?" And yet it was
generally cultivated in America before 1492. Says Professor Kuntze, "It
must be remembered that the plantain is a tree-like, herbaceous plant,
possessing no easily transportable bulbs, like the potato or the dahlia,
nor propagable by cuttings, like the willow or the poplar. It has only a
perennial root, which, once planted, needs hardly any care, and yet
produces the most abundant crop of any known tropical plant." He then
proceeds to discuss how it could have passed from Asia to America. He
admits that the roots must have been transported from one country to the
other *by civilized man*. He argues that it could not have crossed the
Pacific from Asia to America, because the Pacific is nearly thrice or
four times as wide as the Atlantic. The only way he can account for the
plantain reaching America is to suppose that it was carried there when
the North Pole had a tropical climate! Is there any proof that civilized
man existed at the North Pole when it possessed the climate of Africa?

Is it not more reasonable to suppose that the plantain, or banana, was
cultivated by the people of Atlantis, and carried by their civilized
agricultural colonies to the east and the west? Do we not find a
confirmation of this view in the fact alluded

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to by Professor Kuntze in these words: "A cultivated plant which does
not possess seeds must have been under culture for a very long
period--we have not in Europe a single exclusively seedless,
berry-bearing, cultivated plant--and hence it is perhaps fair to infer
that these plants *were cultivated as early as the beginning of the
middle of the Diluvial Period*."

Is it possible that a plant of this kind could have been cultivated for
this immense period of time in both Asia and America? Where are the two
nations, agricultural and highly civilized, on those continents by whom
it was so cultivated? What has become of them? Where are the traces of
their civilization? All the civilizations of Europe, Asia, and Africa
radiated from the Mediterranean; the Hindoo-Aryans advanced from the
north-west; they were kindred to the Persians, who were next-door
neighbors to the Arabians (cousins of the Phœnicians), and who lived
along-side of the Egyptians, who had in turn derived their civilization
from the Phœnicians.

It would be a marvel of marvels if *one* nation, on *one* continent, had
cultivated the banana for such a vast period of time until it became
seedless; the nation retaining a peaceful, continuous, agricultural
civilization during all that time. But to suppose that two nations could
have cultivated the same plant, under the same circumstances, on two
different continents, for the same unparalleled lapse of time, is
supposing an impossibility.

We find just such a civilization as was necessary, according to Plato,
and under just such a climate, in Atlantis and nowhere else. We have
found it reaching, by its contiguous islands, within one hundred and
fifty miles of the coast of Europe on the one side, and almost touching
the West India Islands on the other, while, by its connecting ridges, it
bound together Brazil and Africa.

But it may be said these animals and plants may have passed from Asia to
America across the Pacific by the continent of Lemuria; or there may
have been continuous land communication

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

at one time at Behring's Strait. True; but an examination of the flora
of the Pacific States shows that very many of the trees and plants
common to Europe and the Atlantic States are not to be seen west of the
Rocky Mountains. The magnificent magnolias, the tulip-trees, the
plane-trees, etc., which were found existing in the Miocene Age in
Switzerland, and are found at the present day in the United States, are
altogether lacking on the Pacific coast. The sources of supply of that
region seem to have been far inferior to the sources of supply of the
Atlantic States. Professor Asa Gray tells us that, out of sixty-six
genera and one hundred and fifty-five species found in the forests cast
of the Rocky Mountains, only thirty-one genera and seventy-eight species
are found west of the mountains. The Pacific coast possesses no papaw,
no linden or basswood, no locust-trees, no cherry-tree large enough for
a timber tree, no gum-trees, no sorrel-tree, nor kalmia; no
persimmon-trees, not a holly, only one ash that may be called a timber
tree, no catalpa or sassafras, not a single elm or hackberry, not a
mulberry, not a hickory, or a beech, or a true chestnut. These facts
would seem to indicate that the forest flora of North America entered it
*from the east*, and that the Pacific States possess only those
fragments of it that were able to struggle over or around the great
dividing mountain-chain.

We thus see that the flora and fauna of America and Europe testify not
only to the existence of Atlantis, but to the fact that in an earlier
age it must have extended from the shores of one continent to those of
the other; and by this bridge of land the plants and animals of one
region passed to the other.

The cultivation of the cotton-plant and the manufacture of its product
was known to both the Old and New World. Herodotus describes it (450
B.C.) as the tree of India that bears a fleece more beautiful than that
of the sheep. Columbus found the natives of the West Indies using cotton
cloth. It was also found in Mexico and Peru. It is a significant fact

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

that the cotton-plant has been found growing wild in many parts of
America, but never in the Old World. This would seem to indicate that
the plant was a native of America; and this is confirmed by the
superiority of American cotton, and the further fact that the plants
taken from America to India constantly degenerate, while those taken
from India to America as constantly improve.

There is a question whether the potato, maize, and tobacco were not
cultivated in China ages before Columbus discovered <span
id="img_06000"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/06000.jpg" alt="Ancient Carving--Stratford-on-Avon, England" /><br />
Ancient Carving--Stratford-on-Avon, England</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

America. A recent traveller says, "The interior of China, along the
course of the Yang-tse-Kiang, is a land full of wonders. In one place
piscicultural nurseries line the banks for nearly fifty miles. All sorts
of inventions, the cotton-gin included, claimed by Europeans and
Americans, are to be found there forty centuries old. Plants, yielding
drugs of great value, without number, the familiar tobacco and potato,
maize, white and yellow corn, and other plants *believed to be
indigenous to America, have been cultivated there from time
immemorial*."

Bonafous ("Histoire Naturelle du Mais," Paris, 1826) attributes a
European or Asiatic origin to maize. The word maize, (Indian corn) is
derived from *mahiz* or *mahis*, the name of the plant in the language
of the Island of Hayti. And yet, strange to may, in the Lettish and
Livonian languages, in the north of Europe, *mayse* signifies bread; in
Irish, *maise* is food, and in the Old High German, *maz* is meat. May
not likewise the Spanish

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

maiz have antedated the time of Columbus, and borne testimony to early
intercommunication between the people of the Old and New Worlds?

It is to Atlantis we must look for the origin of nearly all our valuable
plants. Darwin says ("Animals and Plants under Domestication," vol. i.,
p. 374), "It has often been remarked that we do not owe a single useful
plant to Australia, or the Cape of Good Hope--countries abounding to an
unparalleled degree with endemic species--or to New Zealand, or to
America south of the Plata; and, according to some authors, not to
America north of Mexico." In other words, the domesticated plants are
only found within the limits of what I shall show hereafter was the
Empire of Atlantis and its colonies; for only here was to be found an
ancient, long-continuing civilization, capable of developing from a wild
state those plants which were valuable to man, including all the cereals
on which to-day civilized man depends for subsistence. M. Alphonse de
Candolle tells us that we owe 33 useful plants to Mexico, Peru, and
Chili. According to the same high authority, of 157 valuable cultivated
plants 85 can be traced back to their wild state; as to 40, there is
doubt as to their origin; while 32 are utterly unknown in their
aboriginal condition. ("Geograph. Botan. Raisonnée," 1855, pp. 810-991.)
Certain roses--the imperial lily, the tuberose and the lilac--are said
to have been cultivated from such a vast antiquity that they are not
known in their wild state. (Darwin, "Animals and Plants," vol. i., p.
370.) And these facts are the more remarkable because, as De Candolle
has shown, all the plants historically known to have been first
cultivated in Europe still exist there in the wild state. (*Ibid*.) The
inference is strong that the great cereals--wheat, oats, barley, rye,
and maize--must have been first domesticated in a vast antiquity, or in
some continent which has since disappeared, carrying the original wild
plants with it.

Darwin quotes approvingly the opinion of Mr. Bentham (Hist. Notes Cult.
Plants"), "as the result of all the most

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

reliable evidence that none of the Ceralia--wheat, rye, barley, and
oats--exist or have existed truly wild in their present state." In the
Stone Age of Europe five varieties of wheat and three of barley were
cultivated. (Darwin, "Animals and Plants," vol. i., p. 382.) He says
that it may be inferred, from the presence in the

 

<span id="img_06200"></span> ![](img/06200.jpg)  
CEREALS OF THE AGE OF STONE IN EUROPE.

 

lake habitations of Switzerland of a variety of wheat known as the
Egyptian wheat, and from the nature of the weeds that grew among their
crops, "that the lake inhabitants either still kept up commercial
intercourse with some southern people, or had originally proceeded as
colonists from the south." I should argue that they were colonists from
the land where wheat and

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

barley were first domesticated, to wit, Atlantis. And when the Bronze
Age came, we find oats and rye making their appearance with the weapons
of bronze, together with a peculiar kind of pea. Darwin concludes
(*Ibid*., vol. i., p. 385) that wheat, barley, rye, and oats were either
descended from ten or fifteen distinct species, "most of which are now
unknown or extinct," or from four or eight species closely resembling
our present forms, or so "widely different as to escape identification;"
in which latter case, he says, "man must have cultivated the cereals at
an *enormously remote period*," and at that time practised "some degree
of selection."

Rawlinson ("Ancient Monarchies," vol. i., p. 578) expresses the opinion
that the ancient Assyrians possessed the pineapple. "The representation
on the monuments is so exact that I can scarcely doubt the pineapple
being intended." (See Layard's "Nineveh and Babylon," p. 338.) The
pineapple (*Bromelia ananassa*) is supposed to be of American origin,
and unknown to Europe before the time of Columbus; and yet, apart from
the revelations of the Assyrian monuments, there has been some dispute
upon this point. ("Amer. Cyclop.," vol. xiii., p. .528.)

It is not even certain that the use of tobacco was not known

 

<span id="img_06300"></span> ![](img/06300.jpg)  
ANCIENT IRISH PIPES.

 

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

to the colonists from Atlantis settled in Ireland in an age long prior
to Sir Walter Raleigh. Great numbers of pipes have been found in the
raths and tumuli of Ireland, which, there is every reason to believe,
were placed there by men of the Prehistoric Period. The illustration on
p. 63 represents some of the so-called "Danes' pipes" now in the
collection of the Royal Irish Academy. The Danes entered Ireland many
centuries before the time of Columbus, and if the pipes are theirs, they
must have used tobacco, or some substitute for it, at that early period.
It is probable, however, that the tumuli of Ireland antedate the Danes
thousands of years.

Compare these pipes from the ancient mounds of Ireland with the
accompanying picture of an Indian pipe of the Stone Age of New Jersey.
("Smithsonian Rep.," 1875, p. 342.)

 

<span id="img_06400"></span> ![](img/06400.jpg)  
ANCIENT INDIAN PIPE, NEW JERSEY.

 

Recent Portuguese travellers have found the most remote tribes of savage
negroes in Africa, holding no commercial intercourse with Europeans,
using strangely shaped pipes, in which they smoked a plant of the
country. Investigations in America lead to the conclusion that tobacco
was first burnt as an incense to the gods, the priest alone using the
pipe; and from this beginning the extraordinary practice spread to the
people, and thence over all the world. It may have crossed the Atlantic
in a remote age, and have subsequently disappeared with the failure of
retrograding colonists to raise the tobacco-plant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Destruction of Atlantis Described in the Deluge
Legends.](ataw201)
