[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw309)  [Next](ataw402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

# PART IV.

# THE MYTHOLOGIES OF THE OLD WORLD A RECOLLECTION OF ATLANTIS.

## CHAPTER I. TRADITIONS OF ATLANTIS.

WE find allusions to the Atlanteans in the most ancient traditions of
many different races.

The great *antediluvian* king of the Mussulman was Shedd-Ad-Ben-Ad, or
Shed-Ad, the son of Ad, or Atlantis.

Among the Arabians the first inhabitants of that country are known as
the Adites, from their progenitor, who is called Ad, the grandson of
Ham. These Adites were probably the people of Atlantis or Ad-lantis.
"They are personified by a monarch *to whom everything is ascribed*, and
to whom is assigned several centuries of life." ("Ancient History of the
East," Lenormant and Chevallier, vol. ii., p. 295.), Ad came from the
northeast. "He married a thousand wives, had four thousand sons, and
lived twelve hundred years. His descendants multiplied considerably.
After his death his sons Shadid and Shedad reigned in succession over
the Adites. In the time of the latter the people of Ad were a thousand
tribes, each composed of several thousands of men. Great conquests are
attributed to Shedad; he subdued, it is said, all Arabia and Irak. The
migration of the Canaanites, their establishment in Syria, and the
Shepherd invasion of Egypt are, by many Arab writers, attributed to an
expedition of Shedad." (*Ibid*., p. 296.)

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Shedad built a palace ornamented with superb columns, and surrounded by
a magnificent garden. It was called Irem. "It was a paradise that Shedad
had built in imitation of the celestial Paradise, of whose delights he
had heard." ("Ancient History of the East," p. 296.) In other words, an
ancient, sun-worshipping, powerful, and conquering race overran Arabia
at the very dawn of history; they were the sons of Adlantis: their king
tried to create a palace and garden of Eden like that of Atlantis.

The Adites are remembered by the Arabians as a great and civilized race.
"They are depicted as men of gigantic stature; their strength was equal
to their size, and they easily moved enormous blocks of stone."
(*Ibid*.) They were architects and builders. "They raised many monuments
of their power; and hence, among the Arabs, arose the custom of calling
great ruins "buildings of the Adites." To this day the Arabs say "as old
as Ad." In the Koran allusion is made to the edifices they built on
"high places for vain uses;" expressions proving that their "idolatry
was considered to have been tainted with Sabæism or star-worship."
(*Ibid*.) "In these legends," says Lenormant, "we find traces of a
wealthy nation, constructors of great buildings, with an advanced
civilization, analogous to that of Chaldea, professing a religion
similar to the Babylonian; a nation, in short, with whom material
progress was allied to great moral depravity and obscene rites. These
facts must be true and strictly historical, for they are everywhere met
with among the Cushites, as among the Canaanites, their brothers by
origin."

Nor is there wanting a great catastrophe which destroys the whole Adite
nation, except a very few who escape because they had renounced
idolatry. A black cloud assails their country, from which proceeds a
terrible hurricane (the water-spout?) which sweeps away everything.

The first Adites were followed by a second Adite race; probably the
colonists who had escaped the Deluge. The centre of its power was the
country of Sheba proper. This empire

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

endured for a thousand years. The Adites are represented upon the
Egyptian monuments as very much like the Egyptians themselves; in other
words, they were a red or sunburnt race: their great temples were
pyramidal, surmounted by buildings. ("Ancient History of the East," p.
321.) "The Sabæans," says Agatharchides ("De Mari Erythræo," p. 102),
"have in their houses an incredible number of vases, and utensils of all
sorts, of gold and silver, beds and tripods of silver, and all the
furniture of astonishing richness. Their buildings have porticos with
columns sheathed with gold, or surmounted by capitals of silver. On the
friezes, ornaments, and the framework of the doors they place plates of
gold incrusted with precious stones."

All this reminds one of the descriptions given by the Spaniards of the
temples of the sun in Peru.

The Adites worshipped the gods of the Phœnicians under names but
slightly changed; "their religion was especially solar... It was
originally a religion without images, without idolatry, and without a
priesthood." (*Ibid*., p. 325.) They "worshipped the sun from the tops
of pyramids." (*Ibid*.) They believed in the immortality of the soul.

In all these things we see resemblances to the Atlanteans.

The great Ethiopian or Cushite Empire, which in the earliest ages
prevailed, as Mr. Rawlinson says, "from the Caucasus to the Indian
Ocean, from the shores of the Mediterranean to the mouth of the Ganges,"
was the empire of Dionysos, the empire of "Ad," the empire of Atlantis.
El Eldrisi called the language spoken to this day by the Arabs of
Mahrah, in Eastern Arabia, "the language of the people of Ad," and Dr.
J. H. Carter, in the *Bombay Journal* of July, 1847, says, "It is the
softest and sweetest language I have ever heard." It would be
interesting to compare this primitive tongue with the languages of
Central America.

The god Thoth of the Egyptians, who was the god of a foreign country,
and who invented letters, was called *At*-hothes.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

We turn now to another ancient race, the Indo-European family--the Aryan
race.

In Sanscrit *Adim*, means first. Among the Hindoos the first man was
*Ad*-ima, his wife was Heva. They *dwelt upon an island*, said to be
Ceylon; they left the island and reached the main-land, when, by a great
convulsion of nature, their communication with the parent land was
forever cut off. (See "Bible in India.")

Here we seem to have a recollection of the destruction of Atlantis.

Mr. Bryant says, "Ad and Ada signify *the first*." The Persians called
the first man "Ad-amah." "Adon" was one of the names of the Supreme God
of the Phœnicians; from it was derived the name of the Greek god
"Ad-onis." The Arv-*ad* of Genesis was the Ar-*Ad* of the Cushites; it
is now known as Ru-*Ad*. It is a series of connected cities twelve miles
in length, along the coast, full of the most massive and gigantic ruins.

Sir William Jones gives the tradition of the Persians as to the earliest
ages. He says: "Moshan assures us that in the opinion of the best
informed Persians the first monarch of Iran, *and of the whole earth*,
was Mashab-*Ad*; that he received from the Creator, and promulgated
among men a sacred book, *in a heavenly language*, to which the
Mussulman author gives the Arabic title of 'Desatir,' or 'Regulations.'
Mashab-*Ad* was, in the opinion of the ancient Persians, the person left
at the end of the last great cycle, and consequently *the father of the
present world*. He and his wife having survived the former cycle, were
blessed with a numerous progeny; he planted *gardens*, invented
ornaments, forged weapons, taught men to take the fleece from sheep and
make clothing; he built cities, constructed palaces, fortified towns,
and introduced arts and commerce."

We have already seen that the primal gods of this people are identical
with the gods of the Greek mythology, and were

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

originally kings of Atlantis. But it seems that these ancient divinities
are grouped together as "*the Aditya*;" and in this name "Ad-itya" we
find a strong likeness to the Semitic "Adites," and another reminiscence
of Atlantis, or Adlantis. In corroboration of this view we find,

1\. The gods who are grouped together as the Aditya are the most ancient
in the Hindoo mythology.

2\. They are all gods of light, or solar gods. (Whitney's Oriental and
Linguistic Studies," p. 39.)

3\. There are twelve of them. (*Ibid*.)

4\. These twelve gods presided over twelve months in the year.

5\. They are a dim recollection of a very remote past. Says Whitney, "It
seems as if here was an attempt on the part of the Indian religion to
take a new development in a moral direction, which a change in the
character and circumstances of the people has caused to fail in the
midst, and fall back again into forgetfulness, while yet half finished
and indistinct." (*Ibid*.)

6\. These gods are called "the sons of Aditi," just as in the Bible we
have allusions to "the sons of Adab," who were the first metallurgists
and musicians. "Aditi is not a goddess. She is addressed as a queen's
daughter, she of fair children."

7\. The Aditya "are elevated above all imperfections; they do not sleep
or wink." The Greeks represented their gods as equally wakeful and
omniscient. "Their character is all truth; they hate and punish guilt."
We have seen the same traits ascribed by the Greeks to the Atlantean
kings.

8\. The sun is sometimes addressed as an Aditya.

9\. Among the Aditya is Varuna, the equivalent of Uranos, whose
identification with Atlantis I have shown. In the vedas Varuna is "the
god of the ocean."

10\. The Aditya represent an earlier and purer form of religion: "While
in hymns to the other deities long: life, wealth, power, are the objects
commonly prayed for, of the Aditya is

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

craved purity, forgiveness of sin, freedom from guilt, and repentance."
("Oriental and Linguistic Studies," p. 43.)

11\. The Aditya, like the Adites, are identified with the doctrine of
the immortality of the soul. Yama is the god of the abode beyond the
grave. In the Persian story he appears as Yima, and "*is made ruler of
the golden age and founder of the Paradise*." (*Ibid*., p. 45.) (See
"Zamna," p. 167 *ante*.)

In view of all these facts, one cannot doubt that the legends of the
"sons of Ad," "the Adites," and "the Aditya," all refer to Atlantis.

Mr. George Smith, in the Chaldean account of the Creation (p. 78),
deciphered from the Babylonian tablets, shows that there was an original
race of men at the beginning of Chaldean history, a dark race, the
*Zalmat-qaqadi*, who were called *Ad-mi*, or *Ad-ami*; they were the
race "who had fallen," and were contradistinguished from "the *Sarku*,
or light race." The "fall" probably refers to their destruction by a
deluge, in consequence of their moral degradation and the indignation of
the gods. The name Adam is used in these legends, but as the name of a
race, not of a man.

Genesis (chap. v., 2) distinctly says that God created man male and
female, and "called *their* name Adam." That is to say, the people were
the Ad-ami, the people of "Ad," or Atlantis. "The author of the Book of
Genesis," says M. Schœbel, "in speaking of the men who were swallowed up
by the Deluge, always describes them as 'Haadam,' 'Adamite humanity.'"
The race of Cain lived and multiplied far away from the land of Seth; in
other words, far from the land destroyed by the Deluge. Josephus, who
gives us the primitive traditions of the Jews, tells us (chap. ii., p.
42) that "Cain travelled over many countries" before he came to the land
of Nod. The Bible does not tell us that the race of Cain perished in the
Deluge. "Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah;" he did not call on
his name; the people that were destroyed were the "sons of Jehovah." All
this indicates

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

that large colonies had been sent out by the mother-land before it sunk
in the sea.

Across the ocean we find the people of Guatemala claiming their descent
from a goddess called *At-tit*, or grandmother, who lived for four
hundred years, and first taught the worship of the true God, which they
afterward forgot. (Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii., p. 75.) While
the famous Mexican calendar stone shows that the sun was commonly called
*tonatiuh* but when it was referred to as the god of the Deluge it was
then called *Atl-tona-ti-uh*, or *At-onatiuh*. (Valentini's "Mexican
Calendar Stone," art. *Maya Archæology*, p. 15.)

We thus find the sons of *Ad* at the base of all the most ancient races
of men, to wit, the Hebrews, the Arabians, the Chaldeans, the Hindoos,
the Persians, the Egyptians, the Ethiopians, the Mexicans, and the
Central Americans; testimony that all these races traced their beginning
back to a dimly remembered Ad-lantis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Kings of Atlantis Become the Gods of the
Greeks.](ataw402)
