[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw106)  [Next](ataw202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# PART II. THE DELUGE.

## CHAPTER I.

### THE DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTIS DESCRIBED IN THE DELUGE LEGENDS.

HAVING demonstrated, as we think successfully, that there is no
improbability in the statement of Plato that a large island, almost a
continent, existed in the past in the Atlantic Ocean, nay, more, that it
is a geological certainty that it did exist; and having further shown
that it is not improbable but very possible that it may have sunk
beneath the sea in the manner described by Plato, we come now to the
next question, Is the memory of this gigantic catastrophe preserved
among the traditions of mankind? We think there can be no doubt that an
affirmative answer must be given to this question.

An event, which in a few hours destroyed, amid horrible convulsions, an
entire country, with all its vast population--that population the
ancestors of the great races of both continents, and they themselves the
custodians of the civilization of their age--could not fail to impress
with terrible force the minds of men, and to project its gloomy shadow
over all human history. And hence, whether we turn to the Hebrews, the
Aryans, the Phœnicians, the Greeks, the Cushites, or the inhabitants of
America, we find everywhere traditions of the Deluge;

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

and we shall see that all these traditions point unmistakably to the
destruction of Atlantis.

François Lenormant says (*Contemp. Rev*., Nov., 1879):

"The result authorizes us to affirm the story of the Deluge to be a
universal tradition among all branches of the human race, with the one
exception, however, of the black. Now, a recollection thus precise and
concordant cannot be a myth voluntarily invented. No religious or
cosmogonic myth presents this character of universality. It must arise
from the reminiscence of a real and terrible event, so powerfully
impressing the imagination of the first ancestors of our race as never
to have been forgotten by their descendants. This cataclysm. must have
occurred near the first cradle of mankind, and before the dispersion of
the families from which the principal races were to spring; for it would
be at once improbable and uncritical to admit that, at as many different
points of the globe as we should have to assume in order to explain the
wide spread of these traditions, local phenomena so exactly alike should
have occurred, their memory having assumed an identical form, and
presenting circumstances that need not necessarily have occurred to the
mind in such cases.

"Let us observe, however, that probably the diluvian tradition is not
primitive, but imported in America; that it undoubtedly wears the aspect
of an importation among the rare populations of the yellow race where it
is found; and lastly, that it is doubtful among the Polynesians of
Oceania. There will still remain three great races to which it is
undoubtedly peculiar, *who have not borrowed it from each other*, but
among whom the tradition is primitive, and goes back to the most ancient
times, and these three races are precisely the only ones of which the
Bible speaks as being *descended from Noah*--those of which it gives the
ethnic filiation in the tenth chapter of Genesis. This observation.
which I hold to be undeniable, attaches a singularly historic and exact
value to the tradition as recorded by the Sacred Book, even if, on the
other hand, it may lead to giving it a *more limited geographical and
ethnological significance*. . . .

"But, as the case now stands, we do not hesitate to declare that, far
from being a myth, the Biblical Deluge *is a real and historical fact*,
having, to say the least, left its impress on the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

ancestors of three races--Aryan, or Indo-European, Semitic, or
Syro-Arabian, Chamitic, or Cushite--that is to say, on the *three great
civilized races of the ancient world*, those which constitute the higher
humanity--before the ancestors of those races had as yet separated, and
in the part of Asia they together inhabited."

Such profound scholars and sincere Christians as M. Schwœbel (Paris,
1858), and M. Omalius d'Halloy (Bruxelles, 1866), deny the universality
of the Deluge, and claim that "it extended only to the principal centre
of humanity, to those who remained near its primitive cradle, without
reaching the scattered tribes who had already spread themselves far away
in almost desert regions. It is certain that the Bible narrative
commences by relating facts common to the whole human species, confining
itself subsequently to the annals of the race peculiarly chosen by the
designs of Providence." (Lenormant and Chevallier, "Anc. Hist. of the
East," p. 44.) This theory is supported by that eminent authority on
anthropology, M. de Quatrefages, as well as by Cuvier; the Rev. R. p.
Bellynck, S.J., admits that it has nothing expressly opposed to
orthodoxy.

Plato identifies "the great deluge of all" with the destruction of
Atlantis. The priest of Sais told Solon that before "the great deluge of
all" Athens possessed a noble race, who performed many noble deeds, the
last and greatest of which was resisting the attempts of Atlantis to
subjugate them; and after this came the destruction of Atlantis, and the
same great convulsion which overwhelmed that island destroyed a number
of the Greeks. So that the Egyptians, who possessed the memory of many
partial deluges, regarded this as "the great deluge of all."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Deluge of the Bible](ataw202)
