[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw405)  [Next](ataw501) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

## CHAPTER VI.

### GOLD AND SILVER THE SACRED METALS OF ATLANTIS.

MONEY is the instrumentality by which man is lifted above the
limitations of barter. Baron Storch terms it "the marvellous instrument
to which we are indebted for our wealth and civilization."

It is interesting to inquire into the various articles which have been
used in different countries and ages as money. The following is a table
of some of them:

Articles of Utility.

|                             |                                        |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| India                       | Cakes of tea.                          |
| China                       | Pieces of silk.                        |
| Abyssinia                   | Salt.                                  |
| Iceland and Newfoundland    | Codfish.                               |
| Illinois (in early days)    | Coon-skins.                            |
| Bornoo (Africa)             | Cotton shirts.                         |
| Ancient Russia              | Skins of wild animals.                 |
| West India Islands (1500)   | Cocoa-nuts.                            |
| Massachusetts Indians       | Wampum and musket-balls.               |
| Virginia (1700)             | Tobacco.                               |
| British West India Islands  | Pins, snuff, and whiskey.              |
| Central South America       | Soap, chocolate, and eggs.             |
| Ancient Romans              | Cattle.                                |
| Ancient Greece              | Nails of copper and iron.              |
| The Lacedemonians           | Iron.                                  |
| The Burman Empire           | Lead.                                  |
| Russia (1828 to 1845)       | Platinum.                              |
| Rome (under Numa Pompilius) | Wood and leather.                      |
| Rome (under the Cæsars)     | Land.<span id="page_344">p. 344</span> |
| Carthaginians               | Leather.                               |
| Ancient Britons Cattle,     | slaves, brass, and iron.               |
| England (under James II.)   | Tin, gun-metal, and pewter.            |
| South Sea Islands           | Axes and hammers.                      |

Articles of Ornament.

|                               |                |
|-------------------------------|----------------|
| Ancient Jews                  | Jewels.        |
| The Indian Islands and Africa | Cowrie shells, |

Conventional Signs.

|                |                            |
|----------------|----------------------------|
| Holland (1574) | Pieces of pasteboard.      |
| China (1200)   | Bark of the mulberry-tree. |

 

It is evident that every primitive people uses as money those articles
upon which they set the highest value--as cattle, jewels, slaves, salt,
musket-balls, pins, snuff, whiskey, cotton shirts, leather, axes, and
hammers; or those articles for which there was a foreign demand, and
which they could trade off to the merchants for articles of
necessity--as tea, silk, codfish, coonskins, cocoa-nuts, and tobacco.
Then there is a later stage, when the stamp of the government is
impressed upon paper, wood, pasteboard, or the bark of trees, and these
articles are given a legal-tender character.

When a civilized nation comes in contact with a barbarous people they
seek to trade with them for those things which they need; a
metal-working people, manufacturing weapons of iron or copper, will seek
for the useful metals, and hence we find iron, copper, tin, and lead
coming into use as a standard of values--as money; for they can always
be converted into articles of use and weapons of war. But when we ask
bow it chanced that gold and silver came to be used as money, and why it
is that gold is regarded as so much more valuable than silver, no answer
presents itself. It was impossible to make either of them into pots or
pans, swords or spears; they were not necessarily more beautiful than
glass or the combinations of tin and copper. Nothing astonished the
American races

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

more than the extraordinary value set upon gold and silver by the
Spaniards; they could not understand it. A West Indian savage traded a
handful of gold-dust with one of the sailors accompanying Columbus for
some tool, and then ran for his life to the woods lest the sailor should
repent his bargain and call him back. The Mexicans had coins of tin
shaped like a letter **T**. We can understand this, for tin was
necessary to them in hardening their bronze implements, and it may have
been the highest type of metallic value among them. A round copper coin
with a serpent stamped on it was found at Palenque, and **T**-shaped
copper coins are very abundant in the ruins of Central America. This too
we can understand, for copper was necessary in every work of art or
utility.

All these nations were familiar with gold and silver, but they used them
as *sacred metals* for the adornment of the temples of the sun and moon.
The color of gold was something of the color of the sun's rays, while
the color of silver resembled the pale light of the moon, and hence they
were respectively sacred to the gods of the sun and moon. And this is
probably the origin of the comparative value of these metals: they
became the precious metals because they were the sacred metals, and gold
was more valuable than silver--just as the sun-god was the great god of
the nations, while the mild moon was simply an attendant upon the sun.

The Peruvians called gold "the tears wept by the sun." It was not used
among the people for ornament or money. The great temple of the sun at
Cuzco was called the "Place of Gold." It was, as I have shown, literally
a mine of gold. Walls, cornices, statuary, plate, ornaments, all were of
gold; the very ewers, pipes, and aqueducts--even the agricultural
implements used in the garden of the temple--were of gold and silver.
The value of the jewels which adorned the temple was equal to one
hundred and eighty millions of dollars! The riches of the kingdom can be
conceived when we remember that from a pyramid in Chimu a Spanish
explorer named

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

Toledo took, in 1577, $4,450,284 in gold and silver. ("New American
Cyclopædia," art. *American Antiquities*.) The gold and silver of Peru
largely contributed to form the metallic currency upon which Europe has
carried on her commerce during the last three hundred years.

Gold and silver were not valued in Peru for any intrinsic usefulness;
they were regarded as sacred because reserved for the two great gods of
the nation. As we find gold and silver mined and worked on both sides of
the Atlantic at the earliest periods of recorded history, we may fairly
conclude that they were known to the Atlanteans; and this view is
confirmed by the statements of Plato, who represents a condition of
things in Atlantis exactly like that which Pizarro found in Peru.
Doubtless the vast accumulations of gold and silver in both countries
were due to the fact that these metals were not permitted to be used by
the people. In Peru the annual taxes of the people were paid to the Inca
in part in gold and silver from the mines, and they were used to
ornament the temples; and thus the work of accumulating the sacred
metals went on from generation to generation. The same process doubtless
led to the vast accumulations in the temples of Atlantis, as described
by Plato.

Now, as the Atlanteans carried on an immense commerce with all the
countries of Europe and Western Asia, they doubtless inquired and traded
for gold and silver for the adornment of their temples, and they thus
produced a demand for and gave a value to the two metals otherwise
comparatively useless to man--a value higher than any other commodity
which the people could offer their civilized customers; and as the
reverence for the great burning orb of the sun, master of all the
manifestations of nature, was tenfold as great as the veneration for the
smaller, weaker, and variable goddess of the night, so was the demand
for the metal sacred to the sun ten times as great as for the metal
sacred to the moon. This view is confirmed by the fact that the root of
the word by which the Celts,

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

the Greeks, and the Romans designated gold was the Sanscrit word karat,
which means, "*the color of the sun*." Among the Assyrians gold and
silver were respectively consecrated to the and moon precisely as they
were in Peru. A pyramid belonging to the palace of Nineveh is referred
to repeatedly in the inscriptions. It was composed of seven stages,
equal in height, and each one smaller in area than the one beneath it;
each stage was covered with stucco of different colors, "a different
color representing each of the heavenly bodies, the least important
being at the base: white (Venus); black (Saturn); purple (Jupiter); blue
(Mercury); vermillion (Mars); *silver* (the Moon); and *gold* (the
Sun)." (Lenormant's "Ancient History of the East," vol. i., p. 463.) "In
England, to this day the new moon is saluted with a bow or a courtesy,
as well as the curious practice of 'turning one's silver,' which seems a
relic of the offering of *the moon's proper metal*." (Tylor's
"Anthropology", p. 361.) The custom of wishing, when one first sees the
new moon, is probably a survival of moon-worship; the wish taking the
place of the prayer.

And thus has it come to pass that, precisely as the physicians of
Europe, fifty years ago, practised bleeding, because for thousands of
years their savage ancestors had used it to draw away the evil spirits
out of the man, so the business of our modern civilization is dependent
upon the superstition of a past civilization, and the bankers of the
world are to-day perpetuating the adoration of "the tears wept by the
sun" which was commenced ages since on the island of Atlantis.

And it becomes a grave question--when we remember that the rapidly
increasing business of the world, consequent upon an increasing
population, and a civilization advancing with giant steps, is measured
by the standard of a currency limited by natural laws, decreasing
annually in production, and incapable of expanding proportionately to
the growth of the world--whether this Atlantean superstition may not yet
inflict more incalculable injuries on mankind than those which resulted
from the practice of phlebotomy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Central American and Mexican Colonies.](ataw501)
