[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ebt02)  [Next](ebt04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# FOREWORD.

### To the Average Reader.

I judge that you pick up this booklet with much the same ideas on the
subject that I had a few months ago. The antiquarians had not helped you
or me very much, but had left us with vague ideas and many notes of
interrogation.

On early trackways they alternated between a misty appreciation of
hill-tracks and ridgeways, and an implied depreciation of all
track-makers before the Romans came. To learn the meaning of mounds they
did not go beyond the child's investigation of a drum, cut it open to
see; and, if nothing was there, quite failed to profit by such valuable
negative evidence. In perhaps one moat in five they found a dwelling,
and argued finely on the defensive importance of a ring of water; but as
to the other four, with no dwelling, and in unexplained positions, they
closed their eyes.

I do not know, dear reader, whether you will be as much astonished in
reading the new facts which I disclose, and the deductions I feel
obliged to make, as I have been in the disclosure. Frankly, if another
person told them to me, I should want to verify before acceptance. And I
try to aid you to verify. But do note this--that the important point in
this booklet is the previously undiscovered string of facts, which make
it necessary to revise former conclusions. My deductions may be faulty.
But the facts are physical ones, and anyone can test in their own
district whether moats, mounds and churches do not line up in straight
lines with a hill peak at one end, and with bits of old tracks and
antiquarian objects on the line.

So please do not begin with the false--as being inapplicable--word
"theory." I had no theory when, out of what appeared to be a tangle, I
got hold of the one right end of this string of facts, and found to my
amazement that it unwound in orderly fashion and complete logical
sequence.

Make your own deductions when you have verified, and I have tried to
help you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](ebt04)
