[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ebt12)  [Next](ebt14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MARK STONES.

These ([Plate IX](ebt19.htm#img_pl09).) were used to mark the way. They
were of all sizes, from the Whetstone on Hargest Ridge to a small stone
not

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

much larger than a football. Some were long stones or menhirs, but few
remain upright in this district. I know of three lying fallen on leys,
namely on the wall at the south gate of Madley Churchyard, near the inn
at Bush Bank (cross road from Weobley), and used as a bridge over a
ditch near the Field Farm on the Litley-Carrots path.

I show photographs of a fine stone at Red Lion, Madley, having a flat
top, and of the type which developed into market stones. The market
stone at Grosmont Town Hall (on which the first market basket placed on
market day paid no toll) is the successor of such a mark stone. Two
marking stones (with ancient brick houses built partly on them) stand
unnoticed in the short Wye Street, just over Wye Bridge at Hereford.
They mark the Palace Ford, and a ley from Castle Hill to Hunderton. They
are of the same peculiar stone (not "old red") as at Madley, Colwall,
etc.

Wergin's Stone ([Plate X](ebt19.htm#img_pl10).) is a late type of mark
stone which was the prototype of the churchyard and wayside crosses, all
of which I think are on the sites of original mark stones, as I find
leys passing through them.

In studying such crosses, I was puzzled to find several (as at
Vowchurch, Hentland, Capel-y-fin) with ancient rough unworked stones as
a base. I am now certain that these bases are the original stones
marking a ley. The Pedlar's Cross near Pen-y-lan Farm above Llanigon
(mentioned in Miss Jacob's fine story, "The Sheep Stealers") has been
chipped into a rude suggestion of a cross without taking down, and a
flat mark stone on which Archbishop Baldwin is said (by tradition) to
have preached when on his tour with Giraldus in 1188, has had a cross
inscribed on it. It stands close to St. Ishaw's Well at Partricio.

There is a striking marking stone on the Rhiw Wen route in the Black
Mountains.

Other stones on leys are:--White Stone, Withington (with original stone
at the base of an inverted fragment of its successor--a wayside cross);
Queen Stone, Huntsham, at Credenhill cross-roads, at the foot of Froom's
Hill, on the road near Turnaston Church, marking a ford at Bartonsham
Farm, Hereford, and Crossways, Bollingham. The stone that all the Kings
of England are crowned on is certainly a mark stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sighting Stones](ebt14)
