[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080300)  [Next](2080302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxix-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXVIII. <span
id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxix-p3"></span>To the magistrates of Colonia.

<span id="ix.ccxxix-p4"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxix-p4.1"></span>have</span> received your lordships’ letter,
and offered thanks to God most holy, that you, occupied as you are with
affairs of state, should not put those of the Church in the second
place.  I am grateful to think that every one of you has shewn anxiety
as though he were acting in his own private interest, nay, in defence of
his own life, and that you have written to me in your distress at the
removal of your very God-beloved bishop Euphronius.  Nicopolis has not
really stolen him from you; were she pleading her cause before <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span id="ix.ccxxix-Page_271"></span>a judge
she might say that she was recovering what is her own.  If honourably
treated she will tell you, as becomes an affectionate mother, that she
will share with you the Father who will give a portion of his grace to
each of you:  he will not suffer the one to be in any way harmed by the
invasion of their adversaries, and at the same time will not deprive
you, the other, of the care to which you have been accustomed.  Bethink
you then of the emergency of the time; apply your best intelligence to
understand how good government necessitates a certain course of action;
and then pardon the bishops who have adopted this course for the
establishment of the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ.  Suggest to
yourselves what is becoming you.  Your own intelligence needs no
instruction.  You know how to adopt the counsels of those who love you. 
It is only natural that you should be unaware of many of the questions
that are being agitated, because of our being situated far away in
Armenia; but we who are in the midst of affairs and have our ears dinned
every day on all sides with news of Churches that are being overthrown,
are in deep anxiety lest the common enemy, in envy at the protracted
peace of our life, should be able to sow his tares in your ground too,
and Armenia, as well as other places, be given over to our adversaries
to devour.  For the present be still, as not refusing to allow your
neighbours to share with you the use of a goodly vessel.  Ere long, if
the Lord allow me to come to you, you shall, if it seem necessary to
you, receive yet greater consolation for what has come to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[270:2933](2080301.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="ix.ccxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxix-p2"></span> Of the same date as the preceding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the clergy of Nicopolis.](2080302)
