[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080333)  [Next](2080335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cclxii"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLXI. <span
id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166) </span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p3"></span>*To the Sozopolitans*. <span
id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167)

<span id="ix.cclxii-p5"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p5.1"></span>have</span> received the letter which you,
right honourable brethren, have sent me concerning the circumstances in
which you are placed.  I thank the Lord that you have let me share in
the anxiety you feel as to your attention to things needful and
deserving of serious heed.  But I was distressed to hear that over and
above the disturbance brought on the Churches by the Arians, and the
confusion caused by them in the definition of the faith, there has
appeared among you yet another innovation, throwing the brotherhood into
great dejection, because, as you have informed me, certain persons are
uttering, in the hearing of the faithful, novel and unfamiliar doctrines
which they allege to be deduced from the teaching of Scripture.  You
write that there are men among you who are trying to destroy the saving
incarnation <span id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and, <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="ix.cclxii-Page_300"></span>so far as they can, are overthrowing the
grace of the great mystery unrevealed from everlasting, but manifested
in His own times, when the Lord, when He had gone through <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) all things pertaining to the cure
of the human race, bestowed on all of us the boon of His own sojourn
among us.  For He helped His own creation, first through the patriarchs,
whose lives were set forth as examples and rules to all willing to
follow the footsteps of the saints, and with zeal like theirs to reach
the perfection of good works.  Next for succour He gave the Law,
ordaining it by angels in the hand of Moses; <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) then the prophets, foretelling the
salvation to come; judges, kings, and righteous men, doing great works,
with a mighty <span id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171) hand.  After
all these in the last days He was Himself manifested ill the flesh,
“made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.” <span
id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172)

<span id="ix.cclxii-p11"></span>2.  If, then, the sojourn of the Lord in
flesh has never taken place, the Redeemer <span
id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) paid not the fine to death on our
behalf, nor through Himself destroyed death’s reign.  For if what was
reigned over by death was not that which was assumed by the Lord, death
would not have ceased working his own ends, nor would the sufferings of
the God-bearing flesh have been made our gain; He would not have killed
sin in the flesh:  we who had died in Adam should not have been made
alive in Christ; the fallen to pieces would not have been framed again;
the shattered would not have been set up again; that which by the
serpent’s trick had been estranged from God would never have been made
once more His own.  All these boons are undone by those that assert that
it was with a heavenly body that the Lord came among us.  And if the
God-bearing flesh was not ordained to be assumed of the lump of Adam,
what need was there of the Holy Virgin?  But who has the hardihood now
once again to renew by the help of sophistical arguments and, of course,
by scriptural evidence, that old dogma <span
id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) of Valentinus, now long ago
silenced?  For this impious doctrine of the seeming <span
id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) is no novelty.  It was started long
ago by the feeble-minded Valentinus, who, after tearing off a few of the
Apostle’s statements, constructed for himself this impious fabrication,
asserting that the Lord assumed the “form of a servant,” <span
id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) and not the servant himself, and
that He was made in the “likeness,” but that actual manhood was not
assumed by Him.  Similar sentiments are expressed by these men who can
only be pitied for bringing new troubles upon you. <span
id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177)

<span id="ix.cclxii-p17"></span>3.  As to the statement that human
feelings are transmitted to the actual Godhead, it is one made by men
who preserve no order in their thoughts, and are ignorant that there is
a distinction between the feelings of flesh, of flesh endowed with soul,
and of soul using a body. <span id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178)  
It is the property of flesh to undergo division, diminution,
dissolution; of flesh endowed with soul to feel weariness, pain, hunger,
thirst, and to be overcome by sleep; of soul using body to feel grief,
heaviness, anxiety, and such like.  Of these some are natural and
necessary to every living creature; others come of evil will, and are
superinduced because of life’s lacking proper discipline and training
for virtue.  Hence it is evident that our Lord assumed the natural
affections to establish His real incarnation, and not by way of
semblance of incantation, and that all the affections derived from evil
that besmirch the purity of our life, He rejected as unworthy of His
unsullied Godhead.  It is on this account that He is said to have been
“made in the likeness of flesh of sin;” <span
id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) not, as these men hold, in likeness
of flesh, but of flesh of sin.  It follows that He took our flesh with
its natural afflictions, but “did no sin.” <span
id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180)   Just as the death which is in the
flesh, transmitted to us through Adam, was swallowed up by the Godhead,
so was the sin taken away by the righteousness which is in Christ
Jesus, <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) so that in the
resurrection we receive back the flesh neither liable to death nor
subject to sin.

<span id="ix.cclxii-p22"></span>These, brethren, are the mysteries of
the <span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="ix.cclxii-Page_301"></span>Church; these are the traditions of the
Fathers.  Every man who fears the Lord, and is awaiting God’s judgment,
I charge not to be carried away by various doctrines.  If any one
teaches a different doctrine, and refuses to accede to the sound words
of the faith, rejecting the oracles of the Spirit, and making his own
teaching of more authority than the lessons of the Gospels, of such an
one beware.  May the Lord grant that one day we may meet, so that all
that my argument has let slip I may supply when we stand face to face! 
I have written little when there was much to say, for I did not like to
go beyond my letter’s bounds.  At the same time I do not doubt that to
all that fear the Lord a brief reminder is enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[299:3167](2080334.htm#fr_3166) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p2"></span> This letter is placed in 377.  Fessler
styles it “*celeberrima*.”  The Benedictine heading is “*Cum
scripsissent Basilio Sozopolitani nonnullos carnem cœlestem Christo
affingere et affectus humanos in ipsam divinitatem conferre; breviter
hunc errorem refellit; ac demonstrat nihil nobis prodesse passiones
Christi si non eandem ac nos carnem habuit.  Quod spectat ad affectus
humanos, probat naturales a Christo assumptos fuisse, vitiosos vero
nequaquam*.”

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[299:3168](2080334.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p4"></span> Sozopolis, or Suzupolis, in Pisidia
(*cf*. Evagrius, *Hist. Ecc*. iii. 33), has been supposed to be the
ancient name of Souzon, S. of Aglasoun, where ruins still exist.  On its
connexion with Apollonia, *cf*. *Hist. Geog. A.M.* p. 400.

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[299:3169](2080334.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p6.1"></span>οἰκονομίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[300:3170](2080334.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p7"></span> Here the Ben. Ed. call attention to the
fact that S. Basil may by this word indicate the appearance of the Son
to the patriarchs before the Birth from the Virgin, and compares a
similar statement in his Book *Cont. Eunom*. II., as well as the words
of Clemens Alex. in the work *Quis Dives Salvandus*, n. 8, in which the
Son is described as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p7.2"></span>πὸ γενέσεως μέχρι τοῦ σημείου τὴν ἀνθρωπότητα
διατρέχων</span>.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[300:3171](2080334.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p8"></span> *cf*. [Gal. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="ix.cclxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[300:3172](2080334.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p9.1"></span>κραταιᾷ</span> with the ed. Par. seems to
make better sense than <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p9.2"></span>κρυφαί& 139·</span>, which has better
authority.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[300:3173](2080334.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p10"></span> [Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="ix.cclxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[300:3174](2080334.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p12.1"></span>Λ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p12.2"></span>υτρωτής</span>.  *cf*. [Acts vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035)<span id="ix.cclxii-p12.3"></span>,
where R.V. gives redeemer as marginal rendering.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxii-p12.4"></span>Λ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxii-p12.5"></span>υτρωτής</span>=payer of
the <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxii-p12.6"></span>λύτρον</span>,
which is the means of release (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p12.7"></span>λύω</span>).  The word is used of Moses in
the Acts in a looser sense than here of the Saviour.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[300:3175](2080334.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p12.8"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p13"></span> On the use of “dogma” for heretical
opinion, *cf*. *De Sp. S.* note on § 66.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[300:3176](2080334.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p14.1"></span>δόκησις</span>.

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[300:3177](2080334.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p15"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ix.cclxii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[300:3178](2080334.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p16"></span> On the Docetism of Valentinus *vide*
Dr. Salmon in *D. C. Biog*. i. 869.  “According to V. (Irenæus i. 7) our
Lord’s nature was fourfold:  (1) He had a <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxii-p16.1"></span>ψυχή</span> or animal soul; (2) He had a
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxii-p16.2"></span>πνεῦμα</span> or
spiritual principle derived from Achamoth; (3) He had a body, but not a
material body, but a heavenly one.…(4) The pre-existent Saviour
descended on Him in the form of a dove at His Baptism.  When our Lord
was brought before Pilate, this Saviour as being incapable of suffering
withdrew His power;” (*cf*. the *Gospel of Peter*, “The Lord cried,
saying, ‘My Power, my Power, Thou hast left me.’”) “and the spiritual
part which was also impassible was likewise dismissed; the animal soul
and the wonderfully contrived body alone remaining to suffer, and to
exhibit on the cross on earth a representation of what had previously
taken place on the heavenly Stauros.  It thus appears that Valentinus
was only partially docetic.”  But *cf*. Iren. v. 1, 2, and iii. 22.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[300:3179](2080334.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p18"></span> *cf*. *De Sp. S.* § 12. p. 7.

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[300:3180](2080334.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="ix.cclxii-p19.1"></span>,
R.V. marg.

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[300:3181](2080334.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p20"></span>[1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="ix.cclxii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[300:3182](2080334.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="ix.cclxii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxii-p21"></span> *cf*. [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxii-p21.1"></span>
*ad fin*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Monk Urbicius.](2080335)
