[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080312)  [Next](2080314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxli"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXL. <span
id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p3"></span>To the Presbyters of Nicopolis.

<span id="ix.ccxli-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p4.1"></span>You</span> have done quite right in sending me
a letter, and in sending it by the hands of one who, even if you had not
written, would have been perfectly competent to give me considerable
comfort in all my anxieties, and an authentic report as to the position
of affairs.  Many vague rumours were continually reaching me, and
therefore I was desirous of getting information on many points from some
one able to give it through accurate knowledge.  Touching all these I
have received a satisfactory and intelligent narrative from our
well-beloved and honourable brother Theodosius the presbyter.  I now
write to your reverences the advice which I give myself, for in many
respects our positions are identical; and that not only at the present
moment, but in times gone by too, as many instances may prove.  Of some
of these we possess records in writing; others we have received through
unwritten recollection from persons acquainted with the facts.  We know
how, for the sake of the name of the Lord, trials have beset alike
individuals and cities that have put their trust in Him.  Nevertheless,
one and all have passed away, and the distress caused by the days of
darkness has not been everlasting.  For just as when hail-storm and
flood, and all natural calamities, at once injure and destroy things
that have no strength, while they are only themselves affected by
falling on the strong, so the terrible trials set in action against the
Church have been proved feebler than the firm foundation of our faith in
Christ.  The hail-storm has passed away; the torrent has rushed over its
bed; clear sky has taken the place of the former, and the latter has
left the course without water and dry, over which it travelled, and has
disappeared in the deep.  So, too, in a little while the storm, now
bursting upon us, will cease to be.  But this will be on the condition
of our being willing not to look to the present, but to gaze in hope at
the future somewhat further off.

<span id="ix.ccxli-p5"></span>2.  Is the trial heavy, my brethren?  Let
us endure the toil.  No one who shuns the blows and the dust of battle
wins a crown.  Are those mockeries of the devil, and the enemies sent to
attack us, insignificant?  They are troublesome because they are his
ministers, but contemptible because God has in them combined wickedness
with weakness.  Let us beware of being condemned for crying out too loud
over a little pain.  Only one thing is worth anguish, the loss of one’s
own self, when for the sake of the credit of the moment, if one can
really call making a public disgrace of one’s self credit, one has
deprived one’s self of the everlasting reward of the just.  You are
children of confessors; you are children of martyrs; you have resisted
sin unto blood. <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022.md)   Use, each
one of you, the examples of those near and dear to you to make you brave
for true religion’s sake.  No one of us has been torn by lashes; <span
id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023.md) no one of us has suffered
confiscation of his house; we have not been driven into exile; we have
not suffered imprisonment.  What great suffering have we undergone,
unless peradventure it is grievous that we have suffered nothing, and
have not been reckoned worthy of the sufferings of Christ? <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024.md)   But if you are grieved because
one whom I need not name occupies the house of prayer, and you worship
the Lord of heaven and earth in the open air, remember that the eleven
disciples were shut up in the upper chamber, when they that had
crucified the Lord were worshipping in the Jews’ far-famed temple. 
Peradventure, Judas, who preferred death by hanging to life in disgrace,
proved himself a better man than those who now meet universal
condemnation without a blush.

<span id="ix.ccxli-p9"></span>3.  Only do not be deceived by their lies
<span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="ix.ccxli-Page_282"></span>when they claim to be of the right faith. 
They are not Christians, but traffickers in Christ, <span
id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025.md) always preferring their profit in
this life to living in accordance with the truth.  When they thought
that they should get this empty dignity, they joined the enemies of
Christ:  now that they have seen the indignation of the people, they are
once more for pretending orthodoxy.  I do not recognise as bishop—I
would not count among Christ’s clergy <span
id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026.md) —a man who has been promoted to a
chief post by polluted hands, to the destruction of the faith.  This is
my decision.  If you have any part with me, you will doubtless think as
I do.  If you take counsel on your own responsibility, every man is
master of his own mind, and I am innocent of this blood. <span
id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027.md)   I have written thus, not because
I distrust you, but that by declaring my own mind I may strengthen some
men’s hesitation, and prevent any one from being prematurely received
into communion, or after receiving the laying on of hands of our
enemies, when peace is made, later on, trying to force me to enroll them
in the ranks of the sacred ministry.  Through you I salute the clergy of
the city and diocese, and all the laity who fear the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[281:3022](2080313.htm#fr_3021.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p2"></span> Placed in 376.

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[281:3023](2080313.htm#fr_3022.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p6"></span> *cf*. [Heb. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ccxli-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[281:3024](2080313.htm#fr_3023.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p7.1"></span>κατεξάνθη</span>.  *cf*. the use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxli-p7.2"></span>καταξαίνω</span> (=card or
comb) in the *Letter of the Smyrneans on the Martyrdom of Polycarp,* §
2, “They were so torn by lashes that the mechanism of their flesh was
visible, even as far as the veins and arteries.”  *cf*. note, p. 2, on
the difference between the persecution of the Catholics by Valens and
that of the earlier Christians by earlier emperors, though exile and
confiscation were suffered in Basil’s time.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[281:3025](2080313.htm#fr_3024.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p8"></span> *cf*. [Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041.md)<span id="ix.ccxli-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[282:3026](2080313.htm#fr_3025.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p10.1"></span>χριστέμποροι</span>.  *cf*. the use of the
cognate subst. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p10.2"></span>χριστεμ πορία</span> in the letter of
Alexander of Alexandria in Theodoret, *Ecc. Hist*. i. 3.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxli-p10.3"></span>χριστέμπορος</span>
occurs in the *Didache*, § 12, and in the *Pseud. Ig., e.g., ad Mag.*
ix.

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[282:3027](2080313.htm#fr_3026.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p11.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxli-p11.2"></span>ερεῦσι</span>.  *cf*. note in *Letter* liv.
p. 157.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[282:3028](2080313.htm#fr_3027.md) <span
id="ix.ccxli-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxli-p12"></span> *cf*. [Matt. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.ccxli-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.](2080314.md)
