[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080406)  [Next](2080408.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cccxxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cccxxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCCXL.</span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxv-p2"></span>Libanius to Basil.

<span id="ix.cccxxxv-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cccxxxv-p3.1"></span>Had</span> you been for a long time
considering how best you could reply to my letter about yours, you could
not in my judgment have acquitted yourself better than by writing as you
have written now.  You call me a sophist, and you allege that it is a
sophist’s business to make small things great and great things small. 
And you maintain that the object of my letter was to prove yours a good
one, when it was not a good one, and that it was no better than the one
which you have sent last, and, in a word that you have no power of
expression, the books which you have now in hand producing no such
effect, and the eloquence which you once possessed having all
disappeared.  Now, in the endeavour to prove this, you have made this
epistle too, which you are reviling, so admirable, that my visitors
could not refrain from leaping with admiration as it was being read.  I
was astonished that after your trying to run down the former one by
this, by saying that the former one was like it, you have really
complimented the former by it.  To carry out your object, you ought to
have made this one worse, that you might slander the former.  But it is
not like you, I think, to do despite to the truth.  It would have been
done despite to, if you had purposely written badly, and not put out the
powers you have.  It would be characteristic of you not to find fault
with what is worthy of praise, lest in your attempt to make great things
insignificant, your proceedings reduce you to the rank of the sophists. 
Keep to the books which you say are inferior in style, though better in
sense.  No one hinders you.  But of the principles which are ever mine,
and once were yours, the roots both remain and will remain, as long as
you exist.  Though you water them ever so little, no length of time will
ever completely destroy them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Libanius to Basil.](2080408.md)
