[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080332)  [Next](2080334) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cclxi"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLX. <span
id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) </span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p3"></span>*To Optimus the bishop*. <span
id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143)

<span id="ix.cclxi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p5.1"></span>Under</span> any circumstances I should have
gladly seen the good lads, on account of both a steadiness of character
beyond their years, and their near relationship to your excellency,
which might have led me to expect something remarkable in them.  And,
when I saw them approaching me with your letter, my affection towards
them was doubled.  But now that I have read the letter, now that I have
seen all the anxious care for the Church that there is in it, and the
evidence it affords of your zeal in reading the divine Scriptures, I
thank the Lord.  And I invoke blessings on those who brought me such a
letter, and, even before them, on the writer himself.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p6"></span>2.  You have asked for a solution of that
famous passage which is everywhere interpreted in different senses,
“Whosoever slayeth Cain will exact vengeance for seven sins.” <span
id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144)   Your question shews that you have
yourself carefully observed the charge of Paul to Timothy, <span
id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145) for you are obviously attentive to
your reading.  You have moreover roused me, old man that I am, dull
alike from age and bodily infirmity, and from the many afflictions which
have been stirred up round about me and have weighed down my life. 
Fervent in spirit as you are yourself, you are rousing me, now benumbed
like a beast in his den, to some little wakefulness and vital energy. 
The passage in question may be interpreted simply and may also receive
an elaborate explanation.  The simpler, and one that may occur to any
one off hand, is this:  that Cain ought to suffer sevenfold punishment
for his sins.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p9"></span>For it is not the part of a righteous
judge to define requital on the principle of like for like, but the
originator of evil must pay his debt with addition, if he is to be made
better by punishment and render other men wiser by his example. 
Therefore, since it is ordained that Cain pay the penalty of his sin
sevenfold, he who kills him, it is said, will discharge the sentence
pronounced against him by the divine judgment.  This is the sense that
suggests itself to us on our first reading the passage.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p10"></span>3.  But readers, gifted with greater
curiosity, are naturally inclined to probe into the question further. 
How, they ask, can justice be satisfied seven times?  And what are the
vengeances?  Are they for seven sins committed?  Or is the sin committed
once and are there seven punishments for the one sin?  Scripture
continually assigns seven as the number of the remission of sins.  “How
often,” it is asked, “shall my brother sin against me and I forgive
him?”  (It is Peter who is speaking to the Lord.)  “Till <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="ix.cclxi-Page_297"></span>seven
times?”  Then comes the Lord’s answer, “I say not unto thee, until seven
times, but, until seventy times seven.” <span
id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146)   Our Lord did not vary the number,
but multiplied the seven, and so fixed the limit of the forgiveness. 
After seven years the Hebrew used to be freed from slavery. <span
id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147)   Seven weeks of years used in old
times to make the famous jubilee, <span
id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148) in which the land rested, debts
were remitted, slaves were set free, and, as it were, a new life began
over again, the old life from age to age being in a sense completed at
the number seven.  These things are types of this present life, which
revolves in seven days and passes by, wherein punishments of slighter
sins are inflicted, according to the loving care of our good Lord, to
save us from being delivered to punishment in the age that has no end. 
The expression *seven times* is therefore introduced because of its
connexion with this present world for men who love this world ought
specially to be punished in the things for the sake of which they have
chosen to live wicked lives.  If you understand the *vengeances* to be
for the sins committed by Cain, you will find those sins to be seven. 
Or if you understand them to mean the sentence passed on him by the
Judge, you will not go far wrong.  To take the crimes of Cain:  the
first sin is *envy* at the preference of Abel; the second is *guile*,
whereby he said to his brother, “Let us go into the field:” <span
id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149)   the third is *murder*, a further
wickedness:  the fourth, *fratricide*, a still greater iniquity:  the
fifth that he committed the *first murder*, and set a bad example to
mankind:  the sixth *wrong* in that he grieved his parents:  the
seventh, his *lie* to God; for when he was asked, “Where is Abel thy
brother?” he replied, “I know not.” <span
id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150)   Seven sins were therefore avenged
in the destruction of Cain.  For when the Lord said, “Cursed is the
earth which has opened to receive the blood of thy brother,” and
“groaning and trembling shall there be on the earth,” Cain said, “If
thou castest me out to-day from the earth, then from thy face shall I be
hid, and groaning and trembling shall I lie upon the earth, and every
one that findeth me shall slay me.”  It is in answer to this that the
Lord says, “Whosoever slayeth Cain will discharge seven
vengeances.” <span id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151)   Cain supposed
that he would be an easy prey to every one, because of there being no
safety for him in the earth (for the earth was cursed for his sake), and
of his being deprived of the succour of God, Who was angry with him for
the murder, and so of there being no help for him either from earth or
from heaven.  Therefore he said, “It shall come to pass that every one
that findeth me shall slay me.”  Scripture proves his error in the
words, “Not so;” *i.e.* thou shalt not be slain.  For to men suffering
punishment, death is a gain, because it brings relief from their pain. 
But thy life shall be prolonged, that thy punishment may be made
commensurate with thy sins.  Since then the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxi-p16.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.cclxi-p16.3"></span>κδικούμενον</span> may be
understood in two senses; both the sin for which vengeance was taken,
and the manner of the punishment, let us now examine whether the
criminal suffered a sevenfold torment.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p17"></span>4.  The seven sins of Cain have been
enumerated in what has been already said.  Now I ask if the punishments
inflicted on him were seven, and I state as follows.  The Lord enquired
‘Where is Abel thy brother?’ not because he wished for information, but
in order to give Cain an opportunity for repentance, as is proved by the
words themselves, for on his denial the Lord immediately convicts him
saying, “The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me.”  So the
enquiry, “Where is Abel thy brother?” was not made with a view to God’s
information, but to give Cain an opportunity of perceiving his sin.  But
for God’s having visited him he might have pleaded that he was left
alone and had no opportunity given him for repentance.  Now the
physician appeared that the patient might flee to him for help.  Cain,
however, not only fails to hide his sore, but makes another one in
adding the lie to the murder.  “I know not.  Am I my brother’s keeper?” 
Now from this point begin to reckon the punishments.  “Cursed is the
ground for thy sake,” one punishment.  “Thou shalt till the ground.”
 This is the second punishment.  Some secret necessity was imposed upon
him forcing him to the tillage of the earth, so that it should never be
permitted him to take rest when he might wish, but ever to suffer pain
with the earth, his enemy, which, by polluting it with his brother’s
blood, he had made accursed.  “Thou shalt till the ground.”  Terrible
punishment, to live with those that hate one, to have for a companion an
enemy, an implacable foe.  “Thou shalt till the earth,” that is, Thou
shalt toil at the labours of the field, never resting, never released
from thy work, day or night, bound down by secret necessity which is
harder than any savage master, and continually urged on to labour.  “And
it shall not yield unto thee her <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="ix.cclxi-Page_298"></span>strength.”  Although the ceaseless toil
had some fruit, the labour itself were no little torture to one forced
never to relax it.  But the toil is ceaseless, and the labours at the
earth are fruitless (for “she did not yield her strength”) and this
fruitlessness of labour is the third punishment.  “Groaning and
trembling shalt thou be on the earth.”  Here two more are added to the
three; continual groaning, and tremblings of the body, the limbs being
deprived of the steadiness that comes of strength.  Cain had made a bad
use of the strength of his body, and so its vigour was destroyed, and it
tottered and shook, and it was hard for him to lift meat and drink to
his mouth, for after his impious conduct, his wicked hand was no longer
allowed to minister to his body’s needs.  Another punishment is that
which Cain disclosed when he said, “Thou hast driven me out from the
face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid.”  What is the
meaning of this driving out from the face of the earth?  It means
deprivation of the benefits which are derived from the earth.  He was
not transferred to another place, but he was made a stranger to all the
good things of earth.  “And from thy face shall I be hid.”  The heaviest
punishment for men of good heart is alienation from God.  “And it shall
come to pass that every one that findeth me shall slay me.”  He infers
this from what has gone before.  If I am cast out of the earth, and
hidden from thy face, it remains for me to be slain of every one.  What
says the Lord?  Not so.  But he put a mark upon him.  This is the
seventh punishment, that the punishment should not be hid, but that by a
plain sign proclamation should be made to all, that this is the first
doer of unholy deeds.  To all who reason rightly the heaviest of
punishments is shame.  We have learned this also in the case of the
judgments, when “some” shall rise “to everlasting life, and some to
shame and everlasting contempt.” <span
id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152)

<span id="ix.cclxi-p19"></span>5.  Your next question is of a kindred
character, concerning the words of Lamech to his wives; “I have slain a
man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt:  if Cain shall be
avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.” <span
id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153)   Some suppose that Cain was slain
by Lamech, and that he survived to this generation that he might suffer
a longer punishment.  But this is not the case.  Lamech evidently
committed two murders, from what he says himself, “I have slain a man
and a young man,” the man to his wounding, and the young man to his
hurt.  There is a difference between wounding and hurt. <span
id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154)   And there is a difference between
a man and a young man.  “If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly
Lamech seventy and sevenfold.”  It is right that I should undergo four
hundred and ninety punishments, if God’s judgment on Cain was just, that
his punishments should be seven.  Cain had not learned to murder from
another, and had never seen a murderer undergoing punishment.  But I,
who had before my eyes Cain groaning and trembling, and the mightiness
of the wrath of God, was not made wiser by the example before me. 
Wherefore I deserve to suffer four hundred and ninety punishments. 
There are, however, some who have gone so far as the following
explanation, which does not jar with the doctrine of the Church; from
Cain to the flood, they say, seven generations passed by, and the
punishment was brought on the whole earth, because sin was everywhere
spread abroad.  But the sin of Lamech requires for its cure not a Flood,
but Him Who Himself takes away the sin of the world. <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155)   Count the generations from Adam
to the coming of Christ, and you will find, according to the genealogy
of Luke, that the Lord was born in the seventy-seventh.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p23"></span>Thus I have investigated this point to
the best of my ability, though I have passed by matters therein that
might be investigated, for fear of prolonging my observations beyond the
limits of my letter.  But for your intelligence little seeds are
enough.  “Give instruction,” it is said, “to a wise man, and he will be
yet wiser.” <span id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156)  “If a skilful
man hear a wise word he will commend it, and add unto it.” <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157)

<span id="ix.cclxi-p26"></span>6.  About the words of Simeon to Mary,
there is no obscurity or variety of interpretation.  “And Simeon blessed
them, and said unto Mary His mother, Behold, this Child is set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be
spoken against; (yea, a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also,)
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.” <span
id="fr_3158"></span>[3159](#fn_3158)   Here I am astonished that, after
passing by the previous words as requiring no explanation, you should
enquire about the expression, “Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own
soul also.”  To me the question, how the same child can be for the fall
and rising again, and what is the sign that shall be spoken against,
does not seem less perplexing than the question how a sword shall pierce
through Mary’s heart.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p28"></span><span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="ix.cclxi-Page_299"></span>7.  My view is, that the Lord is for
falling and rising again, not because some fall and others rise again,
but because in us the worst falls and the better is set up.  The
advent <span id="fr_3159"></span>[3160](#fn_3159) of the Lord is
destructive of our bodily affections and it rouses the proper qualities
of the soul.  As when Paul says, “When I am weak, then I am
strong,” <span id="fr_3160"></span>[3161](#fn_3160) the same man is weak
and is strong, but he is weak in the flesh and strong in the spirit. 
Thus the Lord does not give to some occasions of falling and to others
occasions of rising.  Those who fall, fall from the station in which
they once were, but it is plain that the faithless man never stands, but
is always dragged along the ground with the serpent whom he follows.  He
has then nowhere to fall from, because he has already been cast down by
his unbelief.  Wherefore the first boon is, that he who stands in his
sin should fall and die, and then should live in righteousness and rise,
both of which graces our faith in Christ confers on us.  Let the worse
fall that the better may have opportunity to rise.  If fornication fall
not, chastity does not rise.  Unless our unreason be crushed our reason
will not come to perfection.  In this sense he is for the fall and
rising again of many.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p31"></span>8.  *For a sign that shall be spoken
against*.  By a sign, we properly understand in Scripture a cross. 
Moses, it is said, set the serpent “upon a pole.” <span
id="fr_3161"></span>[3162](#fn_3161)   That is upon a cross.  Or else a
sign <span id="fr_3162"></span>[3163](#fn_3162) is indicative of
something strange and obscure seen by the simple but understood by the
intelligent.  There is no cessation of controversy about the Incarnation
of the Lord; some asserting that he assumed a body, and others that his
sojourn was bodiless; some that he had a passible body, and others that
he fulfilled the bodily œconomy by a kind of appearance.  Some say that
his body was earthly, some that it was heavenly; some that He
pre-existed before the ages; some that He took His beginning from Mary. 
It is on this account that He is a sign that shall be spoken against.

<span id="ix.cclxi-p34"></span>9.  By a sword is meant the word which
tries and judges our thoughts, which pierces even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of our thoughts. <span id="fr_3163"></span>[3164](#fn_3163)  
Now every soul in the hour of the Passion was subjected, as it were, to
a kind of searching.  According to the word of the Lord it is said, “All
ye shall be offended because of me.” <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164)   Simeon therefore prophesies about
Mary herself, that when standing by the cross, and beholding what is
being done, and hearing the voices, after the witness of Gabriel, after
her secret knowledge of the divine conception, after the great
exhibition of miracles, she shall feel about her soul a mighty
tempest. <span id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165)   The Lord was bound
to taste of death for every man—to become a propitiation for the world
and to justify all men by His own blood.  Even thou thyself, who hast
been taught from on high the things concerning the Lord, shalt be
reached by some doubt.  This is the sword.  “That the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed.”  He indicates that after the offence at the
Cross of Christ a certain swift healing shall come from the Lord to the
disciples and to Mary herself, confirming their heart in faith in Him. 
In the same way we saw Peter, after he had been offended, holding more
firmly to his faith in Christ.  What was human in him was proved
unsound, that the power of the Lord might be shewn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[296:3143](2080333.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p2"></span> Placed in 377.

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[296:3144](2080333.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p4"></span> Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia.  Soc. vii.
36; Theod. v. 8.

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[296:3145](2080333.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p7"></span> [Gen. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015)<span id="ix.cclxi-p7.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[296:3146](2080333.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p8"></span> *cf*. [1 Tim. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013)<span id="ix.cclxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[297:3147](2080333.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p11"></span> [Matt.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span id="ix.cclxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[297:3148](2080333.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p12"></span> [Deut. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[297:3149](2080333.htm#fr_3148) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p13"></span> [Lev. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)<span id="ix.cclxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[297:3150](2080333.htm#fr_3149) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p14"></span> [Gen. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)<span id="ix.cclxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[297:3151](2080333.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p15"></span> [Gen. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009)<span id="ix.cclxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[297:3152](2080333.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p16"></span> [Gen.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015)<span id="ix.cclxi-p16.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[298:3153](2080333.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p18"></span> [Dan. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)<span id="ix.cclxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[298:3154](2080333.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p20"></span> [Gen.
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024)<span id="ix.cclxi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[298:3155](2080333.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p21"></span> LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p21.1"></span>μώλωψ</span>, *i.e.* weal.

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[298:3156](2080333.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p22"></span> [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="ix.cclxi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[298:3157](2080333.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p24"></span> [Prov. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#009)<span id="ix.cclxi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[298:3158](2080333.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p25"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
20.18](../../../bib/apo/sir020.htm#018)<span
id="ix.cclxi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3158"></span>[298:3159](2080333.htm#fr_3158) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p27"></span> [Luke
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)<span id="ix.cclxi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3159"></span>[299:3160](2080333.htm#fr_3159) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p29.2"></span>πιδάνεια</span>.

<span id="fn_3160"></span>[299:3161](2080333.htm#fr_3160) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p30"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="ix.cclxi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3161"></span>[299:3162](2080333.htm#fr_3161) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p32"></span> [Num. xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008)<span id="ix.cclxi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3162"></span>[299:3163](2080333.htm#fr_3162) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cclxi-p33.1"></span>σήμειον</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3163"></span>[299:3164](2080333.htm#fr_3163) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p35"></span> *cf*. [Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="ix.cclxi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[299:3165](2080333.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p36"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)<span id="ix.cclxi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[299:3166](2080333.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="ix.cclxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cclxi-p37"></span> The Ben. note strongly objects to this
slur upon the constancy of the faith of the Blessed Virgin, and is sure
that St. Basil’s error will not be thus corrected without his own
concurrence.  It supposes this interpretation of the passage in question
to be derived from Origen, *Hom*. xxvii. *In Lucam*, and refers to a
list of commentators who have followed him in Petavius, *De Incar*. xiv.
1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Sozopolitans.](2080334)
