[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080361)  [Next](2080363.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxc"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxc-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxc-p1.1"></span>Letter CCLXXXIX. <span
id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxc-p3"></span>Without address.  Concerning an afflicted
woman.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p4"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxc-p4.1"></span>consider</span> it an equal mistake, to let the
guilty go unpunished, and to exceed the proper limits of punishment.  I
accordingly passed upon this man the sentence I considered it incumbent
on me to pass—excommunication from the Church.  The sufferer I exhorted
not to avenge herself; but to leave to God the redressing of her
wrongs.  Thus if my admonitions had possessed any weight, I should then
have been obeyed, for the language I employed was far more likely to
ensure credit, than any letter to enforce compliance.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p5"></span>So, even after listening to her statements
that contained matter sufficiently grave, I still held my peace; and
even now I am not sure that it becomes me to treat again of this same
question.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p6"></span>For, she says, I have foregone husband,
children, all the enjoyments of life, for the attainment of this single
object, the favour of God, and good repute amongst men.  Yet one day the
offender, an adept from boyhood in corrupting families, with the
impudence habitual to him, forced an entrance into my house; and thus
within the bare limits of an interview an acquaintanceship was formed. 
It was only owing to my ignorance of the man, and to that timidity which
comes from inexperience, that I hesitated openly to turn him out of
doors.  Yet to such a pitch of impiety and insolence did he come, that
he filled the whole city with slanders, and publicly inveighed against
me by affixing to the church doors libellous placards.  For this
conduct, it is true, he incurred the displeasure of the law:  but,
nevertheless, he returned to his slanderous attacks on me.  Once more
the market-place was filled with his abuse, as well as the gymnasia,
theatres, and houses whose congeniality of habits gained him an
admittance.  Nor did his very extravagance lead men to recognise those
virtues wherein I was conspicuous, so universally had I been represented
as being of an incontinent disposition.  In these calumnies, she goes on
to say, some find a delight—such is the pleasure men naturally feel in
the disparagement of others; some profess to be pained, but shew no
sympathy; others believe the truth of these slanders; others again,
having regard to the persistency of his oaths, are undecided.  But
sympathy I have none.  And now indeed I begin to realise my loneliness,
and bewail myself.  I have no brother, friend, relation, no servant,
bond or free, in a word, no one whatever to share my grief.  And yet, I
think, I am more than any one else an object of pity, in a city where
the haters of wickedness are so few.  They bandy violence; but violence,
though they fail to see it, moves in a circle, and in time will overtake
each one of them.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p7"></span>In such and still more appealing terms she
told her tale, with countless tears, and so departed.  Nor did she
altogether acquit me of blame; thinking that, when I ought to sympathise
with her like a father, I am indifferent to her troubles, and regard the
sufferings of others too philosophically.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p8"></span>For it is not, she urged, the loss of money
that you bid me disregard; nor the endurance of bodily sufferings; but a
damaged reputation, an injury involving loss upon the Church at large.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p9"></span>This is her appeal; and now I pray you,
most excellent sir, consider what answer you would have me make her. 
The decision I have come to in my own mind is, not to surrender
offenders to the magistrates; yet not to rescue those already in their
custody, since it has long ago been declared by the Apostle, that the
magistrates should be a terror to them in their evil-doings; for, it is
said, “he beareth not the sword in vain.” <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251.md)   To surrender him, then, is
contrary to my humanity; while to release him would be an encouragement
to his violence.

<span id="ix.ccxc-p11"></span>Perhaps, however, you will defer taking
action until my arrival.  I will then shew you that I can effect nothing
from there being none to obey me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[314:3251](2080362.htm#fr_3250.md) <span
id="ix.ccxc-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxc-p2"></span> Placed in the episcopate.

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[314:3252](2080362.htm#fr_3251.md) <span
id="ix.ccxc-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxc-p10"></span> [Rom. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ccxc-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Nectarius.](2080363.md)
