[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080366)  [Next](2080368.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxcv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p1"></span> <span id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span
id="ix.ccxcv-Page_317"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxcv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXCIV.</span>

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p2"></span>To Festus and Magnus.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxcv-p3.1"></span>It</span> is doubtless a father’s duty to make
provision for his children; a husbandman’s to tend his plants and crops;
a teacher’s to bestow care upon his pupils, especially when, innate
goodness shews signs of promise for them.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p4"></span>The husbandman finds toil a pleasure when
he sees the ears ripen or the plants increase; the teacher is gladdened
at his pupils’ growth in knowledge, the father at his son’s in stature. 
But greater is the care I feel for you; higher the hopes I entertain; in
proportion as piety is more excellent than all the arts, than all the
animals and fruits together.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p5"></span>And piety I planted in your heart while
still pure and tender, and I matured it in the hopes of seeing it reach
maturity and bearing fruits in due season.  My prayers meanwhile were
furthered by your love of learning.  And you know well that you have my
good wishes, and that God’s favour rests upon your endeavours; for when
rightly directed, called or uncalled, God is at hand to further them.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p6"></span>Now every man that loves God is prone to
teaching; nay, where there is the power to teach things profitable,
their eagerness is well nigh uncontrollable; but first their hearers’
minds must be cleared of all resistance.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p7"></span>Not that separation in the body is a
hindrance to instruction.  The Creator, in the fulness of His love and
wisdom, did not confine our minds within our bodies, nor the power of
speaking to our tongues.  Ability to profit derives some advantage even
from lapse of time; thus we are able to transmit instruction, not only
to those who are dwelling far away, but even to those who are hereafter
to be born.  And experience proves my words:  those who lived many years
before teach posterity by instruction preserved in their writings; and
we, though so far separated in the body, are always near in thought, and
converse together with ease.

<span id="ix.ccxcv-p8"></span>Instruction is bounded neither by sea nor
land, if only we have a care for our souls’ profit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To monks.](2080368.md)
