[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080262)  [Next](2080264) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxci"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxci-p1.1"></span>Letter CXC. <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) </span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p3"></span>*To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium*. <span
id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663)

<span id="ix.cxci-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxci-p5.1"></span>The</span> interest which you have shewn in the
affairs of the Isaurian Church is only what might have been expected
from that zeal and propriety of conduct which so continually rouses my
admiration of you.  The most careless observer must at once perceive
that it is in all respects more advantageous for care and anxiety to be
divided among several bishops.  This has not escaped your observation,
and you have done well in noting, and in acquainting me with, the
position of affairs.  But it is not easy to find fit men.  While, then,
we are desirous of having the credit that comes of numbers, and cause
God’s Church to be more effectively administered by more officers, let
us be careful lest we unwittingly bring the word into contempt on
account of the unsatisfactory character of the men who are called to
office, and accustom the laity to indifference.  You yourself know well
that the conduct of the governed is commonly of a piece with that of
those who are set over them.  Perhaps therefore it might be better to
appoint one well approved man, though even this may not be an easy
matter, to the supervision of the whole city, and entrust him with the
management of details on his own responsibility.  Only let him be a
servant of God, “a workman that needeth not to be ashamed,” <span
id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) not “looking on his own
things,” <span id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665) but on the things of
the most, “that they be saved.” <span
id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666)   If he finds himself overweighted
with responsibility, he will associate other labourers for the harvest
with himself.  If only we can find such a man, I own that I think the
one worth many, and the ordering of the cure of souls in this way likely
to be attended at once with more advantage to the Churches and with less
risk to us.  If, however, this course prove difficult, let us first do
our best to appoint superintendents <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667) to the small townships or villages
which have of old been episcopal sees.  Then afterwards we will appoint
once more the \[bishop\] of the city.  Unless we take this course the
man appointed may prove a hindrance to subsequent administration, and
from his wish to rule over a larger diocese, and his refusal to accept
the ordination of the bishops, we may find ourselves suddenly involved
in a domestic quarrel.  If this course is difficult, and time does not
allow, see to it that the Isaurian bishop is strictly kept within his
own bounds by ordaining some of his immediate neighbours.  In the future
it will be reserved for us to give to the rest bishops at the proper
season, after we have carefully examined those whom we ourselves may
judge to be most fit.

<span id="ix.cxci-p10"></span>2.  I have asked George, as you
requested.  He replies as you reported.  In all this we must remain
quiet, casting the care of the house on the Lord.  For I put my trust in
the Holy God that He will by my aid <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668) grant to him deliverance from his
difficulties in some other way, and to me to live my life without
trouble.  If this cannot be, be so good as to send me word yourself as
to what part I must look after, that I may begin to ask this favour of
each of my friends in power, either for nothing, or for some moderate
price, as the Lord may prosper me. <span
id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669)

<span id="ix.cxci-p13"></span>I have, in accordance with your request,
written to brother Valerius.  Matters at Nyssa are going on as they were
left by your reverence, and, by the aid of your holiness, are
improving.  Of those who were then separated from me some have gone off
to the court, and some remain waiting for tidings from it.  The Lord is
able as well to frustrate the expectations of these latter as to make
the return of the former useless.

<span id="ix.cxci-p14"></span>3.  Philo, on the authority of some Jewish
tradition, explains the manna to have been of such a nature that it
changed with the taste of the eater:  that of itself it was like millet
seed boiled in honey; it served sometimes for bread, sometimes for meat,
either of birds or beasts; at other times for vegetables, ac<span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span id="ix.cxci-Page_233"></span>cording
to each man’s liking; even for fish so that the flavour of each separate
kind was exactly reproduced in the eater’s mouth.

<span id="ix.cxci-p15"></span>Scripture recognises chariots containing
three riders, because while other chariots contained two, the driver and
the man-at-arms, Pharaoh’s held three, two men-at-arms, and one to hold
the reins.

<span id="ix.cxci-p16"></span>Sympius has written me a letter expressive
of respect and communion.  The letter which I have written in reply I am
sending to your holiness, that you may send it on to him if you quite
approve of it, with the addition of some communication from yourself. 
May you, by the loving kindness of the Holy One, be preserved for me and
for the Church of God, in good health, happy in the Lord, and ever
praying for me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[232:2663](2080263.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="ix.cxci-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p2"></span> Placed by Maran in 374.  After Easter 375
by Tillemont.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[232:2664](2080263.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="ix.cxci-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p4"></span> Isauria, the district of Pisidia, forming
the S. W. corner of the modern Karamania, was under the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of Iconium.  “In the heart of the Roman monarchy, the
Isaurians long continued a nation of wild barbarians.  Succeeding
powers, unable to reduce them to obedience either by arms or policy,
were compelled to acknowledge their weakness by surrounding the hostile
and independent spot with a strong chain of fortifications (*Hist. Aug*.
197) which often proved insufficient to restrain the invasions of these
domestic foes.”  Gibbon. chap. X.  Raids and Arian persecution had
disorganised the Isaurian Episcopate.  (Maran, *Vit. Bas*.)

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[232:2665](2080263.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="ix.cxci-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p6"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015)<span id="ix.cxci-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[232:2666](2080263.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="ix.cxci-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p7"></span> [Phil. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004)<span id="ix.cxci-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[232:2667](2080263.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="ix.cxci-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p8"></span> [1 Thess. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016)<span id="ix.cxci-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[232:2668](2080263.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="ix.cxci-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxci-p9.1"></span>προϊσταμένους</span>.

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[232:2669](2080263.htm#fr_2668) <span
id="ix.cxci-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p11"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxci-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> vary, and the sense is obscure. 
Ben. Ed. <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cxci-p11.2"></span>σὺν
ἡμῖν</span>. al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxci-p11.3"></span>συνέσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[232:2670](2080263.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="ix.cxci-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ix.cxci-p12"></span> “*Videtur illa dignitas, quam se amici
causa alicujus petiturum promittit Basilius, non administratio aliqua
fuisse, sed tantum codicillaria dignitas.  Hoc enim consilio hanc
dignitatem petere statuerat, ut amici domus magnum aliquod incommodum
effugeret.  Porro in hunc usum impetrari solebant codicilli, ut curia,
vel saltem duumviratus et civitatis cura vitarentur.  Pretio autem
impetratos non modo nulla immunitas, sed etiam multa sequebatur ut
perspictur ex Cod. Theod. vi. 22.  Sic enim habet lex secunda
imperatoris Constantii:  ‘Ab honoribus mercandis per suffragia, vel
qualibet ambitione quærendis, certa multa prohibuit:  cui addimus et
quicunque, fugientes obsequia curiarum, umbras et nomina affectaverint
dignitatem, tricenas libras argenti inferre cogantur, manente illa
præterita inlatione auri qua perpetua lege constructi sunt.’  Unde miror
Basilium ab hac via tentanda non omnino alienum fuisse.  Sed forte hæ
leges non admodum accurate servabuntur sub Valente*.”  Ben. note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.](2080264)
