[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080066)  [Next](2080068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>The Germination of the Earth.

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span>1.  “*And God said Let the earth bring
forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit
after his kind, whose seed is in itself*.” <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534)   It was deep wisdom that commanded
the earth, when it rested after discharging the weight of the waters,
first to bring forth grass, then wood as we see it doing still at this
time.  For the voice that was then heard and this command were as a
natural and permanent law for it; it gave fertility and the power to
produce fruit for all ages to come; “Let the earth bring forth.”  The
production of vegetables shows first germination.  When the germs begin
to sprout they form grass; this develops and becomes a plant, which
insensibly receives its different articulations, and reaches its
maturity in the seed.  Thus all things which sprout and are green are
developed.  “Let the earth bring forth green grass.”  Let the earth
bring forth by itself without having any need of help from without. 
Some consider the sun as the source of all productiveness on the earth.
 It is, they say, the action of the sun’s heat which attracts the vital
force from the centre of the earth to the surface.  The reason why the
adornment of the earth was before the sun is the following; that those
who worship the sun, as the source of life, may renounce their error. 
If they be well persuaded that the earth was adorned before the genesis
of the sun, they will retract their unbounded admiration for it, because
they see grass and plants vegetate before it rose. <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535)   If then the food for the flocks
was prepared, did our race appear less worthy of a like solicitude?  He,
who provided pasture for horses and cattle, thought before all of your
riches and pleasures.  If he fed your cattle, it was to provide for all
the needs of your life.  And what object was there in the bringing forth
of grain, if not for your subsistence?  Moreover, many grasses and
vegetables serve for the food of man.

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span>2.  “*Let the earth bring forth grass
yielding seed after his kind*.”  So that although some kind of grass is
of service to animals, even their gain is our gain too, and seeds are
especially designed for our use.  Such is the true meaning of the words
that I have quoted.  “Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed after his kind.”  In this manner we can re-establish the order of
the words, of which the construction seems faulty in the actual version,
and the economy of nature will be rigorously observed.  In fact, first
comes germination, then verdure, then the growth of the plant, which
after having attained its full growth arrives at perfection in seed.

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span>How then, they say, can Scripture describe
all the plants of the earth as seed-bearing, when the reed,
couch-grass, <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) mint, crocus,
garlic, and the flowering rush and countless other species, produce no
seed?  To this we reply that many vegetables have their seminal virtue
in the lower part and in the roots.  The need, for example, after its
annual growth sends forth a protuberance from its roots, which takes the
place of seed for future trees.  Numbers of other vegetables are the
same and all over the earth reproduce by the roots.  Nothing then is
truer than that each plant produces its seed or contains some seminal
virtue; this is what is meant by “after its kind.”  So that the shoot of
a reed does not produce an olive tree, but from a reed grows another
reed, and from one sort of seed a plant of the same sort always
germinates.  Thus, all which sprang from the earth, in its first
bringing forth, is kept the same to our time, thanks to the constant
reproduction of kind. <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537)

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span>“Let the earth bring forth.”  See how, at
this short word, at this brief command, the cold and sterile earth
travailed and hastened to bring forth its fruit, as it cast away its sad
and dismal covering to clothe itself in a more brilliant robe, proud of
its proper adornment and displaying the infinite variety of plants.

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span>I want creation to penetrate you with so
much admiration that everywhere, wherever you may be, the least plant
may bring to you the clear remembrance of the Creator.  If you see the
grass of the fields, think of human nature, and remember the comparison
of the wise Isaiah.  “All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof
is as the flower of the field.”  Truly the rapid flow of life, the short
gratification and pleasure that an instant of happiness gives a man, all
wonderfully suit the comparison of the prophet.  To-day he is vigorous
in body, fattened by luxury, and in the prime of life, with complexion
fair like the flowers, strong and pow<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>
<span id="viii.vi-Page_77"></span>erful and of irresistible energy;
tomorrow and he will be an object of pity, withered by age or exhausted
by sickness.  Another shines in all the splendour of a brilliant
fortune, and around him are a multitude of flatterers, an escort of
false friends on the track of his good graces; a crowd of kinsfolk, but
of no true kin; a swarm of servants who crowd after him to provide for
his food and for all his needs; and in his comings and goings this
innumerable suite, which he drags after him, excites the envy of all
whom he meets.  To fortune may be added power in the State, honours
bestowed by the imperial throne, the government of a province, or the
command of armies; a herald who precedes him is crying in a loud voice;
lictors right and left also fill his subjects with awe, blows,
confiscations, banishments, imprisonments, and all the means by which he
strikes intolerable terror into all whom he has to rule.  And what
then?  One night, a fever, a pleurisy, or an inflammation of the lungs,
snatches away this man from the midst of men, stripped in a moment of
all his stage accessories, and all this, his glory, is proved a mere
dream.  Therefore the Prophet has compared human glory to the weakest
flower.

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span>3.  Up to this point, the order in which
plants shoot bears witness to their first arrangement.  Every herb,
every plant proceeds from a germ.  If, like the couch-grass and the
crocus, it throws out a shoot from its root and from this lower
protuberance, it must always germinate and start outwards.  If it
proceeds from a seed, there is still, by necessity, first a germ, then
the sprout, then green foliage, and finally the fruit which ripens upon
a stalk hitherto dry and thick.  “Let the earth bring forth grass.” 
When the seed falls into the earth, which contains the right combination
of heat and moisture, it swells and becomes porous, and, grasping the
surrounding earth, attracts to itself all that is suitable for it and
that has affinity to it.  These particles of earth, however small they
may be, as they fall and insinuate themselves into all the pores of the
seed, broaden its bulk and make it send forth roots below, and shoot
upwards, sending forth stalks no less numerous than the roots.  As the
germ is always growing warm, the moisture, pumped up through the roots,
and helped by the attraction of heat, draws a proper amount of
nourishment from the soil, and distributes it to the stem, to the bark,
to the husk, to the seed itself and to the beards with which it is
armed.  It is owing to these successive accretions that each plant
attains its natural development, as well corn as vegetables, herbs or
brushwood.  A single plant, a blade of grass is sufficient to occupy all
your intelligence in the contemplation of the skill which produced
it. <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538)   Why is the wheat stalk
better with joints? <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539)   Are
they not like fastenings, which help it to bear easily the weight of the
ear, when it is swollen with fruit and bends towards the earth?  Thus,
whilst oats, which have no weight to bear at the top, are without these
supports, nature has provided them for wheat.  It has hidden the grain
in a case, so that it may not be exposed to birds’ pillage, and has
furnished it with a rampart of barbs, which, like darts, protect it
against the attacks of tiny creatures.

<span id="viii.vi-p17"></span>4.  What shall I say?  What shall I leave
unsaid?  In the rich treasures of creation it is difficult to select
what is most precious; the loss of what is omitted is too severe.  “Let
the earth bring forth grass;” and instantly, with useful plants, appear
noxious plants; with corn, hemlock; with the other nutritious plants,
hellebore, monkshood, mandrake and the juice of the poppy.  What then? 
Shall we show no gratitude for so many beneficial gifts, and reproach
the Creator for those which may be harmful to our life?  And shall we
not reflect that all has not been created in view of the wants of our
bellies?  The nourishing plants, which are destined for our use, are
close at hand, and known by all the world.  But in creation nothing
exists without a reason.  The blood of the bull is a poison: <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540)   ought this animal then, whose
strength is so serviceable to man, not to have been created, or, if
created, to have been bloodless?  But you have sense enough in yourself
to keep you free from deadly things.  What!  Sheep and goats know how to
turn away from what threatens their life, discerning danger by instinct
alone:  and you, who have reason and the art of medicine to supply what
you need, and the experience of your forebears to tell you to avoid all
that is dangerous, you tell me that you find it difficult to keep
yourself from poisons!  But not a single thing has been created without
reason, not a single thing is useless.  One serves as food to some
animal; medicine has found in another a relief for one of our maladies. 
Thus the starling eats hemlock, its constitution rendering it
insusceptible to the action of the poison.  <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> <span id="viii.vi-Page_78"></span>Thanks to the tenuity of the
pores of its heart, the malignant juice is no sooner swallowed than it
is digested, before its chill can attack the vital parts. <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)   The quail, thanks to its peculiar
temperament, whereby it escapes the dangerous effects, feeds on
hellebore.  There are even circumstances where poisons are useful to
men; with mandrake <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) doctors
give us sleep; with opium they lull violent pain.  Hemlock has ere now
been used to appease the rage of unruly diseases; <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) and many times hellebore has taken
away long standing disease. <span id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544)  
These plants, then, instead of making you accuse the Creator, give you a
new subject for gratitude.

<span id="viii.vi-p23"></span>5.  “*Let the earth bring forth grass*.” 
What spontaneous provision is included in these words,—that which is
present in the root, in the plant itself, and in the fruit, as well as
that which our labour and husbandry add!  God did not command the earth
immediately to give forth seed and fruit, but to produce germs, to grow
green, and to arrive at maturity in the seed; so that this first command
teaches nature what she has to do in the course of ages.  But, they ask,
is it true that the earth produces seed after his kind, when often,
after having sown wheat, we gather black grain?  This is not a change of
kind, but an alteration, a disease of the grain.  It has not ceased to
be wheat; it is on account of having been burnt that it is black, as one
can learn from its name. <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545)   If
a severe frost had burnt it, <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546)
it would have had another colour and a different flavour.  They even
pretend that, if it could find suitable earth and moderate temperature,
it might return to its first form.  Thus, you find nothing in nature
contrary to the divine command.  As to the darnel and all those bastard
grains which mix themselves with the harvest, the tares of Scripture,
far from being a variety of corn, have their own origin and their own
kind; image of those who alter the doctrine of the Lord and, not being
rightly instructed in the word, but, corrupted by the teaching of the
evil one, mix themselves with the sound body of the Church to spread
their pernicious errors secretly among purer souls.  The Lord thus
compares the perfection of those who believe in Him to the growth of
seed, “as if a man should cast seed into the ground; and should sleep
and rise, night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he
knoweth not how.  For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first
the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.” <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547)   “Let the earth bring forth
grass.”  In a moment earth began by germination to obey the laws of the
Creator, completed every stage of growth, and brought germs to
perfection.  The meadows were covered with deep grass, the fertile
plains quivered <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) with
harvests, and the movement of the corn was like the waving of the sea. 
Every plant, every herb, the smallest shrub, the least vegetable, arose
from the earth in all its luxuriance.  There was no failure in this
first vegetation:  no husbandman’s inexperience, no inclemency of the
weather, nothing could injure it; then the sentence of condemnation was
not fettering the earth’s fertility.  All this was before the sin which
condemned us to eat our bread by the sweat of our brow.

<span id="viii.vi-p28"></span>6.  “*Let the earth*,” the Creator adds,
“*bring forth the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed
is in itself*.” <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549)

<span id="viii.vi-p30"></span>At this command every copse was thickly
planted; all the trees, fir, cedar, cypress, pine, rose to their
greatest height, the shrubs were straightway clothed with thick
foliage. <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550)   The plants called
crown-plants, roses, myrtles, laurels, did not exist; in one moment they
came into being, each one with its distinctive peculiarities.  Most
marked differences separated them from other plants, and each one was
distinguished by a character of its own.  But then the rose was without
thorns; since then the thorn has been added to its beauty, to make us
feel that sorrow is very near to pleasure, and to remind us of our sin,
which condemned the earth to produce thorns <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) and caltrops.  But, they say, the
earth has received the command to produce trees “yielding fruit whose
seed was in itself,” and we see many trees which have neither fruit, nor
seed.  What shall we reply?  First, that only the more important trees
are mentioned; and then, that a careful examination will show us that
every tree has seed, or some property which takes the place of it.  The
black poplar, the willow, the elm, the white poplar, all the trees of
this family, do not produce any apparent fruit; however, an attentive
observer finds <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="viii.vi-Page_79"></span>seed in each of them.  This grain which is
at the base of the leaf, and which those who busy themselves with
inventing words call mischos, has the property of seed.  And there are
trees which reproduce by their branches, throwing out roots from them. 
Perhaps we ought even to consider as seeds the saplings which spring
from the roots of a tree:  for cultivators tear them out to multiply the
species.  But, we have already said, it is chiefly a question of the
trees which contribute most to our life; which offer their various
fruits to man and provide him with plentiful nourishment.  Such is the
vine, which produces wine to make glad the heart of man; such is the
olive tree, whose fruit brightens his face with oil.  How many things in
nature are combined in the same plant!  In a vine, roots, green and
flexible branches, which spread themselves far over the earth, buds,
tendrils, bunches of sour grapes and ripe grapes.  The sight of a vine,
when observed by an intelligent eye, serves to remind you of your
nature.  Without doubt you remember the parable where the Lord calls
Himself a vine and His Father the husbandman, and every one of us who
are grafted by faith into the Church the branches.  He invites us to
produce fruits in abundance, for fear lest our sterility should condemn
us to the fire. <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552)   He
constantly compares our souls to vines.  “My well beloved,” says He,
“hath a vineyard in a very fruitfull hill,” <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) and elsewhere, I have “planted a
vineyard and hedged it round about.” <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554)   Evidently He calls human souls
His vine, those souls whom He has surrounded with the authority of His
precepts and a guard of angels.  “The angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear him.” <span id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555)  
And further:  He has planted for us, so to say, props, in establishing
in His Church apostles, prophets, teachers; <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) and raising our thoughts by the
example of the blessed in olden times, He has not allowed them to drag
on the earth and be crushed under foot.  He wishes that the claspings of
love, like the tendrils of the vine, should attach us to our neighbours
and make us rest on them, so that, in our continual aspirations towards
heaven, we may imitate these vines, which raise themselves to the tops
of the tallest trees.  He also asks us to allow ourselves to be dug
about; and that is what the soul does when it disembarrasses itself from
the cares of the world, which are a weight on our hearts.  He, then, who
is freed from carnal affections and from the love of riches, and, far
from being dazzled by them, disdains and despises this miserable vain
glory, is, so to say, dug about and at length breathes, free from the
useless weight of earthly thoughts.  Nor must we, in the spirit of the
parable, put forth too much wood, that is to say, live with ostentation,
and gain the applause of the world; we must bring forth fruits, keeping
the proof of our works for the husbandman.  Be “like a green olive tree
in the house of God,” <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) never
destitute of hope, but decked through faith with the bloom of
salvation.  Thus you will resemble the eternal verdure of this plant and
will rival it in fruitfulness, if each day sees you giving abundantly in
alms.

<span id="viii.vi-p39"></span>7.  But let us return to the examination
of the ingenious contrivances of creation.  How many trees then arose,
some to give us their fruits, others to roof our houses, others to build
our ships, others to feed our fires!  What a variety in the disposition
of their several parts!  And yet, how difficult is it to find the
distinctive property of each of them, and to grasp the difference which
separates them from other species.  Some strike deep roots, others do
not; some shoot straight up and have only one stem, others appear to
love the earth and, from their root upwards, divide into several
shoots.  Those whose long branches stretch up afar into the air, have
also deep roots which spread within a large circumference, a true
foundation placed by nature to support the weight of the tree.  What
variety there is in bark!  Some plants have smooth bark, others rough,
some have only one layer, others several.  What a marvellous thing!  You
may find in the youth and age of plants resemblances to those of man. 
Young and vigorous, their bark is distended; when they grow old, it is
rough and wrinkled.  Cut one, it sends forth new buds; the other remains
henceforward sterile and as if struck with a mortal wound.  But further,
it has been observed that pines, cut down, or even submitted to the
action of fire, are changed into a forest of oaks. <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558)   We know besides that the industry
of agriculturists remedies the natural defects <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> <span id="viii.vi-Page_80"></span>of certain trees.  Thus the
sharp pomegranate and bitter almonds, if the trunk of the tree is
pierced near the root to introduce into the middle of the pith a fat
plug of pine, lose the acidity of their juice, and become delicious
fruits. <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559)   Let not the sinner
then despair of himself, when he thinks, if agriculture can change the
juices of plants, the efforts of the soul to arrive at virtue, can
certainly triumph over all infirmities.

<span id="viii.vi-p42"></span>Now there is such a variety of fruits in
fruit trees that it is beyond all expression; a variety not only in the
fruits of trees of different families, but even in those of the same
species, if it be true, as gardeners say, that the sex of a tree
influences the character of its fruits.  They distinguish male from
female in palms; sometimes we see those which they call female lower
their branches, as though with passionate desire, and invite the
embraces of the male.  Then, those who take care of these plants shake
over these palms the fertilizing dust from the male palm-tree, the
*psen* as they call it:  the tree appears to share the pleasures of
enjoyment; then it raises its branches, and its foliage resumes its
usual form.  The same is said of the fig tree.  Some plant wild fig
trees near cultivated fig trees, and there are others who, to remedy the
weakness of the productive fig tree of our gardens, attach to the
branches unripe figs and so retain the fruit which had already begun to
drop and to be lost.  What lesson does nature here give us?  That we
must often borrow, even from those who are strangers to the faith, a
certain vigour to show forth good works.  If you see outside the Church,
in pagan life, or in the midst of a pernicious heresy, the example of
virtue and fidelity to moral laws, redouble your efforts to resemble the
productive fig tree, who by the side of the wild fig tree, gains
strength, prevents the fruit from being shed, and nourishes it with more
care.

<span id="viii.vi-p43"></span>8.  Plants reproduce themselves in so many
different ways, that we can only touch upon the chief among them.  As to
fruits themselves, who could review their varieties, their forms, their
colours, the peculiar flavour, and the use of each of them?  Why do some
fruits ripen when exposed bare to the rays of the sun, while others fill
out while encased in shells?  Trees of which the fruit is tender have,
like the fig tree, a thick shade of leaves; those, on the contrary, of
which the fruits are stouter, like the nut, are only covered by a light
shade.  The delicacy of the first requires more care; if the latter had
a thicker case, the shade of the leaves would be harmful.  Why is the
vine leaf serrated, if not that the bunches of grapes may at the same
time resist the injuries of the air and receive through the openings all
the rays of the sun?  Nothing has been done without motive, nothing by
chance.  All shows ineffable wisdom. <span
id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560)

<span id="viii.vi-p45"></span>What discourse can touch all?  Can the
human mind make an exact review, remark every distinctive property,
exhibit all the differences, unveil with certainty so many mysterious
causes?  The same water, pumped up through the root, nourishes in a
different way the root itself, the bark of the trunk, the wood and the
pith.  It becomes leaf, it distributes itself among the branches and
twigs and makes the fruits swell—it gives to the plant its gum and its
sap.  Who will explain to us the difference between all these?  There is
a difference between the gum of the mastich and the juice of the balsam,
a difference between that which distils in Egypt and Libya from the
fennel.  Amber is, they say, the crystallized sap of plants.  And for a
proof, see the bits of straws and little insects which have been caught
in the sap while still liquid and imprisoned there.  In one word, no one
without long experience could find terms to express the virtue of it. 
How, again, does this water become wine in the vine, and oil in the
olive tree?  Yet what is marvellous is, not to see it become sweet in
one fruit, fat and unctuous in another, but to see in sweet fruits an
inexpressible variety of flavour.  There is one sweetness of the grape,
another of the apple, another of the fig, another of the date.  I shall
willingly give you the gratification of continuing this research.  How
is it that this same water has sometimes a sweet taste, softened by its
remaining in certain plants, and at other times stings the palate
because it has become acid by passing through others?  How is it, again,
that it attains extreme bitterness, and makes the mouth rough when it is
found in wormwood and in scammony?  That it has in acorns <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span id="viii.vi-Page_81"></span>and dogwood
a sharp and rough flavour?  That in the turpentine tree and the walnut
tree it is changed into a soft and oily matter?

<span id="viii.vi-p46"></span>9.  But what need is there to continue,
when in the same fig tree we have the most opposite flavours, as bitter
in the sap as it is sweet in the fruit?  And in the vine, is it not as
sweet in the grapes as it is astringent in the branches?  And what a
variety of colour!  Look how in a meadow this same water becomes red in
one flower, purple in another, blue in this one, white in that.  And
this diversity of colours, is it to be compared to that of scents?  But
I perceive that an insatiable curiosity is drawing out my discourse
beyond its limits.  If I do not stop and recall it to the law of
creation, day will fail me whilst making you see great wisdom in small
things.

<span id="viii.vi-p47"></span>“*Let the earth bring forth the fruit tree
yielding fruit*.”  Immediately the tops of the mountains were covered
with foliage:  paradises were artfully laid out, and an infinitude of
plants embellished the banks of the rivers.  Some were for the adornment
of man’s table; some to nourish animals with their fruits and their
leaves; some to provide medicinal help by giving us their sap, their
juice, their chips, their bark or their fruit.  In a word, the
experience of ages, profiting from every chance, has not been able to
discover anything useful, which the penetrating foresight of the Creator
did not first perceive and call into existence.  Therefore, when you see
the trees in our gardens, or those of the forest, those which love the
water or the land, those which bear flowers, or those which do not
flower, I should like to see you recognising grandeur even in small
objects, adding incessantly to your admiration of, and redoubling your
love for the Creator.  Ask yourself why He has made some trees evergreen
and others deciduous; why, among the first, some lose their leaves, and
others always keep them.  Thus the olive and the pine shed their leaves,
although they renew them insensibly and never appear to be despoiled of
their verdure.  The palm tree, on the contrary, from its birth to its
death, is always adorned with the same foliage.  Think again of the
double life of the tamarisk; it is an aquatic plant, and yet it covers
the desert.  Thus, Jeremiah compares it to the worst of characters—the
double character. <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561)

<span id="viii.vi-p49"></span>10.  “*Let the earth bring forth*.”  This
short command was in a moment a vast nature, an elaborate system. 
Swifter than thought it produced the countless qualities of plants.  It
is this command which, still at this day, is imposed on the earth, and
in the course of each year displays all the strength of its power to
produce herbs, seeds and trees.  Like tops, which after the first
impulse, continue their evolutions, turning upon themselves when once
fixed in their centre; thus nature, receiving the impulse of this first
command, follows without interruption the course of ages, until the
consummation of all things. <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562)  
Let us all hasten to attain to it, full of fruit and of good works; and
thus, planted in the house of the Lord we shall flourish in the court of
our God, <span id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) in our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and power for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[76:1535](2080067.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="viii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[76:1536](2080067.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="viii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span> Empedocles, according to Plutarch (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p5.1"></span>περὶ τῶν ἀρέσκ</span>, etc.
v. 342) <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi-p5.2"></span>πρῶτα τῶν
ζώων τὰ δένδρα ἐκ γῆς ἀναδῦναί φησι, πρὶν τὸν ἥλιον περιαπλωθῆναι καὶ
πρὶν ἡμέραν καὶ νύκτα διακριθῆναι</span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[76:1537](2080067.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span> *Triticum repens*.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[76:1538](2080067.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="viii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span> On the history of this doctrine, of which
Linnæus was the latest great exponent, and its contradiction in Darwin,
see Haeckel’s *<span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>Schöpfungsgeschichte*,
vol. i. ch. 2.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[77:1539](2080067.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span> “To me the meanest flower that blows can
give

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span>Thoughts that do often lie too deep for
tears.”

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span>Wordsworth, *Ode on Immortality.*

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[77:1540](2080067.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="viii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p16"></span> Literally, knee—Latin *geniculum*.  *cf*.
Xen., *Anab*. iv. 5, 26, and Theoph. viii. 2, 4.  “Knee-jointed” is a
recognised English term for certain grasses.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[77:1541](2080067.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="viii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p18"></span> “*Taurorum (sanguis) pestifer potu
maxime.” * Plin. xi. 90.  *Taurinus recens inter venena est.*  2d.
xxviii. 41.  *cf*. Dioscorid. in *Alexiph*. 25.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[78:1542](2080067.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="viii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p19"></span> *cf*. Galen. *De Simp. Pac.* iii.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[78:1543](2080067.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="viii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p20.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p20.2"></span>μανδραγόρας τους ἀνθρώπους κοιμίζει</span>. 
Xen., *Symp.* ii. 24.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[78:1544](2080067.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="viii.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p21"></span> *cf*. Aratæus, *De Morb. Aent*. ii. 11.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[78:1545](2080067.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="viii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p22"></span> The Black Hellebore, or Christmas Rose,
is a recognised alternative.  Whether this is the plant of Anticyra is
doubtful.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[78:1546](2080067.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="viii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p24.1"></span>πυρός</span>=wheat.  The root, which has
nothing to do with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p24.2"></span>πῦρ</span>, is found by Curtius in the
Slavonic *pyro*=rye, the Bohemian *pyr*=quitch grass, the Lettish
*purji*=wheat, and the Lithuanian *pyragas*=wheaten bread.  (L. & S. *in
loc.*)

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[78:1547](2080067.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="viii.vi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p25"></span> *cf*. Virg., *Georg*. i. 93:  “*Aut Boreæ
penetrabile frigus adurat*.”  Ov. *M*. xiv. 763, *Frigus adurat poma*,
and in Greek Arist., *Meteor*. iv. 5.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[78:1548](2080067.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="viii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p26"></span> [Matt. iv.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#026)<span id="viii.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[78:1549](2080067.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="viii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p27"></span> *cf.* *Horrescunt segetes. *
Virg.,*Georg*. iii. 39.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[78:1550](2080067.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p29"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="viii.vi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[78:1551](2080067.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="viii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p31.2"></span>μφίκομοι καὶ δασεῖς</span>.  *cf*. Milton,
“With frizzled hair implicit.”  *P.L.* vii.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[78:1552](2080067.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="viii.vi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p32"></span> *cf*. Milton, *P.L.*, B. iv., “Flowers of
all hue and without thorn the rose,” and August. *De Genesi contra
Manichæos*. i. 13.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[79:1553](2080067.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="viii.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p33"></span> *cf*. S. [John xv.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[79:1554](2080067.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="viii.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p34"></span> [Isa. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[79:1555](2080067.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="viii.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p35"></span> [Matt. xxi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033)<span id="viii.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[79:1556](2080067.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="viii.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p36"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)<span id="viii.vi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[79:1557](2080067.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="viii.vi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p37"></span> *cf*. [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="viii.vi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[79:1558](2080067.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="viii.vi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p38"></span> [Ps. lii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)<span id="viii.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[79:1559](2080067.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="viii.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p40"></span> The phenomenon has been observed in later
days, though Basil may be at fault in his account of the cause.  When
pines have been cleared away in North American forests young oaklings
have sprung up.  The acorn lay long hid, unable to contend against the
pine, but, when once the ground was clear, it sprouted.  This upgrowth
of a new kind of tree had been accounted for partly by the burial of
germs by jays, rooks, and some quadrupeds; partly by the theory of De
Candolle and Liebig that roots expel certain substances which, though
unfavourable to the vitality of the plant excreting them, are capable of
supporting others.  So, on the pine pressure being removed, the hidden
seeds sprout in a kind of vegetable manure.  *cf*. Sir Charles Lvell’s
*Travels in the United States* and Rough’s *Elements of Forestry*, p.
19.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[80:1560](2080067.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="viii.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p41"></span> Ambrose, *Hexæm*. iii. 13, writes: 
*Amygdalis quoque hoc genere medicari feruntur agricolæ, ut ex amaris
dulces fiant fructus, ut et terebrent ejus radicem arboris, et in medium
inserant surculum ejus arboris quam Græci* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi-p41.1"></span>πεύχην</span>*, nos piceam dicimus:  quo facto
succi amaritudo deponitur.*

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[80:1561](2080067.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="viii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p44"></span> On the argument from design, *cf*.
Aristotle, *De Part. Anim*. iii. 1, as quoted and translated by
Cudworth, III. xxxvii. 3:  “A carpenter would give a better account than
so, for he would not think it sufficient to say that the fabric came to
be of such a form because the instruments happened to fall so and so,
but he will tell you that it is because himself made such strokes, and
that he directed the instruments and determined their motion after such
a manner, to this end that he might make the whole a fabric fit and
useful for such purposes.”  On the strength and weakness of the argument
from design, in view of modern speculation, suggestive matter is
contained in Dr. Eagar’s *Buther’s Analogy and Modern Thought*, p. 49
*et sq.*

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[81:1562](2080067.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="viii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p48"></span> *cf*. [Jer. xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)<span id="viii.vi-p48.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[81:1563](2080067.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="viii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p50"></span> “*Ac mihi quidem videtur, cum duæ
sententiæ fuissent veterum philosophorum, una eorum qui censerent omnia
ita fato fieri, ut id fatum vim necessitatis afferret, in qua sententia
Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Aristoteles fuit; altera eorum,
quibus viderentur sine ullo fato esse animorum motus voluntarii: 
Chrysippus tanquam arbiter honorarius, medium ferire voluisse…quanquam
assensio non possit fieri nisi commota visa, tamen cum id visum proximam
causam habeat, non principalem hanc habet rationem, ut Chrysippus vult,
quam dudum diximus, non, ut illa quidem fieri possit, nulla vi
extrinsecus excitata, necesse est enim assensionem viso commoveri, sed
revertitur ad cylindrum, et ad turbinem suum, quæ moveri incipere, nisi
pulsa non possunt:  id autem cum accidit suapte natura, quod superest et
cylindrum volvi, et versari turbinem putat*.”  (Cic., *De fato*. xviii.)

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[81:1564](2080067.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="viii.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p51"></span> *cf*. [Ps. xcii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)<span id="viii.vi-p51.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The creation of luminous bodies.](2080068)
