[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080296)  [Next](2080298.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXIV. <span
id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p3"></span>To the presbyter Genethlius.

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p4"></span>1.<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxv-p4.1"></span>  I have</span> received your reverence’s
letter and I am delighted at the title which you have felicitously
applied to the writing which they have composed in calling it “a writing
of divorcement.” <span id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903.md)   What
defence the writers will be able to make before the <span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="ix.ccxxv-Page_266"></span>tribunal
of Christ, where no excuse will avail, I am quite unable to conceive. 
After accusing me, violently running me down, and telling tales in
accordance not with the truth but with what they wished to be true, they
have assumed a great show of humility, and have accused me of
haughtiness for refusing to receive their envoys.  They have written, as
they have, what is all—or nearly all—for I do not wish to
exaggerate,—lies, in the endeavour to persuade men rather than God, and
to please men rather than God, with Whom nothing is more precious than
truth.  Moreover into the letter written against me they have introduced
heretical expressions, and have concealed the author of the impiety, in
order that most of the more unsophisticated might be deceived by the
calumny got up against me, and suppose the portion introduced to be
mine.  For nothing is said by my ingenious slanderers as to the name of
the author of these vile doctrines, and it is left for the simple to
suspect that these inventions, if not their expression in writing, is
due to me.  Now that you know all this, I exhort you not to be perturbed
yourselves, and to calm the excitement of those who are agitated.  I say
this although I know that it will not be easy for my defence to be
received, because I have been anticipated by the vile calumnies uttered
against me by persons of influence.

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p6"></span>2.  Now as to the point that the writings
going the round as mine are not mine at all, the angry feeling felt
against me so confuses their reason that they cannot see what is
profitable.  Nevertheless, if the question were put to them by
yourselves, I do think that they would not reach such a pitch of
obstinate perversity as to dare to utter the lie with their own lips,
and allege the document in question to be mine.  And if it is not mine,
why am I being judged for other men’s writings?  But they will urge that
I am in communion with Apollinarius, and cherish in my heart perverse
doctrines of this kind.  Let them be asked for proof.  If they are able
to search into a man’s heart, let them say so; and do you admit the
truth of all that they say about everything.  If on the other hand, they
are trying to prove my being in communion on plain and open grounds, let
them produce either a canonical letter written by me to him, or by him
to me.  Let them shew that I have held intercourse with his clergy, or
have ever received any one of them into the communion of prayer.  If
they adduce the letter written now five and twenty years ago, written by
layman to layman, and not even this as I wrote it, but altered (God
knows by whom), then recognise their unfairness.  No bishop is accused
if, while he was a layman, he wrote something somewhat incautiously on
an indifferent matter; not anything concerning the Faith, but a mere
word of friendly greeting.  Possibly even my opponents are known to have
written to Jews and to Pagans, without incurring any blame.  Hitherto no
one has ever been judged for any such conduct as that on which I am
being condemned by these strainers-out of gnats. <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904.md)   God, who knows men’s hearts,
knows that I never wrote these things, nor sanctioned them, but that I
anathematize all who hold the vile opinion of the confusion of the
hypostases, on which point the most impious heresy of Sabellius has been
revived.  And all the brethren who have been personally acquainted with
my insignificant self know it equally well.  Let those very men who now
vehemently accuse me, search their own consciences, and they will own
that from my boyhood I have been far removed from any doctrine of the
kind.

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p8"></span>3.  If any one enquires what my opinion
is, he will learn it from the actual little document, to which is
appended their own autograph signature.  This they wish to destroy, and
they are anxious to conceal their own change of position in slandering
me.  For they do not like to own that they have repented of their
subscription to the tract I gave them; while they charge me with impiety
from the idea that no one perceives that their disruption from me is
only a pretext, while in reality they have departed from that faith
which they have over and over again owned in writing, before many
witnesses, and have lastly received and subscribed when delivered to
them by me.  It is open to any one to read the signatures and to learn
the truth from the document itself.  Their intention will be obvious,
if, after reading the subscription which they gave me, any one reads the
creed which they gave Gelasius, <span
id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905.md) and observes what a vast difference
there is between the two confessions.  It would be better for men who so
easily shift their own position, not to examine other men’s motes but to
cast out the beam in their own eye. <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906.md)   I am making a more complete
defence on every point in another letter; <span
id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907.md) this will satisfy readers who want
fuller assurance.  Do you, now that you have received this letter, put
away all despondency, and confirm the love to me, <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908.md) <span id="page_267">p. 267</span>
<span id="ix.ccxxv-Page_267"></span>which makes me eagerly long for
union with you.  Verily it is a great sorrow to me, and a pain in my
heart that cannot be assuaged, if the slanders uttered against me so far
prevail as to chill your love and to alienate us from one another. 
Farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[265:2903](2080297.htm#fr_2902.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[265:2904](2080297.htm#fr_2903.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p5"></span> [Matt. xix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.ccxxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[266:2905](2080297.htm#fr_2904.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p7"></span> *cf*. [Matt. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.ccxxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[266:2906](2080297.htm#fr_2905.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p9"></span> *cf. Letter* cxxx. p. 198.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[266:2907](2080297.htm#fr_2906.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p10"></span> *cf*. [Matt. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ccxxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[266:2908](2080297.htm#fr_2907.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p11"></span> *i.e. Letter* ccxxiii.

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[266:2909](2080297.htm#fr_2908.md) <span
id="ix.ccxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxv-p12"></span> *cf*. [2 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ccxxv-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Demosthenes, as from the synod of bishops.](2080298.md)
