[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080011)  [Next](2080013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p1.1"></span>VI.—Basil as Archbishop.</span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p2"></span>The archiepiscopal throne was now
technically vacant.  But the man who had practically filled it, “the
keeper and tamer of the lion,” <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134)
was still alive in the plenitude of his power.  What course was he to
follow ?  Was he meekly to withdraw, and perhaps be compelled to support
the candidature of another and an inferior?  The indirect evidence <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) has seemed to some strong enough to
compel the conclusion that he determined, if possible, to secure his
election to the see. <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)   Others,
on the contrary, have thought him incapable of scheming for the
nomination. <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)   The truth probably
lies between the two extreme views.  No intelligent onlooker of the
position at Cæsarea on the death of Eusebius, least of all the highly
capable administrator of the province, could be blind to the fact that
of all possible competitors for the vacant throne Basil himself was the
ablest and most distinguished, and the likeliest to be capable of
directing the course of events in the interests of orthodoxy.  But it
does not follow that Basil’s appeal to Gregory to come to him was a
deliberate step to secure this end.  He craved for the support and
counsel of his friend; but no one could <span id="page_xxii">p.
xxii</span> <span id="vi.i.vi-Page_xxii"></span>have known better that
Gregory the younger was not the man to take prompt action or rule
events.  His invention of a fatal sickness, or exaggeration of a slight
one, failed to secure even Gregory’s presence at Cæsarea.  Gregory burst
into tears on receipt of the news of his friend’s grave illness, and
hastened to obey the summons to his side.  But on the road he fell in
with bishops hurrying to Cæsarea for the election of a successor to
Eusebius, and detected the unreality of Basil’s plea.  He at once
returned to Nazianzus and wrote the oft-quoted letter, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) on the interpretation given to which
depends the estimate formed of Basil’s action at the important crisis.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p13"></span>Basil may or may not have taken Gregory’s
advice not to put himself forward.  But Gregory and his father, the
bishop, from this time strained every nerve to secure the election of
Basil.  It was felt that the cause of true religion was at stake.  “The
Holy Ghost must win.” <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)  
Opposition had to be encountered from bishops who were in open or secret
sympathy with Basil’s theological opponents, from men of wealth and
position with whom Basil was unpopular on account of his practice and
preaching of stern self-denial, and from all the lewd fellows of the
baser sort in Cæsarea. <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)   Letters
were written in the name of Gregory the bishop with an eloquence and
literary skill which have led them to be generally regarded as the
composition of Gregory the younger.  To the people of Cæsarea Basil was
represented as a man of saintly life and of unique capacity to stem the
surging tide of heresy. <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)   To the
bishops of the province who had asked him to come to Cæsarea without
saying why, in the hope perhaps that so strong a friend of Basil’s might
be kept away from the election without being afterwards able to contest
it on the ground that he had had no summons to attend, he expresses an
earnest hope that their choice is not a factious and foregone
conclusion, and, anticipating possible objections on the score of
Basil’s weak health, reminds them that they have to elect not a
gladiator, but a primate. <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)   To
Eusebius of Samosata he sends the letter included among those of
Basil <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) in which he urges him to
cooperate in securing the appointment of a worthy man.  Despite his age
and physical infirmity, he was laid in his litter, as his son says <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) like a corpse in a grave, and borne to
Cæsarea to rise there with fresh vigour and carry the election by his
vote. <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145)   All resistance was
overborne, and Basil was seated on the throne of the great exarchate.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p21"></span>The success of the Catholics roused, as
was inevitable, various feelings.  Athanasius wrote from
Alexandria <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) to congratulate
Cappadocia on her privilege in being ruled by so illustrious a primate. 
Valens prepared to carry out the measures against the Catholic province,
which had been interrupted by the revolt of Procopius.  The bishops of
the province who had been narrowly out-voted, and who had refused to
take part in the consecration, abandoned communion with the new
primate. <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147)   But even more
distressing to the new archbishop than the disaffection of his
suffragans was the refusal of his friend Gregory to come in person to
support him on his throne.  Gregory pleaded that it was better for
Basil’s own sake that there should be no suspicion of favour to personal
friends, and begged to be excused for staying at Nazianzus. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148)   Basil complained that his wishes and
interests were disregarded, <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) and
was hurt at Gregory’s refusing to accept high responsibilities, possibly
the coadjutor-bishopric, at Cæsarea. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150)   A yet further cause of sorrow and
annoyance was the blundering attempt of Gregory of Nyssa to effect a
reconciliation between his uncle Gregory, who was in sympathy with the
disaffected bishops, and his brother.  He even went so far as to send
more than one forged letter in their uncle’s name.  The clumsy
counterfeit was naturally found out, and the widened breach not bridged
without difficulty. <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151)   The
episcopate thus began with troubles, both public and personal.  Basil
confidently confronted them.  His magnanimity and capacity secured the
adhesion of his immediate neighbours and subordinates, <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) and soon his energies took a wider
range.  He directed the theological campaign all over the East, and was
ready alike to meet opponents in hand to hand encounter, and to aim the
arrows of his epistolary eloquence far and wide. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)   He invokes the illustrious pope of
Alexandria to join him in winning the support of the West for the
orthodox cause. <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)   He is keenly
interested in the unfortunate controversy which distracted the Church of
Antioch. <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155)   He makes an earnest
appeal to Damasus for the wonted sympathy of the Church at Rome. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)   At the same time his industry in his
see was indefatigable.  He is keen to secure the <span
id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span> <span
id="vi.i.vi-Page_xxiii"></span>purity of ordination and the fitness of
candidates. <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157)   Crowds of working
people come to hear him preach before they go to their work for the
day. <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)   He travels distances
which would be thought noticeable even in our modern days of idolatry of
the great goddess Locomotion.  He manages vast institutions eleemosynary
and collegiate.  His correspondence is constant and complicated.  He
seems the personification of the active, rather than of the literary and
scholarly, bishop.  Yet all the while he is writing tracts and treatises
which are monuments of industrious composition, and indicative of a
memory stored with various learning, and of the daily and effective
study of Holy Scripture.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p35"></span>Nevertheless, while thus actively engaged
in fighting the battle of the faith, and in the conscientious discharge
of his high duties, he was not to escape an unjust charge of
pusillanimity, if not of questionable orthodoxy, from men who might have
known him better.  On September 7th, probably in 371, <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) was held the festival of St.
Eupsychius.  Basil preached the sermon.  Among the hearers were many
detractors. <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)   A few days after
the festival there was a dinner-party at Nazianzus, at which Gregory was
present, with several persons of distinction, friends of Basil.  Of the
party was a certain unnamed guest, of religious dress and reputation,
who claimed a character for philosophy, and said some very hard things
against Basil.  He had heard the archbishop at the festival preach
admirably on the Father and the Son, but the Spirit, he alleged, Basil
defamed. <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)   While Gregory boldly
called the Spirit God, Basil, from poor motives, refrained from any
clear and distinct enunciation of the divinity of the Third Person.  The
unfavourable view of Basil was the popular one at the dinner-table, and
Gregory was annoyed at not being able to convince the party that, while
his own utterances were of comparatively little importance, Basil had to
weigh every word, and to avoid, if possible, the banishment which was
hanging over his head.  It was better to use a wise “economy” <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) in preaching the truth than so to
proclaim it as to ensure the extinction of the light of true religion. 
Basil <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) shewed some natural
distress and astonishment on hearing that attacks against him were
readily received. <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)

<span id="vi.i.vi-p42"></span>It was at the close of this same year
371 <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) that Basil and his diocese
suffered most severely from the hostility of the imperial government. 
Valens had never lost his antipathy to Cappadocia.  In 370 he determined
on dividing it into two provinces.  Podandus, a poor little town at the
foot of Mt. Taurus, was to be the chief seat of the new province, and
thither half the executive was to be transferred.  Basil depicts in
lively terms the dismay and dejection of Cæsarea. <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166)   He even thought of proceeding in
person to the court to plead the cause of his people, and his conduct is
in itself a censure of those who would confine the sympathies of
ecclesiastics within rigidly clerical limits.  The division was insisted
on.  But, eventually, Tyana was substituted for Podandus as the new
capital; and it has been conjectured <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) that possibly the act of kindness of
the prefect mentioned in Ep. LXXVIII. may have been this transfer, due
to the intervention of Basil and his influential friends.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p46"></span>But the imperial Arian was not content
with this administrative mutilation.  At the close of the year 371,
flushed with successes against the barbarians, <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) fresh from the baptism of Endoxius,
and eager to impose his creed on his subjects, Valens was travelling
leisurely towards Syria.  He is said to have shrunk from an encounter
with the famous primate of Cæsarea, for he feared lest one strong man’s
firmness might lead others to resist. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)   Before him went Modestus, Prefect of
the Prætorium, the minister of his severities, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) and before Modestus, like the
skirmishers in front of an advancing army, had come a troop of Arian
<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> <span
id="vi.i.vi-Page_xxiv"></span>bishops with Euippius, in all probability,
at their head. <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)   Modestus found
on his arrival that Basil was making a firm stand, and summoned the
archbishop to his presence with the hope of overawing him.  He met with
a dignity, if not with a pride, which was more than a match for his
own.  Modestus claimed submission in the name of the emperor.  Basil
refused it in the name of God.  Modestus threatened impoverishment,
exile, torture, death.  Basil retorted that none of these threats
frightened him:  he had nothing to be confiscated except a few rags and
a few books; banishment could not send him beyond the lands of God;
torture had no terrors for a body already dead; death could only come as
a friend to hasten his last journey home.  Modestus exclaimed in
amazement that he had never been so spoken to before.  “Perhaps,”
replied Basil, “you never met a bishop before.”  The prefect hastened to
his master and reported that ordinary means of intimidation appeared
unlikely to move this undaunted prelate.  The archbishop must be owned
victorious, or crushed by more brutal violence.  But Valens, like all
weak natures, oscillated between compulsion and compliance.  He so far
abated his pretensions to force heresy on Cappadocia, as to consent to
attend the services at the Church on the Festival of the Epiphany. <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172)   The Church was crowded.  A mighty
chant thundered over the sea of heads.  At the end of the basilica,
facing the multitude, stood Basil, statue-like, erect as Samuel among
the prophets at Naioth, <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) and
quite indifferent to the interruption of the imperial approach.  The
whole scene seemed rather of heaven than of earth, and the orderly
enthusiasm of the worship to be rather of angels than of men.  Valens
half fainted, and staggered as he advanced to make his offering at God’s
Table.  On the following day Basil admitted him within the curtain of
the sanctuary, and conversed with him at length on sacred
subjects. <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="vi.i.vi-p54"></span>The surroundings and the personal
appearance of the interlocutors were significant.  The apse of the
basilica was as a holy of holies secluded from the hum and turmoil of
the vast city. <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)   It was typical
of what the Church was to the world.  The health and strength of the
Church were personified in Basil.  He was now in the ripe prime of life
but bore marks of premature age.  Upright in carriage, of commanding
stature, thin, with brown hair and eyes, and long beard, slightly bald,
with bent brow, high cheek bones, and smooth skin, he would shew in
every tone and gesture at once his high birth and breeding, the supreme
culture that comes of intercourse with the noblest of books and of men,
and the dignity of a mind made up and of a heart of single purpose.  The
sovereign presented a marked contrast to the prelate. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)   Valens was of swarthy complexion,
and by those who approached him nearly it was seen that one eye was
defective.  He was strongly built, and of middle height, but his person
was obese, and his legs were crooked.  He was hesitating and unready in
speech and action. <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)   It is on
the occasion of this interview that Theodoret places the incident of
Basil’s humorous retort to Demosthenes, <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) the chief of the imperial kitchen, the
Nebuzaradan, as the Gregories style him, of the petty fourth century
Nebuchadnezzar.  This Demosthenes had already threatened the archbishop
with the knife, and been bidden to go back to his fire.  Now he ventured
to join in the imperial conversation, and made some blunder in Greek. 
“An illiterate Demosthenes!” exclaimed Basil; “better leave theology
alone, and go back to your soups.”  The emperor was amused at the
discomfiture of his satellite, and for a while seemed inclined to be
friendly.  He gave Basil lands, possibly part of the neighbouring estate
of Macellum, to endow his hospital. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)

<span id="vi.i.vi-p60"></span>But the reconciliation between the
sovereign and the primate was only on the surface.  Basil would not
admit the Arians to communion, and Valens could not brook the refusal. 
The decree of exile was to be enforced, though the pens had refused to
form the letters of the imperial signature. <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180)   Valens, however, was in distress at
the dangerous illness of <span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> <span
id="vi.i.vi-Page_xxv"></span>Galates, his infant son. and, on the very
night of the threatened expatriation, summoned Basil to pray over him. 
A brief rally was followed by relapse and death, which were afterwards
thought to have been caused by the young prince’s Arian baptism. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)   Rudeness was from time to time shewn
to the archbishop by discourteous and unsympathetic magistrates, as in
the case of the Pontic Vicar, who tried to force an unwelcome marriage
on a noble widow.  The lady took refuge at the altar, and appealed to
Basil for protection.  The magistrate descended to contemptible
insinuation, and subjected the archbishop to gross rudeness.  His ragged
upper garment was dragged from his shoulder, and his emaciated frame was
threatened with torture.  He remarked that to remove his liver would
relieve him of a great inconvenience. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182)

<span id="vi.i.vi-p64"></span>Nevertheless, so far as the civil power
was concerned, Basil, after the famous visit of Valens, was left at
peace. <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)   He had triumphed.  Was
it a triumph for the nobler principles of the Gospel?  Had he exhibited
a pride and an irritation unworthy of the Christian name?  Jerome, in a
passage of doubtful genuineness and application, is reported to have
regarded his good qualities as marred by the one bane of pride, <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) a “leaven” of which sin is admitted by
Milman <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) to have been exhibited by
Basil, as well as uncompromising firmness.  The temper of Basil in the
encounter with Valens would probably have been somewhat differently
regarded had it not been for the reputation of a hard and overbearing
spirit which he has won from his part in transactions to be shortly
touched on.  His attitude before Valens seems to have been dignified
without personal haughtiness, and to have shewn sparks of that quiet
humour which is rarely exhibited in great emergencies except by men who
are conscious of right and careless of consequences to self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_134"></span>[xxi:135](2080012.htm#fr_134) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p3"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii. 33.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[xxi:136](2080012.htm#fr_135) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p4"></span> *i.e*. the extant reply to his urgent
request that Gregory would come to him.  Greg. Naz., *Ep*. xl.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[xxi:137](2080012.htm#fr_136) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p5"></span> “*Persuadé que, s’il échouait c’en était
fait de la foi de Nicée en Cappadoce, il deploie toutes les ressources
de son dénie, aussi souple que puissant*.”  Fialone, *Et. Hist*. p. 85.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p6"></span>“*Personne dans la ville, pas même Basile,
malgré son humilité, ne donta que la succession ne lui fût acquise…il
fit assez ouvertement ses préparatifs pour sa promotion*.”  De Broglie,
*L’Eglise et l’Empire R*. v. 88.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p7"></span>“Basil persuaded himself, and not
altogether unwarrantably, that the cause of orthodoxy in Asia Minor was
involved in his becoming his successor.”  Canon Venables in *D.C.B.*

<span id="vi.i.vi-p8"></span>“*Erselbst, so schwer er sich anfangs zur
Uebernahme des Presbyterates hatte entschliessen können, jetzt, wo er
sich in seine Stellung hinein gearbeitet hatte wünschte er nichts
sehnlicher al seine Wahl zum Bischof*.  Böhringer the IVth c. p. 24.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p9"></span>“Was it really from ambitious views? 
Certainly the suspicion, which even his friend entertained, attaches to
him.”  Ullmann, *Life of Gregory of Naz*., Cox’s Trans. p. 117.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[xxi:138](2080012.htm#fr_137) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p10"></span> “*Ne suspicatus quidem in se oculos
conjectum iri*.”  Maran, *Vit. Bas*.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p11"></span>“*Former une brigue pour parvenir à
l’épiscopat était bien loin de sa pensée*.´ Ceillier, iv. 354.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[xxii:139](2080012.htm#fr_138) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p12"></span> Greg. N., *Ep*. xl. (xxi.).

<span id="fn_139"></span>[xxii:140](2080012.htm#fr_139) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p14"></span> Or. xliii.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[xxii:141](2080012.htm#fr_140) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p15"></span> Or. xliii. § 37.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[xxii:142](2080012.htm#fr_141) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p16"></span> *Ep*. xli.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[xxii:143](2080012.htm#fr_142) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p17"></span> *Ep*. xliii.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[xxii:144](2080012.htm#fr_143) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p18"></span> *Ep*. xlvii.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[xxii:145](2080012.htm#fr_144) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p19"></span> *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[xxii:146](2080012.htm#fr_145) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p20"></span> *Or*. xviii., xliii.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[xxii:147](2080012.htm#fr_146) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p22"></span> Athan., *Ad Pall*. 953; *Ad Johan*, *et
Ant*. 951.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[xxii:148](2080012.htm#fr_147) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p23"></span> This is inferred from the latter part of
*Ep*. xlviii.  *cf*. Maran, *Vit. Bas*. xiii. 3.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[xxii:149](2080012.htm#fr_148) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p24"></span> Greg. Naz., *Ep*. xlv.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[xxii:150](2080012.htm#fr_149) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p25"></span> *Id. Ep*. xlvi.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[xxii:151](2080012.htm#fr_150) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p26.1"></span>τήνδε τῆς καθέδρας τίμην</span>.  Greg. Naz.,
*Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[xxii:152](2080012.htm#fr_151) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p27"></span> *Epp*. lviii., lix., lx.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[xxii:153](2080012.htm#fr_152) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p28"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii. § 40.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[xxii:154](2080012.htm#fr_153) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p29"></span> *Id*. § 43.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[xxii:155](2080012.htm#fr_154) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p30"></span> Basil, *Epp*. lxvi., lxvii.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[xxii:156](2080012.htm#fr_155) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p31"></span> *Ep*. lxix.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[xxii:157](2080012.htm#fr_156) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p32"></span> *Ep*. lxx.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[xxiii:158](2080012.htm#fr_157) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p33"></span>*Ep*. liii.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[xxiii:159](2080012.htm#fr_158) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p34"></span>*Hex. Hom*. iii. p. 65.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[xxiii:160](2080012.htm#fr_159) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p36"></span> Maran, *Vit. Bas*. xviii. 4.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[xxiii:161](2080012.htm#fr_160) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p37"></span> Greg. Naz., *Ep*. lviii. *Ep*. lxxi.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[xxiii:162](2080012.htm#fr_161) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p38.1"></span>παρασύρειν</span>.  *Ib*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[xxiii:163](2080012.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p39"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p39.1"></span>οἰκονομηθῆναι</span>.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[xxiii:164](2080012.htm#fr_163) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p40"></span> *Ep*. lxxi.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[xxiii:165](2080012.htm#fr_164) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p41"></span> Mr. C.F.H. Johnston (*The Book of St.
Basil the Great on the Holy Spirit*), in noting that St. Basil in the
*De Sp. Scto*. refrained from directly using the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.vi-p41.1"></span>Θεός</span> of the Holy
Ghost, remarks that he also avoided the use of the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.vi-p41.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.vi-p41.3"></span>μοούσιος</span> of the
Son, “in accordance with his own opinion expressed in *Ep*. ix.”  In
*Ep*. ix., however, he rather gives his reasons for preferring the
homoousion.  The epitome of the essay of C. G. Wuilcknis (Leipsig, 1724)
on the economy or reserve of St. Basil, appended by Mr. Johnston, is a
valuable and interesting summary of the best defence which can be made
for such reticence.  It is truly pointed out that the only possible
motive in Basil’s case was the desire of serving God, for no one could
suspect or accuse him of ambition, fear, or covetousness.  And if there
was an avoidance of a particular phrase, there was no paltering with
doctrine.  As Dr. Swete (*Doctrine of the H. S*., p. 64) puts it:  “He
knew that the opponents of the Spirit’s Deity were watching their
opportunity.  Had the actual name of God been used in reference to the
Third Person of the Trinity, they would have risen, and, on the plea of
resisting blasphemy, expelled St. Basil from his see, which would then
have been immediately filled by a Macedonian prelate.  In private
conversation with Gregory, Basil not only asserted again and again the
Godhead of the Spirit, but even confirmed his statement with a solemn
imprecation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p41.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p41.5"></span>παρασάμενος ἑαυτῷ τὸ φρικωδέστατον, αὐτοῦ τοῦ
πνεύματος ἐκπεσεῖν εἰ μὴ σέβοι τὸ πνεῦμα μετὰ πατρὸς καὶ ῾Υιοῦ ὡς
ὁμοούσιον καὶ ὁμότιμον</span>.”  (Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.)  In *Letter*
viii. § 11 he distinctly calls the Spirit God, as in *Adv. Eunomius*,
v., if the latter be genuine.  In the *De S. Scto*. (p. 12) Basil uses
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.vi-p41.6"></span>οἰκονομία</span> in the patristic sense nearly
equivalent to *incarnation*.  In the passage of Bp. Lightfoot, referred
to in the note on p. 7, he points out how in *Ign. ad Eph*. xviii, the
word has “already reached its first stage on the way to the sense of
‘dissimulation,’ which was afterwards connected with it, and which led
to disastrous consequences in the theology and practice of a later
age.”  On “Reserve” as taught by later casuists, see Scavini, *Theolog.
Mor*. ii. 23, the letters of Pascal, and Jer. Taylor, *Ductor Dubit*.
iii. 2.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[xxiii:166](2080012.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p43"></span> Maran, *Vit. Bas*. xx. 1.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[xxiii:167](2080012.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p44"></span> *Epp*. lxxiv., lxxv, lxxvi.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[xxiii:168](2080012.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p45"></span> Maran, *Vit. Bas*. xix. 3.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[xxiii:169](2080012.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p47"></span> Greg. Nyss., *C. Eunom*. i.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[xxiii:170](2080012.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p48"></span> Theod. iv. 16.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[xxiii:171](2080012.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p49"></span> Soc. iv. 16.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[xxiv:172](2080012.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p50"></span> *cf. Epp*. lxviii., cxxviii., ccxliv. and
ccli., and Maran, *Vit. Bas*. xx. 1; possibly the bishops were in
Cappadocia as early as the Eupsychian celebration.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[xxiv:173](2080012.htm#fr_172) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p51"></span> Jan. 6, 372.  At this time in the Eastern
Church the celebrations of the Nativity and of the Epiphany were
combined.  *cf. D.C.A*. i. 617.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[xxiv:174](2080012.htm#fr_173) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p52"></span> [1 Sam. xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020)<span id="vi.i.vi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[xxiv:175](2080012.htm#fr_174) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p53"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii., Greg. Nyss.,
*Adv. Eunom*. i., Soz. vi. 16, Theod. iv. 16.  De Broglie well combines
the variations which are not quite easy to harmonize in detail.  On the
admission within the sanctuary, *cf*. the concession of Ambrose to
Theodosius in Theod. v. 18.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[xxiv:176](2080012.htm#fr_175) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p55"></span> Cæsarea, when sacked by Sapor in 260, is
said to have contained 400,000 inhabitants (Zonaras, xii. 630).  It may
be presumed to have recovered and retained much, if not all, of its
importance.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[xxiv:177](2080012.htm#fr_176) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p56"></span> The authority for the personal appearance
of Basil is an anonymous Vatican document quoted by Baronius, *Ann*.
378:  “*Procero fuit habitu corporis et recto, siccus, gracilis; color
ejus fuscus, vultus temperatus pallore, justus nasus, supercilia in
orbem inflexa et adducta; cogitabundo similis fuit, paucæ in vultu rugæ,
eœque renidentes, genæ oblongæ, tempora aliquantum cava, promissa barba,
et mediocris canities*.”

<span id="fn_177"></span>[xxiv:178](2080012.htm#fr_177) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p57"></span> Amm. Marc. xxx. 14, 7:  “*Cessator et
piger:  nigri coloris, pupula oculi unius obstructa, sed ita ut non
eminus appareret:  figura bene compacta membrorum, staturæ nec proceræ
nec humilis, incurvis cruribus, exstanteque mediocriter ventre.”  “Bon
père, bon époux, arien fervent et zélé, mais faible, timide, Valens
était né pour la vie privée, où il eût été un honnête citoyen et un des
saints de l’Arianisme*.”  Fialon, *Et. Hist*. 159.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[xxiv:179](2080012.htm#fr_178) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p58"></span> *cf*. Theod. v. 16 and note on p. 120 of
Theod. in this series.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[xxiv:180](2080012.htm#fr_179) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p59"></span> Theod. iv. 16.  Bas., *Ep*. xciv.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[xxiv:181](2080012.htm#fr_180) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p61"></span> Theod. iv. 16.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[xxv:182](2080012.htm#fr_181) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p62"></span> Theod. iv. 16.  Soz. vi. 17.  Soc. iv.
26.  Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.  Ruf. xi. 9.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[xxv:183](2080012.htm#fr_182) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p63"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[xxv:184](2080012.htm#fr_183) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p65"></span> “The archbishop, who asserted, with
inflexible pride, the truth of his opinions and the dignity of his rank,
was left in the free possession of his conscience and his throne.” 
Gibbon, Chap. xxv.

<span id="vi.i.vi-p66"></span>“*Une sorte d’inviolabilité de fait
demeurait acquise a Basile a Césarée comme a Athanase à Alexandrie*.” 
De Broglie.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[xxv:185](2080012.htm#fr_184) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p67"></span> Quoted by Gibbon *l.c*. from Jerome’s
*Chron*. A.D. 380, and acknowledged by him to be not in Scaliger’s
edition.  The Benedictine editors of Jerome admit it, but refer it to
Photinus.  *cf. D.C.B*. i. 288.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[xxv:186](2080012.htm#fr_185) <span
id="vi.i.vi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.vi-p68"></span> *Hist. Christ*. iii. 45.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Breach with Gregory of Nazianzus.](2080013)
