[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080282)  [Next](2080284.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxi"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCX. <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p3"></span>*To the notables of Neocæsarea*.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p4.1"></span>I am</span> really under no obligation to
publish my own mind to you, or to state the reasons for my present
sojourn where I am; it is not my custom to indulge in self
advertisement, nor is the matter worth publicity.  I am not, I think,
following my own inclinations; I am answering the challenge of your
leaders.  I have always striven to be ignored more earnestly than
popularity hunters strive after notoriety.  But, I am told, the ears of
everybody in your town are set a thrilling, while <span id="page_249">p.
249</span> <span id="ix.ccxi-Page_249"></span>certain tale-mongers,
creators of lies, hired for this very work, are giving you a history of
me and my doings.  I therefore do not think that I ought to overlook
your being exposed to the teaching of vile intention and foul tongue; I
think that I am bound to tell you myself in what position I am placed. 
From my childhood I have been familiar with this spot, for here I was
brought up by my grandmother; <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768.md)
hither I have often retreated, and here I have spent many years, when
endeavouring to escape from the hubbub of public affairs, for experience
has taught me that the quiet and solitude of the spot are favourable to
serious thought.  Moreover as my brothers <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769.md) are now living here, I have gladly
retired to this retreat, and have taken a brief breathing time from the
press of the labours that beset me, not as a centre from which I might
give trouble to others, but to indulge my own longing.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p7"></span>2.  Where then is the need of having
recourse to dreams and of hiring their interpreters, and making me
matter for talk over the cups at public entertainments?  Had slander
been launched against me in any other quarter, I should have called you
to witness to prove what I think, and now I ask every one of you to
remember those old days when I was invited by your city to take charge
of the education of the young, and a deputation of the first men among
you came to see me. <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770.md)  
Afterwards, when you all crowded round me, what were you not ready to
give? what not to promise?  Nevertheless you were not able to keep me. 
How then could I, who at that time would not listen when you invited me,
now attempt to thrust myself on you uninvited?  How could I, who when
you complimented and admired me, avoided you, have been intending to
court you now that you calumniate me?  Nothing of the kind, sirs; I am
not quite so cheap.  No man in his senses would go on board a boat
without a steersman, or get alongside a Church where the men sitting at
the helm are themselves stirring up tempest and storm.  Whose fault was
it that the town was all full of tumult, when some were running away
with no one after them, and others stealing off when no invader was
near, and all the wizards and dream-tellers were flourishing their
bogeys?  Whose fault was it else?  Does not every child know that it was
the mob-leaders’?  The reasons of their hatred to me it would be bad
taste on my part to recount; but they are quite easy for you to
apprehend.  When bitterness and division have come to the last pitch of
savagery, and the explanation of the cause is altogether groundless and
ridiculous, then the mental disease is plain, dangerous indeed to other
people’s comfort, but greatly and personally calamitous to the patient. 
And there is one charming point about them.  Torn and racked with inward
agony as they are, they cannot yet for very shame speak out about it. 
The state they are in may be known not only from their behaviour to me,
but from the rest of their conduct.  If it were unknown, it would not
much matter.  But the veritable cause of their shunning communication
with me may be unperceived by the majority among you.  Listen; and I
will tell you.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p9"></span>3.  There is going on among you a movement
ruinous to the faith, disloyal to the apostolical and evangelical
dogmas, disloyal too to the tradition of Gregory the truly great, <span
id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771.md) and of his successors up to the
blessed Musonius, whose teaching is still ringing in your ears. <span
id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772.md)   For those men, who, from fear of
confutation, are forging figments against me, are endeavouring to renew
the old mischief of Sabellius, started long ago, and extinguished by the
tradition of the great Gregory.  But do you bid goodbye to those
wine-laden heads, bemuddled by the swelling fumes that mount from their
debauch, and from me who am wide awake and from fear of God cannot keep
silence, hear what plague is rife among you.  Sabellianism is
Judaism <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773.md) imported into the
preaching of the Gospel under the guise of Christianity.  For if a man
calls Father Son and Holy Ghost one thing of many faces, <span
id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774.md) and makes the hypostasis of the
three one, <span id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775.md) what is this but
to deny the everlasting pre-existence of the Only begotten?  He denies
too the Lord’s sojourn among men in the incarnation, <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776.md) the going down into hell, the
resurrection, the judgment; he denies also the proper operations of the
Spirit.  And <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="ix.ccxi-Page_250"></span>I hear that even rasher innovations than
those of the foolish Sabellius are now ventured on among you.  It is
said, and that on the evidence of ear witnesses, that your clever men go
to such an extreme as to say that there is no tradition of the name of
the Only-begotten, while of the name of the adversary there is; and at
this they are highly delighted and elated, as though it were a discovery
of their own.  For it is said, “I came in my Father’s name and ye
received me not; if another shall come in his own name, him ye will
receive.” <span id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777.md)   And because it is
said, “Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778.md) it is obvious, they urge, that the
name is one, for it is not “in the *names*,” but “in the *name*.”

<span id="ix.ccxi-p18"></span>4.  I blush so to write to you, for the
men thus guilty are of my own blood; <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779.md) and I groan for my own soul, in
that, like boxers fighting two men at once, I can only give the truth
its proper force by hitting with my proofs, and knocking down, the
errors of doctrine on the right and on the left.  On one side I am
attacked by the Anomœan:  on the other by the Sabellian.  Do not, I
implore you, pay any attention to these abominable and impotent
sophisms.  Know that the name of Christ which is above every name is His
being called Son of God, as Peter says, “There is none other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.” <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780.md)   And as to the words “I came in my
Father’s name,” it is to be understood that He so says describing His
Father as origin and cause of Himself. <span
id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781.md)   And if it is said “Go and baptize
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,” we must
not suppose that here one name is delivered to us.  For just as he who
said Paul and Silvanus and Timothy mentioned three names, and coupled
them one to the other by the word “and,” so He who spoke of the name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, mentioned three, and united them by the
conjunction, teaching that with each name must be understood its own
proper meaning; for the names mean things.  And no one gifted with even
the smallest particle of intelligence doubts that the existence
belonging to the things is peculiar and complete in itself.  For of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost there is the same nature and one Godhead;
but these are different names, setting forth to a us the circumscription
and exactitude of the meanings.  For unless the meaning of the
distinctive qualities of each be unconfounded, it is impossible for the
doxology to be adequately offered to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p22"></span>If, however, they deny that they so say,
and so teach, my object is attained.  Yet I see that this denial is no
easy matter, because of our having many witnesses who heard these things
said.  But let bygones be bygones; let them only be sound now.  If they
persist in the same old error I must proclaim your calamity even to
other Churches, and get letters written to you from more bishops.  In my
efforts to break down this huge mass of impiety now gradually and
secretly growing, I shall either effect something towards the object I
have in view; or at least my present testimony will clear me of guilt in
the judgment day.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p23"></span>5.  They have already inserted these
expressions in their own writings.  They sent them first to the man of
God, Meletius, <span id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782.md) bishop, and
after receiving from him a suitable reply, like mothers of monsters,
ashamed of their natural deformities, these men themselves brought forth
and bring up their disgusting offspring in appropriate darkness.  They
made an attempt too by letter on my dear friend Anthimus, bishop of
Tyana, <span id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783.md) on the ground that
Gregory had said in his exposition of the faith <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784.md) that Father and Son are in thought
two, but in hypostasis one. <span id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785.md)  
The men who congratulate themselves <span id="page_251">p. 251</span>
<span id="ix.ccxi-Page_251"></span>on the subtilty of their intelligence
could not perceive that this is said not in reference to dogmatic
opinion, but in controversy with Ælian.  And in this dispute there are
not a few copyists’ blunders, as, please God, I shall shew in the case
of the actual expressions used.  But in his endeavour to convince the
heathen, he deemed it needless to be nice about the words he employed;
he judged it wiser sometimes to make concessions to the character of the
subject who was being persuaded, so as not to run counter to the
opportunity given him.  This explains how it is that you may find there
many expressions which now give great support to the heretics, as for
instance “creature” <span id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786.md) and
“thing made” <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787.md) and the like. 
But those who ignorantly criticise these writings refer to the question
of the Godhead much that is said in reference to the conjunction with
man; as is the case with this passage which they are hawking about.  For
it is indispensable to have clear understanding that, as he who fails to
confess the community of the essence or substance falls into polytheism,
so he who refuses to grant the distinction of the hypostases is carried
away into Judaism.  For we must keep our mind stayed, so to say, on
certain underlying subject matter, and, by forming a clear impression of
its distinguishing lines, so arrive at the end desired.  For suppose we
do not bethink us of the Fatherhood, nor bear in mind Him of whom this
distinctive quality is marked off, how can we take in the idea of God
the Father?  For merely to enumerate the differences of Persons <span
id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788.md) is insufficient; we must confess
each Person <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789.md) to have a natural
existence in real hypostasis.  Now Sabellius did not even deprecate the
formation of the persons without hypostasis, saying as he did that the
same God, being one in matter, <span
id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790.md) was metamorphosed as the need of
the moment required, and spoken of now as Father, now as Son, and now as
Holy Ghost.  The inventors of this unnamed heresy are renewing the old
long extinguished error; those, I mean, who are repudiating the
hypostases, and denying the name of the Son of God.  They must give over
uttering iniquity against God, <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791.md) or they will have to wail with them
that deny the Christ.

<span id="ix.ccxi-p35"></span>6.  I have felt compelled to write to you
in these terms, that you may be on your guard against the mischief
arising from bad teaching.  If we may indeed liken pernicious teachings
to poisonous drugs, as your dream-tellers have it, these doctrines are
hemlock and monkshood, or any other deadly to man.  It is these that
destroy souls; not my words, as this shrieking drunken scum, full of the
fancies of their condition, make out.  If they had any sense they ought
to know that in souls, pure and cleansed from all defilement, the
prophetic gift shines clear.  In a foul mirror you cannot see what the
reflexion is, neither can a soul preoccupied with cares of this life,
and darkened with the passions of the lust of the flesh, receive the
rays of the Holy Ghost.  Every dream is not a prophecy, as says
Zechariah, “The Lord shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of
rain,…for the idols have spoken vanity and the diviners have told false
dreams.” <span id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792.md)   Those who, as
Isaiah says, dream and love to sleep in their bed <span
id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793.md) forget that an operation of error
is sent to “the children of disobedience.” <span
id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794.md)   And there is a lying spirit,
which arose in false prophecies, and deceived Ahab. <span
id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795.md)   Knowing this they ought not to
have been so lifted up as to ascribe the gift of prophecy to
themselves.  They are shewn to fall far short even of the case of the
seer Balaam; for Balaam when invited by the king of Moab with mighty
bribes brooked not to utter a word beyond the will of God, nor to curse
Israel whom the Lord cursed not. <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796.md)   If then their sleep-fancies do
not tally with the commandments of the Lord, let them be content with
the Gospels.  The Gospels need no dreams to add to their credit.  The
Lord has sent His peace to us, and left us a new commandment, to love
one another, but dreams bring strife and division and destruction of
love.  Let them therefore not give occasion to the devil to attack their
souls in sleep; nor make their imaginations of more authority than the
instruction of salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[248:2768](2080283.htm#fr_2767.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p2"></span> Placed in 375, the year after the
composition of the *De Spiritu Sancto*.  It apparently synchronizes with
*Letter* ccxxiii., in which Basil more directly repels those calumnies
of the versatile Eustathius of Sebaste which he had borne in silence for
three years.  On Annesi, from which he writes, and the occasion of the
visit, see Prolegomena.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[249:2769](2080283.htm#fr_2768.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p5"></span> Macrina, at her residence at Annesi.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[249:2770](2080283.htm#fr_2769.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p6"></span> *cf*. *Ep*. ccxvi., where he speaks of
going to the house of his brother Peter near Neocæsarea.  One of the
five brothers apparently died young, as the property of the elder Basil
was at his death, before 340, divided into nine portions, *i.e.* among
the five daughters and four surviving sons, the youngest, Peter, being
then an infant.  (Greg. Nyss. *Vita Mac.* 186.)  Naucratius, the second
son, was killed by an accident while hunting, c. 357.  Gregory of Nyssa
must, therefore, be referred to in the text, if by “brothers” is meant
brothers in blood.  Was it to Peter’s “cottage” or some neighbouring
dwelling that Gregory fled when he escaped from the police of the Vicar
Demosthenes, in order not to obey the summons of Valens to his synod at
Ancrya?  Is the cottage of Peter “some quiet spot” of *Ep*. ccxxv.?  The
plural <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxi-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxi-p6.2"></span>δελφῶν</span> might be used
conventionally, or understood to include Peter and a sister or sisters.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[249:2771](2080283.htm#fr_2770.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p8"></span> *i.e.* when he was resident at Cæsarea in
his earlier manhood.  If *Letter* ccclviii. (from Libanius to Basil
refers to this period, it would seem that for a time Basil did undertake
school work.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[249:2772](2080283.htm#fr_2771.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p10"></span> *i.e.*Gregory Thaumaturgus.  *cf*. note
on p. 247.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[249:2773](2080283.htm#fr_2772.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p11"></span> Musonius, bp. of Neocæsarea, who died in
368.  *cf*. *Ep*. xxviii.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[249:2774](2080283.htm#fr_2773.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p12"></span> *cf.* *De Sp. S.* § 77, p. 49and *Ep*.
clxxxix. p. 229.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[249:2775](2080283.htm#fr_2774.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p13.1"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p13.2"></span>ν πρᾶγμα πολύπροσωπον</span> .  Another <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.ccxi-p13.3"></span>ms.</span> reading is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxi-p13.4"></span>πολυώνυμον</span>, “of
many names.”

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[249:2776](2080283.htm#fr_2775.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p13.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p14"></span> *cf*. note on p. 195.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[249:2777](2080283.htm#fr_2776.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p15.1"></span>οἰκονομικήν</span>.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[250:2778](2080283.htm#fr_2777.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p16"></span> [John v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p16.1"></span>. 
Slightly varied.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[250:2779](2080283.htm#fr_2778.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p17"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[250:2780](2080283.htm#fr_2779.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p19"></span> The allusion is supposed to be to
Atarbius.  *cf. Letter* lxv.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[250:2781](2080283.htm#fr_2780.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p20"></span> [Acts iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[250:2782](2080283.htm#fr_2781.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p21"></span> *cf*. *De Sp. S*. § 44, p. 27.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[250:2783](2080283.htm#fr_2782.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p24"></span> Meletius of Antioch.

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[250:2784](2080283.htm#fr_2783.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p25"></span> Tyana, at the north of Mount Taurus, is
the city which gave a distinctive name to Apollonius the Thaumaturge. 
That Basil should speak in kindly and complimentary terms of Anthimus is
remarkable, for from few contemporaries did he suffer more.  It was the
quarrel in which Anthimus attacked and plundered a train of Basil’s
sumpter mules, and Gregory of Nazianzus fought stoutly for his friend,
that led to Basil’s erecting Sasima into a bishopric, as a kind of
buffer see against his rival metropolitan.  (Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.
356, *Ep*. xxxi. and *Carm*. i. 8.)  See *Prolegomena*.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[250:2785](2080283.htm#fr_2784.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p26"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p26.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p26.2"></span>κθεσις τῆς πίστεως</span> of Gregory
Thaumaturgus.  *cf*. *Ep*. cciv. and the *De Sp. Scto*. § 74.  On the
genuineness of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p26.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p26.4"></span>κθεσις</span>, *vide* *D. C. Biog*. i. 733. 
*cf*. Dorner’s *Christologie* i. 737.  It is given at length in the
*Life of Greg. Thaumat*. by Gregory of Nyssa, and is found in the Latin
Psalter, written in gold, which Charlemagne gave to Adrian I.  Bp.
Bull’s translation is as follows:

<span id="ix.ccxi-p27"></span>“There is one God, Father of Him who is
the living Word, subsisting Wisdom and Power and Eternal Impress,
Perfect begotten of the Perfect, Father of the only begotten Son.  There
is one Lord, Alone of the Alone, God of God, Impress and Image of the
Godhead, the operative Word; Wisdom comprehensive of the system of the
universe, and Power productive of the whole creation; true Son of true
Father, Invisible of Invisible and Incorruptible of Incorruptible, and
Immortal of Immortal, and Eternal of Eternal.  And there is one Holy
Ghost, who hath His being of God, who hath appeared through the Son,
Image of the Son, Perfect of the Perfect; Life, the cause of all them
that live; Holy Fountain, Holiness, the Bestower of Sanctification, in
whom is manifested God the Father, who is over all and in all, and God
the Son, who is through all.  A Perfect Trinity, not divided nor alien
in glory and eternity and dominion.”

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[250:2786](2080283.htm#fr_2785.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p28"></span> The Ben. note refused to believe that so
Sabellian an expression can have been used by Gregory.  Basil’s
explanation is that it was used in controversy with a heathen on another
subject, loosely and not dogmatically.  The words are said not to be
found in any extant document attributed to Gregory, whether genuine or
doubtful.  But they may be matched in some of the expressions of
Athanasius.  *cf*. p. 195. Ath., *Tom. ad* Af. § 4 and *Hom. in Terem*.
viii. 96.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[251:2787](2080283.htm#fr_2786.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p29.1"></span>κτίσμα</span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[251:2788](2080283.htm#fr_2787.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p30.1"></span>ποίημα</span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[251:2789](2080283.htm#fr_2788.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p31.1"></span>προσώπων</span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[251:2790](2080283.htm#fr_2789.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p32.1"></span>πρόσωπον</span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[251:2791](2080283.htm#fr_2790.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxi-p33.1"></span>τῷ ὑποκειμένῳ</span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[251:2792](2080283.htm#fr_2791.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p34"></span> [Ps. lxxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p34.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[251:2793](2080283.htm#fr_2792.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p36"></span> [Zech.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[251:2794](2080283.htm#fr_2793.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p37"></span> *cf*. [Is. lvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[251:2795](2080283.htm#fr_2794.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p38"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[251:2796](2080283.htm#fr_2795.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p39"></span> [1 Kings xxii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[251:2797](2080283.htm#fr_2796.md) <span
id="ix.ccxi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxi-p40"></span> [Num. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.ccxi-p40.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Olympius.](2080284.md)
