[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080162)  [Next](2080164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xci"></span>

<span id="ix.xci-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xci-p1.1"></span>Letter XC. <span
id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301.md) </span>

<span id="ix.xci-p3"></span>*To the holy brethren the bishops of the
West*. <span id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302.md)

<span id="ix.xci-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xci-p5.1"></span>The</span> good God Who ever mixes consolation
with affliction has, even now in the midst of my pangs, granted me a
certain amount of comfort in the letters which our right honourable
father bishop Athanasius has received from you and sent on to me.  For
they contain evidence of sound faith and proof of your inviolable
agreement and concord, showing thus that the shepherds are following in
the footsteps of the Fathers and feeding the people of the Lord with
knowledge.  All this has so much gladdened my heart as to dispel my
despondency and to create something like a smile in my soul in the midst
of the distressing state of affairs in which we are now placed.  The
Lord has also extended His consolation to me by means of the reverend
deacon Sabinus, my son, who has cheered my soul by giving me an exact
narrative of your condition; and from personal experience of his own,
will give you clear tidings of ours, that you may, in the first place,
aid me in my trouble by earnest and constant prayer to God; and next
that you may consent to give such consolation as lies in your power to
our afflicted Churches.  For here, very honourable brethren, all is in a
weak state; the Church has given way before the continuous attacks of
her foes, like some bark in mid-ocean buffeted by successive blows of
the waves; unless haply there be some quick visitation of the divine
mercy.  As then we reckon your mutual sympathy and unity an important
blessing to ourselves, so do we implore you to pity our dissensions; and
not, because we are separated by a great extent of country, to part us
from you, but to admit us to the concord of one body, because we are
united in the fellowship of the Spirit.

<span id="ix.xci-p6"></span>2.  Our distresses are notorious, even
though we leave them untold, for now their sound has gone out into all
the world.  The doctrines of the Fathers are despised; apostolic
traditions are set at nought; the devices of innovators are in vogue in
the Churches; now men are rather contrivers of cunning systems than
theologians; the wisdom of this world wins the highest prizes and has
rejected the glory of the cross.  Shepherds are banished, and in their
places are introduced grievous wolves hurrying the flock of Christ. 
Houses of prayer have none to assemble in them; desert places are full
of lamenting crowds.  The elders lament when they compare the present
with the past.  The younger are yet more to be compassionated, for they
do not know of what they have been deprived.  All this is enough to stir
the pity of men who have learnt the love of Christ; but, compared with
the actual state of things, words fall very far short.  If then there be
any consolation of love, any fellowship of the Spirit, any bowels of
mercy, be stirred to help us.  Be zealous for true religion, and rescue
us from this storm.  Ever be spoken among us with boldness that famous
dogma <span id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303.md) of the Fathers, which
destroys the ill-famed heresy of Arius, and builds up the Churches in
the sound doctrine wherein the Son is confessed to be of one substance
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost is ranked and worshipped as of equal
honour, to the end that through your prayers and co-operation the Lord
may grant to us that same boldness for the truth and glorying in the
confession of the divine and saving Trinity which He has given you.  But
the aforenamed deacon will tell you every thing in detail.  We have
welcomed your apostolic zeal for orthodoxy <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> <span id="ix.xci-Page_177"></span>and have agreed to all that
has been canonically done by your reverences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[176:2302](2080163.htm#fr_2301.md) <span
id="ix.xci-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xci-p2"></span> Placed in 372.

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[176:2303](2080163.htm#fr_2302.md) <span
id="ix.xci-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xci-p4"></span> By Newman, who translates the first
paragraphs, this letter, as well as xcii., is viewed in close connection
with *Letter* lxx., addressed to Damasus.

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[176:2304](2080163.htm#fr_2303.md) <span
id="ix.xci-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xci-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xci-p7.1"></span>κήρυγμα</span>.  *cf*. note on the *De Sp.
Sancto*. p. 41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Valerianus, Bishop of Illyricum.](2080164.md)
