[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080276)  [Next](2080278.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p1"></span> <span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="ix.ccv-Page_243"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCIV. <span
id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p3"></span>*To the Neocæsareans*. <span
id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733.md)

<span id="ix.ccv-p5"></span>1.  \[<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccv-p5.1"></span>There</span> has been a long silence on both
sides, revered and well-beloved brethren, just as if there were angry
feelings between us.  Yet who is there so sullen and implacable towards
the party which has injured him, as to lengthen out the resentment which
has begun in disgust through almost a whole life of man?\]  This \[is
happening in our case, no just occasion of estrangement existing, as far
as I myself know, but on the contrary, there being, from the first, many
strong reasons for the closest friendship and unity.  The greatest and
first is this, our Lord’s command, pointedly saying, “By this shall all
men know that ye are my disciples if ye have love one to another.” <span
id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734.md) \]  Again, the apostle clearly sets
before us the good of charity where he tells us that love is the
fulfilling of the law; <span id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735.md) and
again where he says that charity is a good thing to be preferred to all
great and good things, in the words, “Though I speak with tongues of men
and of angels and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass or a
tinkling cymbal.  And though I have the gift of prophecy and understand
all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I
could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.  And though
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor and though I give my body to be
burnt and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” <span
id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736.md)   Not that each of the points
enumerated could be performed without love, but that the Holy One
wishes, as He Himself has said, to attribute to the commandment
super-eminent excellency by the figure of hyperbole. <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737.md)

<span id="ix.ccv-p10"></span>2.  \[Next, if it tend much towards
intimacy to have the same teachers, there are to you and to me the same
teachers of God’s mysteries, and spiritual Fathers, who from the
beginning were the founders of your Church.  I mean the great Gregory,
and all who succeeding in order to the throne of your episcopate, like
stars rising one after another, have tracked the same course, so as to
leave the tokens of the heavenly polity most clear to all who desire
them.\]  And if natural relationships are not to be despised, but are
greatly conducive to unbroken union and fellowship, these rights also
exist naturally for you and me.  \[Why is it, then, O venerable among
cities, for through you I address the whole city, that no civil writing
comes from you, no welcome voice, but your ears are open to those who
aim at slander?\]  I am therefore the more bound to groan, the more I
perceive the end they have in view.  There is no doubt as to who is the
originator of the slander. <span id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738.md)  
He is known by many evil deeds, but is best distinguished by this
particular wickedness, and it is for this reason that the sin is made
his name. <span id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739.md)   But you must put
up with my plain speaking.  You have opened both ears to my slanderers. 
You heartily welcome all you hear without any enquiry.  Not one of you
distinguishes between lies and truth.  Who ever suffered for lack of
wicked accusations when struggling all alone?  Who was ever convicted of
lying in the absence of his victim?  What plea does not sound plausible
to the hearers when the reviler persists that such and such is the case,
and the reviled is neither present nor hears what is urged against him? 
Does not even the accepted custom of this world teach you, in reference
to these matters, that if any one is to be a fair and impartial hearer,
he must not be entirely led away by the first speaker, but must wait for
the defence of the accused, that so truth may be demonstrated by a
comparison of the arguments on both sides?  “Judge righteous
judgment.” <span id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740.md)   This precept is
one of those most necessary for salvation.

<span id="ix.ccv-p14"></span>3.  When I say this I am not forgetful of
the words of the Apostle, who fled from human tribunals and reserved the
defence of all his life for the unerring judgment seat, when he said,
“With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you or of
man’s judgment.” <span id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741.md)   Your ears
have been preoccupied by lying slanders, slanders that have touched my
conduct, slanders that have touched my faith in God.  Nevertheless,
knowing, as I do, that three persons at once are injured by the
slanderer, his victim, his hearer, and himself; as to my own wrong, I
would have held my tongue, be sure; not because I despise your good
opinion, (how could I, writing now as I do and earnestly pleading as I
do that I may not lose it?) but <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="ix.ccv-Page_244"></span>because I see that of the three sufferers
the one who is least injured is myself.  It is true that I shall be
robbed of you, but you are being robbed of the truth, and he who is at
the bottom of all this is parting me from you, but he is alienating
himself from the Lord, inasmuch as no one can be brought near to the
Lord by doing what is forbidden.  Rather then for your sakes than for
mine, rather to rescue you from unendurable wrong am I pleading.  For
who could suffer a worse calamity than the loss of the most precious of
all things, the truth?

<span id="ix.ccv-p16"></span>4.  \[What say I, brethren?  Not that I am
a sinless person; not that my life is not full of numberless faults.  I
know myself; and indeed I cease not my tears for my sins, if by any
means I may be able to appease my God, and to escape the punishment
threatened against them.  But this I say:  let him who judges me, hunt
for motes in my eye, if he can say that his own is clear.\]  I own,
brethren, that I need the care of the sound and healthy, and need much
of it.  If he cannot say that it is clear, and the clearer it is the
less will he say so—(for it is the part of the perfect not to exalt
themselves; if they do they will certainly come under the charge of the
pride of the Pharisee, who, while justifying himself, condemned the
publican) let him come with me to the physician; let him not “judge
before the time until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts.” <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742.md)   Let him remember
the words, “Judge not, and ye shall not be judged;” <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743.md) and “Condemn not, and ye shall not
be condemned.” <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744.md)   \[In a word,
brethren, if my offences admit of cure, why does not such an one obey
the teacher of the Churches, “Reprove, exhort, rebuke”? <span
id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745.md)   If, on the other hand, my
iniquity be past cure, why does he not withstand me to the face, and, by
publishing my transgressions, deliver the Churches from the mischief
which I bring on them?\]  Do not put up with the calumny uttered against
me within the teeth. <span id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746.md)   This
is the abuse which any slave-girl from the grindstone might utter; this
is the kind of fine shewing-off you might expect from any street
vagabond; their tongues are whetted for any slander.  But \[there are
bishops; let appeal be made to them.  There is a clergy in each of God’s
dioceses; <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747.md) let the most
eminent be assembled.  Let whoso will, speak freely, that I may have to
deal with a charge, not a slander.\]  Let my secret wickedness be
brought into full view; let me no longer be hated, but admonished as a
brother.  It is more just that we sinners should be pitied by the
blessed and the sinless, than that we should be treated angrily.

<span id="ix.ccv-p23"></span>5.  \[If the fault be a point of faith, let
the document be pointed out to me.  Again, let a fair and impartial
inquiry be appointed.  Let the accusation be read; let it be brought to
the test, whether it does not arise from ignorance in the accuser, not
from blame in the matter of the writing.  For right things often do not
seem such to those who are deficient in accurate judgment.  Equal
weights seem unequal when the arms of the balance are of different
sizes.\]  Men whose sense of taste is destroyed by sickness, sometimes
think honey sour.  A diseased eye does not see many things which do
exist, and notes many things which do not exist.  The same thing
frequently takes place with regard to the force of words, when the
critic is inferior to the writer.  The critic ought really to set out
with much the same training and equipment as the author.  A man ignorant
of agriculture is quite incapable of criticising husbandry, and the
distinctions between harmony and discord can only be adequately judged
by a trained musician.  But any one who chooses will set up for a
literary critic, though he cannot tell us where he went to school, or
how much time was spent in his education, and knows nothing about
letters at all.  I see clearly that, even in the case of the words <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748.md) of the Holy Spirit, the
investigation of the terms is to be attempted not by every one, but by
him who has the spirit of discernment, as the Apostle has taught us, in
the differences of gifts;—“For to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another
faith by the same Spirit; to another the gift of healing by the same
Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to
another discerning of spirits.” <span
id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749.md)   If, therefore, my gifts are
spiritual, he who wishes to judge them must shew proof of his own
possession of the gift of “discerning of spirits.”  If, on the contrary,
as he calumniously contends, my gifts are of the wisdom of this world,
let him shew that he is an adept in this world’s wisdom, and I will
submit myself to his verdict.  And \[let no one suppose that I am making
excuses to <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="ix.ccv-Page_245"></span>evade the charge.  I put it into your hands,
dearest brethren, to investigate for yourselves the points alleged
against me.  Are you so slow of intelligence as to be wholly dependent
upon advocates for the discovery of the truth?  If the points in
question seem to you to be quite plain of themselves, persuade the
jesters to drop the dispute.  \[If there be anything you do not
understand, put questions to me, through appointed persons who will do
justice to me; or ask of me explanations in writing.  And take all kinds
of pains that nothing may be left unsifted.

<span id="ix.ccv-p26"></span>6.  What clearer evidence can there be of
my faith, than that I was brought up by my grandmother, blessed woman,
who came from you?  I mean the celebrated Macrina who taught me the
words of the blessed Gregory; which, as far as memory had preserved down
to her day, she cherished herself, while she fashioned and formed me,
while yet a child, upon the doctrines of piety.  And when I gained the
capacity of thought, my reason being matured by full age, I travelled
over much sea and land, and whomsoever I found walking in the rule of
godliness delivered, those I set down as fathers,\] and made them my
soul’s guides in my journey to God.  And up to this day, by the grace of
Him who has called me in His holy calling to the knowledge of Himself, I
know of no doctrine opposed to the sound teaching having sunk into my
heart; nor was my soul ever polluted by the ill-famed blasphemy of
Arius.  If I have ever received into communion any who have come from
that teacher, hiding their unsoundness deep within them, or speaking
words of piety, or, at any rate, not opposing what has been said by me,
it is on these terms that I have admitted them; and I have not allowed
my judgment concerning them to rest wholly with myself, but have
followed the decisions given about them by our Fathers.  For after
receiving the letter of the very blessed Father Athanasius, bishop of
Alexandria, which I hold in my hand, and shew to any one who asks,
wherein he has distinctly declared that any one expressing a wish to
come over from the heresy of the Arians and accepting the Nicene Creed,
is to be received without hesitation and difficulty, citing in support
of his opinion the unanimous assent of the bishops of Macedonia and of
Asia; I, considering myself bound to follow the high authority of such a
man and of those who made the rule, and with every desire on my own part
to win the reward promised to peacemakers, did enroll in the lists of
communicants all who accepted that creed.

<span id="ix.ccv-p27"></span>7.  \[The fair thing would be to judge of
me, not from one or two who do not walk uprightly in the truth, but from
the multitude of bishops throughout the world, connected with me by the
grace of the Lord.  Make enquiries of Pisidians, Lycaonians, Isaurians,
Phrygians of both provinces, Armenians your neighbours, Macedonians,
Achæans, Illyrians, Gauls, Spaniards, the whole of Italy, Sicilians,
Africans, the healthy part of Egypt, whatever is left of Syria; all of
whom send letters to me, and in turn receive them from me.\]  From these
letters, alike from all which are despatched from them. and from all
which go out from us to them, you may learn that we are all of one mind,
and of one opinion.  \[Whoso shuns communion with me, it cannot escape
your accuracy, cuts himself off from the whole Church.  Look round
about, brethren, with whom do you hold communion?  If you will not
receive it from me, who remains to acknowledge you?  Do not reduce me to
the necessity of counselling anything unpleasant concerning a Church so
dear to me.\]  There are things now which I hide in the bottom of my
heart, in secret groaning over and bewailing the evil days in which we
live, in that the greatest Churches which have long been united to one
another in brotherly love, now, without any reason, are in mutual
opposition.  Do not, oh! do not, drive me to complain of these things to
all who are in communion with me.  Do not force me to give utterance to
words which hitherto I have kept in check by reflection and have hidden
in my heart.  Better were it for me to be removed and the Churches to be
at one, than that God’s people should suffer such evil through our
childish ill-will.  \[Ask your fathers, and they will tell you that
though our districts were divided in position, yet in mind they were
one, and were governed by one sentiment.  Intercourse of the people was
frequent; frequent the visits of the clergy; the pastors, too, had such
mutual affection, that each used the other as teacher and guide in
things pertaining to the Lord.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[243:2733](2080277.htm#fr_2732.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[243:2734](2080277.htm#fr_2733.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p4"></span> Newman introduces his extracts from the
following letter with the prefatory remark:  “If Basil’s Semi-Arian
connexions brought suspicion upon himself in the eyes of Catholic
believers, much more would they be obnoxious to persons attached, as
certain Neocæsareans were, to the Sabellian party, who were in the
opposite extreme to the Semi-Arians and their especial enemies in those
times.  It is not wonderful, then, that he had to write to the church in
question in a strain like the following.”  (*Ch. of the Fathers*. p.
98.)  The passages in brackets are Newman’s version.  The prime agent in
the slandering of Basil was presumably Atarbius, bishop of Neocæsarea.

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[243:2735](2080277.htm#fr_2734.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p6"></span> [John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[243:2736](2080277.htm#fr_2735.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p7"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[243:2737](2080277.htm#fr_2736.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[243:2738](2080277.htm#fr_2737.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p9"></span> The allusion may be to [Mark xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#023.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p9.1"></span>, but
St. Paul would probably reply to Basil that each of the points
enumerated might proceed not from love, but from vanity, ambition, or
fanaticism.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[243:2739](2080277.htm#fr_2738.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p11.1"></span>τῆς διαβολῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[243:2740](2080277.htm#fr_2739.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p12"></span> *i.e.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p12.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p12.2"></span>διαβολος</span>.  The little paronomasia is
untranslatable.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[243:2741](2080277.htm#fr_2740.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p13"></span> [John vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[243:2742](2080277.htm#fr_2741.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[244:2743](2080277.htm#fr_2742.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p17"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[244:2744](2080277.htm#fr_2743.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p18"></span> [Matt. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[244:2745](2080277.htm#fr_2744.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p19"></span> [Luke vi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[244:2746](2080277.htm#fr_2745.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p20"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[244:2747](2080277.htm#fr_2746.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p21.1"></span>υπ᾽ ὀδόντα</span>.  Ben. Lat., *intra dentes*.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[244:2748](2080277.htm#fr_2747.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p22"></span> The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p22.1"></span>παροικία</span> which is used both for what is
meant by the modern “diocese” and by the modern “parish.”  Of the sense
of diocese instances are quoted among others in *D.C.A. s.v.* “Parish,”
from Iren. ad Florin. *apud Euseb. H.E.* v. 20; and Alexand. Alexandrin.
*Ep. apud Theodoret, H.E.* i. 3.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[244:2749](2080277.htm#fr_2748.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p24.1"></span>τοῖς λόγοις πνεύματος ἁγίου</span>, the reading
of the <span class="c14"><span id="ix.ccv-p24.2"></span>mss.</span> Bas.
Sec. and Paris.  The commoner reading is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccv-p24.3"></span>λογίοις</span>.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[244:2750](2080277.htm#fr_2749.md) <span
id="ix.ccv-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ccv-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ccv-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Elpidius the bishop.](2080278.md)
