[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080043)  [Next](2080045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>Objection that some were baptized unto Moses
and believed in him, and an answer to it; with remarks upon types.

<span id="vii.xv-p3"></span>31.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xv-p3.1"></span>But</span> even if some are baptized unto the
Spirit, it is not, it is urged, on this account right for the Spirit to
be ranked with God.  Some “were baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in
the sea.” <span id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970)   And it is admitted
that faith even before now has been put in men; for “The people believed
God and his servant Moses.” <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971)  
Why then, it is asked, do we, on account of faith and of baptism, exalt
and magnify the Holy Spirit so far above creation, when there is
evidence that the same things have before now been said of men?  What,
then, shall we reply?  Our answer is that the faith in the Spirit is the
same as the faith in the Father and the Son; and in like manner, too,
the baptism.  But the faith in Moses and in the cloud is, as it were, in
a shadow and type.  The nature of the divine is very frequently
represented by the rough and shadowy outlines <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) of the types; but because divine
things are prefigured by small and human things, it is obvious that we
must not therefore conclude the divine nature to be small.  The type is
an exhibition of things expected, and gives an imitative anticipation of
the future.  So Adam was a type of “Him that was to come.” <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973)   Typically, “That rock was
Christ;” <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) and the water a type of
the living power of the word; as He says, “If any <span id="page_20">p.
20</span> <span id="vii.xv-Page_20"></span>man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink.” <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975)   The manna is a
type of the living bread that came down from heaven; <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) and the serpent on the standard, <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) of the passion of salvation
accomplished by means of the cross, wherefore they who even looked
thereon were preserved.  So in like manner, the history of the exodus of
Israel is recorded to shew forth those who are being saved through
baptism.  For the firstborn of the Israelites were preserved, like the
bodies of the baptized, by the giving of grace to them that were marked
with blood.  For the blood of the sheep is a type of the blood of
Christ; and the firstborn, a type of the first-formed.  And inasmuch as
the first-formed of necessity exists in us, and, in sequence of
succession, is transmitted till the end, it follows that “in Adam” we
“all die,” <span id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) and that “death
reigned” <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) until the fulfilling of
the law and the coming of Christ.  And the firstborn were preserved by
God from being touched by the destroyer, to show that we who were made
alive in Christ no longer die in Adam.  The sea and the cloud for the
time being led on through amazement to faith, but for the time to come
they typically prefigured the grace to be.  “Who is wise and he shall
understand these things?” <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) —how
the sea is typically a baptism bringing about the departure of Pharaoh,
in like manner as this washing causes the departure of the tyranny of
the devil.  The sea slew the enemy in itself:  and in baptism too dies
our enmity towards God.  From the sea the people came out unharmed:  we
too, as it were, alive from the dead, step up from the water “saved” by
the “grace” of Him who called us. <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981)   And the cloud is a shadow of the
gift of the Spirit, who cools the flame of our passions by the
“mortification” of our “members.” <span
id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982)

<span id="vii.xv-p17"></span>32.  What then?  Because they were
typically baptized unto Moses, is the grace of baptism therefore small? 
Were it so, and if we were in each case to prejudice the dignity of our
privileges by comparing them with their types, not even one of these
privileges could be reckoned great; then not the love of God, who gave
His only begotten Son for our sins, would be great and extraordinary,
because Abraham did not spare his own son; <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) then even the passion of the Lord
would not be glorious, because a sheep typified the offering instead of
Isaac; then the descent into hell was not fearful, because Jonah had
previously typified the death in three days and three nights.  The same
prejudicial comparison is made also in the case of baptism by all who
judge of the reality by the shadow, and, comparing the typified with the
type, attempt by means of Moses and the sea to disparage at once the
whole dispensation of the Gospel.  What remission of sins, what renewal
of life, is there in the sea?  What spiritual gift is there through
Moses?  What dying <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) of sins is
there?  Those men did not die with Christ; wherefore they were not
raised with Him. <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985)   They did not
“bear the image of the heavenly;” <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) they did “bear about in the body the
dying of Jesus;” <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) they did not
“put off the old man;” they did not “put on the new man which is renewed
in knowledge after the image of Him which created him.” <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)   Why then do you compare baptisms
which have only the name in common, while the distinction between the
things themselves is as great as might be that of dream and reality,
that of shadow and figures with substantial existence?

<span id="vii.xv-p24"></span>33.  But belief in Moses not only does not
show our belief in the Spirit to be worthless, but, if we adopt our
opponents’ line of argument, it rather weakens our confession in the God
of the universe.  “The people,” it is written, “believed the Lord and
his servant Moses.” <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989)   Moses then
is joined with God, not with the Spirit; and he was a type not of the
Spirit, but of Christ.  For at that time in the ministry of the law, he
by means of himself typified “the Mediator between God and men.” <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990)   Moses, when mediating for the people
in things pertaining to God, was not a minister of the Spirit; for the
law was given, “ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator,” <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) namely Moses, in accordance with the
summons of the people, “Speak thou with us,…but let not God speak with
us.” <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992)   Thus faith in Moses is
referred to the Lord, the Mediator between God and men, who said, “Had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me.” <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993)   Is then our faith in the Lord a
trifle, because it was signified beforehand through Moses?  So then,
even if men were baptized unto Moses, it does not follow that the grace
given of the Spirit in baptism is small.  I may point out, too, that it
is usual in Scripture to say Moses and the law, <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) as in the passage, “They have Moses
and the prophets.” <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995)   When
therefore it is meant to speak of the baptism of the law, <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="vii.xv-Page_21"></span>the words
are, “They were baptized unto Moses.” <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996)   Why then do these calumniators of
the truth, by means of the shadow and the types, endeavour to bring
contempt and ridicule on the “rejoicing” of our “hope,” <span
id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) and the rich gift of our God and
Saviour, who through regeneration renews our youth like the
eagle’s? <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998)   Surely it is
altogether childish, and like a babe who must needs be fed on
milk, <span id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) to be ignorant of the
great mystery of our salvation; inasmuch as, in accordance with the
gradual progress of our education, while being brought to perfection in
our training for godliness, <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000)
we were first taught elementary and easier lessons, suited to our
intelligence, while the Dispenser of our lots was ever leading us up, by
gradually accustoming us, like eyes brought up in the dark, to the great
light of truth.  For He spares our weakness, and in the depth of the
riches <span id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001) of His wisdom, and the
inscrutable judgments of His intelligence, used this gentle treatment,
fitted for our needs, gradually accustoming us to see first the shadows
of objects, and to look at the sun in water, to save us from dashing
against the spectacle of pure unadulterated light, and being blinded. 
Just so the Law, having a shadow of things to come, and the typical
teaching of the prophets, which is a dark utterance of the truth, have
been devised means to train the eyes of the heart, in that hence the
transition to the wisdom hidden in mystery <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) will be made easy.  Enough so far
concerning types; nor indeed would it be possible to linger longer on
this topic, or the incidental discussion would become many times bulkier
than the main argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_970"></span>[19:971](2080044.htm#fr_970) <span
id="vii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p4"></span> [1 Cor. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span id="vii.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[19:972](2080044.htm#fr_971) <span
id="vii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p5"></span> [Ex. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span id="vii.xv-p5.1"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[19:973](2080044.htm#fr_972) <span
id="vii.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p6.1"></span>σκιαγραφία</span>, or shade-painting, is
illusory scene-painting.  Plato (*Crit.* 107 c.) calls it “indistinct
and deceptive.”  *cf*. Ar. *Eth. Nic*. i. 3, 4, “<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xv-p6.2"></span>παχυλῶς καὶ ἐν
τύπῳ</span>.”  The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p6.3"></span>τύπος</span> gives the general design, not an
exact anticipation.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[19:974](2080044.htm#fr_973) <span
id="vii.xv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p7"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="vii.xv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[19:975](2080044.htm#fr_974) <span
id="vii.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p8"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="vii.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[20:976](2080044.htm#fr_975) <span
id="vii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p9"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="vii.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[20:977](2080044.htm#fr_976) <span
id="vii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p10"></span> [John
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="vii.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[20:978](2080044.htm#fr_977) <span
id="vii.xv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p11.1"></span>σημεῖον</span>, as in the LXX. *cf*. [Num.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009), [John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span id="vii.xv-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[20:979](2080044.htm#fr_978) <span
id="vii.xv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="vii.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[20:980](2080044.htm#fr_979) <span
id="vii.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p13"></span> [Rom. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span id="vii.xv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[20:981](2080044.htm#fr_980) <span
id="vii.xv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p14"></span> [Hos. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)<span id="vii.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[20:982](2080044.htm#fr_981) <span
id="vii.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p15"></span> [Eph. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005)<span id="vii.xv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[20:983](2080044.htm#fr_982) <span
id="vii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p16"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[20:984](2080044.htm#fr_983) <span
id="vii.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p18"></span> *cf*. [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="vii.xv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[20:985](2080044.htm#fr_984) <span
id="vii.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xv-p19.1"></span>νέκρωσις</span>.  A.V. in [2 Cor. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span id="vii.xv-p19.2"></span>,
“dying,” [Rom. iv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xv-p19.3"></span>, “deadness.”

<span id="fn_985"></span>[20:986](2080044.htm#fr_985) <span
id="vii.xv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p20"></span> *cf*. [Rom. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)<span id="vii.xv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[20:987](2080044.htm#fr_986) <span
id="vii.xv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049)<span id="vii.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[20:988](2080044.htm#fr_987) <span
id="vii.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p22"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span id="vii.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[20:989](2080044.htm#fr_988) <span
id="vii.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p23"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="vii.xv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[20:990](2080044.htm#fr_989) <span
id="vii.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p25"></span> [Ex. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span id="vii.xv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[20:991](2080044.htm#fr_990) <span
id="vii.xv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p26"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="vii.xv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[20:992](2080044.htm#fr_991) <span
id="vii.xv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p27"></span> [Gal. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[20:993](2080044.htm#fr_992) <span
id="vii.xv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p28"></span> [Ex. xx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019)<span id="vii.xv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[20:994](2080044.htm#fr_993) <span
id="vii.xv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p29"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="vii.xv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[20:995](2080044.htm#fr_994) <span
id="vii.xv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p30"></span> *i.e*., to mean by “Moses,” the law.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[20:996](2080044.htm#fr_995) <span
id="vii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p31"></span> [Luke xvi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#029)<span id="vii.xv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[21:997](2080044.htm#fr_996) <span
id="vii.xv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p32"></span> [1 Cor. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span id="vii.xv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[21:998](2080044.htm#fr_997) <span
id="vii.xv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p33"></span> [Heb. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006)<span id="vii.xv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[21:999](2080044.htm#fr_998) <span
id="vii.xv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p34"></span> *cf*. [Ps. ciii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[21:1000](2080044.htm#fr_999) <span
id="vii.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p35"></span> *cf*. [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="vii.xv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[21:1001](2080044.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="vii.xv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p36"></span> *cf*. [1 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007)<span id="vii.xv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[21:1002](2080044.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="vii.xv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p37"></span> [Rom. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="vii.xv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[21:1003](2080044.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="vii.xv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p38"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="vii.xv-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reply to the suggested objection that we are baptized “into
water.”  Also concerning baptism.](2080045)
