[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080063)  [Next](2080065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>*“The Earth was Invisible and
Unfinished*.” <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>In</span> the few words which have occupied us
this morning we have found such a depth of thought that we despair of
penetrating further.  If such is the fore court of the sanctuary, if the
portico of the temple is so grand and magnificent, if the splendour of
its beauty thus dazzles the eyes of the soul, what will be the holy of
holies?  Who will dare to try to gain access to the innermost shrine? 
Who will look into its secrets?  To gaze into it is indeed forbidden us,
and language is powerless to express what the mind conceives.  However,
since there are rewards, and most desirable ones, reserved by the just
Judge for the intention alone of doing good, do not let us hesitate to
continue our researches.  Although we may not attain to the truth, if,
with the help of the <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_59"></span>Spirit, we do not fall away from the
meaning of Holy Scripture we shall not deserve to be rejected, and, with
the help of grace, we shall contribute to the edification of the Church
of God.

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>“The earth,” says Holy Scripture, “was
invisible and unfinished.”  The heavens and the earth were created
without distinction.  How then is it that the heavens are perfect whilst
the earth is still unformed and incomplete?  In one word, what was the
unfinished condition of the earth?  And for what reason was it
invisible?  The fertility of the earth is its perfect finishing; growth
of all kinds of plants, the upspringing of tall trees, both productive
and sterile, flowers’ sweet scents and fair colours, and all that which,
a little later, at the voice of God came forth from the earth to
beautify her, their universal Mother.  As nothing of all this yet
existed, Scripture is right in calling the earth “without form.”  We
could also say of the heavens that they were still imperfect and had not
received their natural adornment, since at that time they did not shine
with the glory of the sun and of the moon and were not crowned by the
choirs of the stars. <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412.md)   These
bodies were not yet created.  Thus you will not diverge from the truth
in saying that the heavens also were “without form.”  The earth was
invisible for two reasons:  it may be because man, the spectator, did
not yet exist, or because being submerged under the waters which
over-flowed the surface, it could not be seen, since the waters had not
yet been gathered together into their own places, where God afterwards
collected them, and gave them the name of seas.  What is invisible? 
First of all that which our fleshly eye cannot perceive; our mind, for
example; then that which, visible in its nature, is hidden by some body
which conceals it, like iron in the depths of the earth.  It is in this
sense, because it was hidden under the waters, that the earth was still
invisible.  However, as light did not yet exist, and as the earth lay in
darkness, because of the obscurity of the air above it, it should not
astonish us that for this reason Scripture calls it “invisible.”

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>2.  But the corrupters of the truth, who,
incapable of submitting their reason to Holy Scripture, distort at will
the meaning of the Holy Scriptures, pretend that these words mean
matter.  For it is matter, they say, which from its nature is without
form and invisible,—being by the conditions of its existence without
quality and without form and figure. <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413.md)   The Artificer submitting it to
the working of His wisdom clothed it with a form, organized it, and thus
gave being to the visible world.

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>If matter is uncreated, it has a claim to
the same honours as God, since it must be of equal rank with Him.  Is
this not the summit of wickedness, that an extreme deformity, without
quality, without form, shape, ugliness without configuration, to use
their own expression, should enjoy the same prerogatives with Him, Who
is wisdom, power and beauty itself, the Creator and the Demiurge of the
universe?  This is not all.  If matter is so great as to be capable of
being acted on by the whole wisdom of God, it would in a way raise its
hypostasis to an equality with the inaccessible power of God, since it
would be able to measure by itself all the extent of the divine
intelligence.  If it is insufficient for the operations of God, then we
fall into a more absurd blasphemy, since we condemn God for not being
able, on account of the want of matter, to finish His own works.  The
poverty of human nature has deceived these reasoners.  Each of our
crafts is exercised upon some special matter—the art of the smith upon
iron, that of the carpenter on wood.  In all, there is the subject, the
form and the work which results from the form.  Matter is taken from
without—art gives the form—and the work is composed at the same time of
form and of matter. <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>Such is the idea that they make for
themselves of the divine work.  The form of the world is due to the
wisdom of the supreme Artificer; matter came to the Creator from
without; and thus the world results from a double origin.  It has
received from outside its matter and its essence, and from God its form
and figure. <span id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415.md)   They thus come
to deny that the mighty God has presided at the formation of the
universe, and pretend that He has only brought a crowning contribution
to a common work, that He has only contributed some small portion to the
genesis of beings:  they are incapable from the debase<span
id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_60"></span>ment of
their reasonings of raising their glances to the height of truth.  Here
below arts are subsequent to matter—introduced into life by the
indispensable need of them.  Wool existed before weaving made it supply
one of nature’s imperfections.  Wood existed before carpentering took
possession of it, and transformed it each day to supply new wants, and
made us see all the advantages derived from it, giving the oar to the
sailor, the winnowing fan to the labourer, the lance to the soldier. 
But God, before all those things which now attract our notice existed,
after casting about in His mind and determining to bring into being time
which had no being, imagined the world such as it ought to be, and
created matter in harmony with the form which He wished to give
it. <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416.md)   He assigned to the
heavens the nature adapted for the heavens, and gave to the earth an
essence in accordance with its form.  He formed, as He wished, fire, air
and water, and gave to each the essence which the object of its
existence required.  Finally, He welded all the diverse parts of the
universe by links of indissoluble attachment and established between
them so perfect a fellowship and harmony that the most distant, in spite
of their distance, appeared united in one universal sympathy.  Let those
men therefore renounce their fabulous imaginations, who, in spite of the
weakness of their argument, pretend to measure a power as
incomprehensible to man’s reason as it is unutterable by man’s voice.

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span>3.  God created the heavens and the
earth, but not only half;—He created all the heavens and all the earth,
creating the essence with the form.  For He is not an inventor of
figures, but the Creator even of the essence of beings.  Further let
them tell us how the efficient power of God could deal with the passive
nature of matter, the latter furnishing the matter without form, the
former possessing the science of the form without matter, both being in
need of each other; the Creator in order to display His art, matter in
order to cease to be without form and to receive a form. <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417.md)   But let us stop here and return
to our subject.

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span>“*The earth was invisible and
unfinished*.”  In saying “In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth,” the sacred writer passed over many things in silence, water,
air, fire and the results from them, which, all forming in reality the
true complement of the world, were, without doubt, made at the same time
as the universe.  By this silence, history wishes to train the activity
or our intelligence, giving it a weak point for starting, to impel it to
the discovery of the truth.  Thus, we are not told of the creation of
water; but, as we are told that the earth was invisible, ask yourself
what could have covered it, and prevented it from being seen?  Fire
could not conceal it.  Fire brightens all about it, and spreads light
rather than darkness around.  No more was it air that enveloped the
earth.  Air by nature is of little density and transparent.  It receives
all kinds of visible object, and transmits them to the spectators.  Only
one supposition remains; that which floated on the surface of the earth
was water—the fluid essence which had not yet been confined to its own
place.  Thus the earth was not only invisible; it was still incomplete. 
Even today excessive damp is a hindrance to the productiveness of the
earth.  The same cause at the same time prevents it from being seen, and
from being complete, for the proper and natural adornment of the earth
is its completion:  corn waving in the valleys—meadows green with grass
and rich with many coloured flowers—fertile glades and hill-tops shaded
by forests.  Of all this nothing was yet produced; the earth was in
travail with it in virtue of the power that she had received from the
Creator.  But she was waiting for the appointed time and the divine
order to bring forth.

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>4.  “Darkness was upon the face of the
deep.” <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418.md)   A new source for
fables and most impious imaginations if one distorts the sense of these
words at the will of one’s fancies.  By “darkness” these wicked men do
not understand what is meant in reality—air not illumined, the shadow
produced by the inter<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_61"></span>position of a body, or finally a place for
some reason deprived of light.  For them “darkness” is an evil power, or
rather the personification of evil, having his origin in himself in
opposition to, and in perpetual struggle with, the goodness of God.  If
God is light, they say, without any doubt the power which struggles
against Him must be darkness, “Darkness” not owing its existence to a
foreign origin, but an evil existing by itself.  “Darkness” is the enemy
of souls, the primary cause of death, the adversary of virtue.  The
words of the Prophet, they say in their error, show that it exists and
that it does not proceed from God.  From this what perverse and impious
dogmas have been imagined!  What grievous wolves, <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419.md) tearing the flock of the Lord, have
sprung from these words to cast themselves upon souls!  Is it not from
hence that have come forth Marcions and Valentini, <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420.md) and the detestable heresy of the
Manicheans, <span id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421.md) which you may
without going far wrong call the putrid humour of the churches.

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span>O man, why wander thus from the truth,
and imagine for thyself that which will cause thy perdition?  The word
is simple and within the comprehension of all.  “The earth was
invisible.”  Why?  Because the “deep” was spread over its surface.  What
is “the deep”?  A mass of water of extreme depth.  But we know that we
can see many bodies through clear and transparent water.  How then was
it that no part of the earth appeared through the water?  Because the
air which surrounded it was still without light and in darkness.  The
rays of the sun, penetrating the water, often allow us to see the
pebbles which form the bed of the river, but in a dark night it is
impossible for our glance to penetrate under the water.  Thus, these
words “the earth was invisible” are explained by those that follow; “the
deep” covered it and itself was in darkness.  Thus, the deep is not a
multitude of hostile powers, as has been imagined; <span
id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422.md) nor “darkness” an evil sovereign
force in enmity with good.  In reality two rival principles of equal
power, if engaged without ceasing in a war of mutual attacks, will end
in self destruction.  But if one should gain the mastery it would
completely annihilate the conquered.  Thus, to maintain the balance in
the struggle between good and evil is to represent them as engaged in a
war without end and in perpetual destruction, where the opponents are at
the same time conquerors and conquered.  If good is the stronger, what
is there to prevent evil being completely annihilated?  But if that be
the case, the very utterance of which is impious, I ask myself how it is
that they themselves are not filled with horror to think that they have
imagined such abominable blasphemies.

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span>It is equally impious to say that evil
has its origin from God; <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423.md)
because the contrary cannot proceed from its contrary.  Life does not
engender death; darkness is not the origin of light; sickness is not the
maker of health. <span id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424.md)   In the
changes of conditions there are transitions from one condition to the
contrary; but in genesis each being proceeds from its like, and not from
its contrary.  If then evil is neither uncreate nor created by God, from
whence comes its nature?  Certainly that evil exists, no one living in
the world will deny.  What shall we say then?  Evil is not a living
animated essence; it is the condition of the soul opposed to virtue,
developed in the careless on account of their falling away from
good. <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span>5.  Do not then go beyond yourself to
seek for evil, and imagine that there is an original nature of
wickedness.  Each of us, <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="viii.iii-Page_62"></span>let us acknowledge it, is the first author
of his own vice.  Among the ordinary events of life, some come
naturally, like old age and sickness, others by chance like unforeseen
occurrences, of which the origin is beyond ourselves, often sad,
sometimes fortunate, as for instance the discovery of a treasure when
digging a well, or the meeting of a mad dog when going to the market
place.  Others depend upon ourselves, such as ruling one’s passions, or
not putting a bridle on one’s pleasures, to be master of our anger, or
to raise the hand against him who irritates us, to tell the truth, or to
lie, to have a sweet and well-regulated disposition, or to be fierce and
swollen and exalted with pride. <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426.md)   Here you are the master of your
actions.  Do not look for the guiding cause beyond yourself, but
recognise that evil, rightly so called, has no other origin than our
voluntary falls.  If it were involuntary, and did not depend upon
ourselves, the laws would not have so much terror for the guilty, and
the tribunals would not be so without pity when they condemn wretches
according to the measure of their crimes.  But enough concerning evil
rightly so called.  Sickness, poverty, obscurity, death, finally all
human afflictions, ought not to be ranked as evils; since we do not
count among the greatest boons things which are their opposites. <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427.md)   Among these afflictions, some are
the effect of nature, others have obviously been for many a source of
advantage.  Let us then be silent for the moment about these metaphors
and allegories, and, simply following without vain curiosity the words
of Holy Scripture, let us take from darkness the idea which it gives us.

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span>But reason asks, was darkness created
with the world?  Is it older than light?  Why in spite of its
inferiority has it preceded it?  Darkness, we reply, did not exist in
essence; it is a condition produced in the air by the withdrawal of
light.  What then is that light which disappeared suddenly from the
world, so that darkness should cover the face of the deep?  If anything
had existed before the formation of this sensible and perishable world,
no doubt we conclude it would have been in light.  The orders of angels,
the heavenly hosts, all intellectual natures named or unnamed, all the
ministering spirits, <span id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428.md) did not
live in darkness, but enjoyed a condition fitted for them in light and
spiritual joy. <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span>No one will contradict this; least of all
he who looks for celestial light as one of the rewards promised to
virtue, the light which, as Solomon says, is always a light to the
righteous, <span id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430.md) the light which
made the Apostle say “Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.” <span
id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431.md)   Finally, if the condemned are
sent into outer darkness <span id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432.md)
evidently those who are made worthy of God’s approval, are at rest in
heavenly light.  When then, according to the order of God, the heaven
appeared, enveloping all that its circumference included, a vast and
unbroken body separating outer things from those which it enclosed, it
necessarily kept the space inside in darkness for want of communication
with the outer light.  Three things are, indeed, needed to form a
shadow, light, a body, a dark place.  The shadow of heaven forms the
darkness of the world.  Understand, I pray you, what I mean, by a simple
example; by raising for yourself at mid-day a tent of some compact and
impenetrable material, and shutting yourself up in it in sudden
darkness.  Suppose that original darkness was like this, not subsisting
directly by itself, but resulting from some external causes.  If it is
said that it rested upon the deep, it is because the extremity of air
naturally touches the surface of bodies; and as at that time the water
covered everything, we are obliged to say that darkness was upon the
face of the deep.

<span id="viii.iii-p41"></span>6.  *And the Spirit of God was borne upon
the face of the waters*. <span id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433.md)  
Does this spirit mean the diffusion of air?  The sacred writer wishes to
enumerate to you the elements of the world, to tell you that God created
the heavens, the earth, water, and air and that the last was now
diffused and in motion; or rather, that which is truer and confirmed by
the authority of the ancients, by the Spirit of God, he means the Holy
Spirit.  It is, as has been remarked, the special name, the name above
all others that Scripture delights to give to the Holy Spirit, and
always by the spirit of God the Holy Spirit is meant, <span
id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_63"></span>the Spirit
which completes the divine and blessed Trinity.  You will find it better
therefore to take it in this sense.  How then did the Spirit of God move
upon the waters?  The explanation that I am about to give you is not an
original one, but that of a Syrian, <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434.md) who was as ignorant in the wisdom
of this world as he was versed in the knowledge of the Truth.  He said,
then, that the Syriac word was more expressive, and that being more
analogous to the Hebrew term it was a nearer approach to the scriptural
sense.  This is the meaning of the word; by “was borne” the Syrians, he
says, understand:  it cherished <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435.md) the nature of the waters as one
sees a bird cover the eggs with her body and impart to them vital force
from her own warmth.  Such is, as nearly as possible, the meaning of
these words—the Spirit was borne:  let us understand, that is, prepared
the nature of water to produce living beings: <span
id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436.md)   a sufficient proof for those who
ask if the Holy Spirit took an active part in the creation of the world.

<span id="viii.iii-p58"></span>7.  *And God said, Let there be
light*. <span id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437.md)   The first word of
God created the nature of light; it made darkness vanish, dispelled
gloom, illuminated the world, and gave to all beings at the same time a
sweet and gracious aspect.  The heavens, until then enveloped in
darkness, appeared with that beauty which they still present to our
eyes.  The air was lighted up, or rather made the light circulate mixed
with its substance, and, distributing its splendour rapidly in every
direction, so dispersed itself to its extreme limits.  Up it sprang to
the very æther and heaven.  In an instant it lighted up the whole extent
of the world, the North and the South, the East and the West.  For the
æther also is such a subtle substance and so transparent that it needs
not the space of a moment for light to pass through it.  Just as it
carries our sight instantaneously to the object of vision, <span
id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438.md) so without the least interval, with
a rapidity that thought cannot conceive, it receives these rays of light
in its uttermost limits.  With light the æther becomes more pleasing and
the waters more limpid.  These last, not content with receiving its
splendour, return it by the reflection of light and in all directions
send forth quivering flashes.  The divine word gives every object a more
cheerful and a more attractive appearance, just as when men in deep sea
pour in oil they make the place about them clear.  So, with a single
word and in one instant, the Creator of all things gave the boon of
light to the world. <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p62"></span>*Let there be light*.  The order was
itself an operation, and a state of things was brought into being, than
which man’s mind cannot even imagine a pleasanter one for our
enjoyment.  It must be well understood that when we speak of the voice,
of the word, of the command of God, this divine language does not mean
to us a sound which escapes from the organs of speech, a collision of
air <span id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440.md) struck by the tongue; it
is a simple sign of the will of God, and, if we give it the form of an
order, it is only the better to impress the souls whom we
instruct. <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p65"></span>*And God saw the light, that it was
good*. <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442.md)   How can we worthily
praise light after the testimony given by the Creator to its goodness? 
The word, even among us, refers the judgment to the eyes, incapable of
raising itself to the idea that the senses have already received. <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443.md)   But, if beauty in bodies results
from symmetry of parts, and the harmonious <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_64"></span>appearance of colours, how
in a simple and homogeneous essence like light, can this idea of beauty
be preserved?  Would not the symmetry in light be less shown in its
parts than in the pleasure and delight at the sight of it?  Such is also
the beauty of gold, which it owes not to the happy mingling of its
parts, but only to its beautiful colour which has a charm attractive to
the eyes.

<span id="viii.iii-p68"></span>Thus again, the evening star is the most
beautiful of the stars: <span id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444.md)   not
that the parts of which it is composed form a harmonious whole; but
thanks to the unalloyed and beautiful brightness which meets our eyes. 
And further, when God proclaimed the goodness of light, it was not in
regard to the charm of the eye but as a provision for future advantage,
because at that time there were as yet no eyes to judge of its beauty. 
“*And God divided the light from the darkness*;” <span
id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445.md) that is to say, God gave them
natures incapable of mixing, perpetually in opposition to each other,
and put between them the widest space and distance.

<span id="viii.iii-p76"></span>8.  “*And God called the light Day and
the darkness he called Night*.” <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446.md)   Since the birth of the sun, the
light that it diffuses in the air, when shining on our hemisphere, is
day; and the shadow produced by its disappearance is night.  But at that
time it was not after the movement of the sun, but following this
primitive light spread abroad in the air or withdrawn in a measure
determined by God, that day came and was followed by night.

<span id="viii.iii-p78"></span>“*And the evening and the morning were
the first day*.” <span id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447.md)   Evening is
then the boundary common to day and night; and in the same way morning
constitutes the approach of night to day.  It was to give day the
privileges of seniority that Scripture put the end of the first day
before that of the first night, because night follows day:  for, before
the creation of light, the world was not in night, but in darkness.  It
is the opposite of day which was called night, and it did not receive
its name until after day.  Thus were created the evening and the
morning. <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448.md)   Scripture means
the space of a day and a night, and afterwards no more says day and
night, but calls them both under the name of the more important:  a
custom which you will find throughout Scripture.  Everywhere the measure
of time is counted by days, without mention of nights.  “The days of our
years,” <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449.md) says the Psalmist. 
“Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been,” <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450.md) said Jacob, and elsewhere “all the
days of my life.” <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451.md)   Thus
under the form of history the law is laid down for what is to follow. 
And the evening and the morning were one day. <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452.md)   Why does Scripture say “one day
the first day”?  Before speaking to us of the second, the third, and the
fourth days, would it not have been more natural to call that one the
first which began the series?  If it therefore says “one day,” it is
from a wish to determine the measure of day and night, and to combine
the time that they contain.  Now twenty-four hours fill up the space of
one day—we mean of a day and of a night; and if, at the time of the
solstices, they have not both an equal length, the time marked by
Scripture does not the less circumscribe their duration.  It is as
though it said:  twenty-four hours measure the space of a day, or that,
in reality a day is the time that the heavens starting from one point
take to return there.  Thus, every time that, in the revolution of the
sun, evening and morning occupy the world, their periodical succession
never exceeds the space of one day.  But must we believe in a mysterious
reason for this?  God who made the nature of time measured it out and
determined it by intervals of days; and, wishing to give it a week as a
measure, he ordered the week to revolve from period to period upon
itself, to count the movement of time, forming the week of one day
revolving seven times upon itself:  a proper circle begins and ends with
itself.  Such is also the character of eternity, to revolve upon itself
and to end nowhere.  If then the beginning of time is called “one day”
rather than “the first day,” it is because Scripture wishes to establish
its relationship with eternity.  It was, in reality, fit and natural to
call “one” the day whose character is to be one wholly separated and
isolated from all the others.  If Scripture speaks to us of many ages,
saying everywhere, “age of age, and ages of ages,” we do not see it
enumerate them as first, second, and third.  It follows that we are
hereby shown not so much limits, ends and succession of ages, as
distinctions between various states and modes of action.  “The day of
the Lord,” Scripture says, “is great and very terrible,” <span
id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453.md) and elsewhere “Woe unto you <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="viii.iii-Page_65"></span>that desire
the day of the Lord:  to what end is it for you?  The day of the Lord is
darkness and not light.” <span id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454.md)   A
day of darkness for those who are worthy of darkness.  No; this day
without evening, without succession and without end is not unknown to
Scripture, and it is the day that the Psalmist calls the eighth day,
because it is outside this time of weeks. <span
id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455.md)   Thus whether you call it day, or
whether you call it eternity, you express the same idea.  Give this
state the name of day; there are not several, but only one.  If you call
it eternity still it is unique and not manifold.  Thus it is in order
that you may carry your thoughts forward towards a future life, that
Scripture marks by the word “one” the day which is the type of eternity,
the first fruits of days, the contemporary of light, the holy Lord’s day
honoured by the Resurrection of our Lord.  *And the evening and the
morning were one day*.”

<span id="viii.iii-p88"></span>But, whilst I am conversing with you
about the first evening of the world, evening takes me by surprise, and
puts an end to my discourse.  May the Father of the true light, Who has
adorned day with celestial light, Who has made the fire to shine which
illuminates us during the night, Who reserves for us in the peace of a
future age a spiritual and everlasting light, enlighten your hearts in
the knowledge of truth, keep you from stumbling, and grant that “you may
walk honestly as in the day.” <span id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456.md)
  Thus shall you shine as the sun in the midst of the glory of the
saints, and I shall glory in you in the day of Christ, to Whom belong
all glory and power for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[58:1412](2080064.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span id="viii.iii-p3.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[59:1413](2080064.htm#fr_1412.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span> *cf*. Hom., *Il*. xviii. 485, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p6.2"></span>ν δὲ τὰ τείρεα πάντα τά τ᾽
οὐρανὸς ἐστεφάνωται</span>, and Tennyson’s “When young night divine
crowned dying day with stars.” (*Palace of Art.*)

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[59:1414](2080064.htm#fr_1413.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span> On prime matter and its being <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.2"></span>σωματος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.3"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.4"></span>μορφος</span> *vide*
Cudworth, *Int. Syst*. v. ii. § 27, and Mosheim’s note.  “*Ingens vero
quondam summorum et inclytorum virorum numerus ab eorum semper stetit
partibus, quibus ex qua dixi ratione, materiam placuit decernere*  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.6"></span>σώματον</span> *<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p8.7"></span>εσσε, σίε χορπορε χαρερε
Χιχερο ομνεσ ποστ Πλατονεμ πηιλοσοπηοσ ηοχ δογμα περηιβετ τενυισσε,
Αχαδ. Θυͅστ. ι. 7, ‘σεδ συβ̓εχταμ πυταντ ομνιβυσ σινε υλλα σπεχιε, ατθυε
χαρεντεμ ομνι ιλλα θυαλιτατε ματεριαμ θυανδαμ εξ θυα ομνια εξπρεσσα
ατθυε εφφεχτα σιντ.’  Σεδ ̓αμ διυ αντε Πλατονεμ Πψτηαγορͅορυμ μυλτι ει
αδδιχτι φυερυντ, θυοδ εξ</span>*Timæi Locri*, nobilis hujus scholæ et
perantiqui philosophi, De Anima Mundi libello (Cap. i. p. 544, Ed.
Galei) intelligitur:*  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p8.8"></span>τὰν ὕλαν ἄμορφον δὲ καθ' αὐτὰν καὶ
ἀχρημάτιστον δεχόμενον δὲ πᾶσαν μορφάν</span>.”

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[59:1415](2080064.htm#fr_1414.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span> *cf*. Arist., *Met*. vi. 7, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>πάντα δὲ τὰ γιγνόμενα ὑπό
τέ τινος γίγνεται, καὶ ἔκ τινος, καὶ τί</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p10.3"></span>τὸ δὲ ἐξ οὗ γίγνεται, ἣν λέγομεν
ὕλην</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p10.4"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p10.5"></span>τὸ δὲ ὑφ᾽ οὗ, τῶν φύσει τι ὄντων</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p10.6"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p10.7"></span>εἶδος δὲ λέγω τὸ τί ἦν
εἶναι ἑκάστον, καὶ τὴν πρώτην οὐσίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[59:1416](2080064.htm#fr_1415.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span> *cf*. Cudworth, *Int. Syst*. iv. 6, and
remarks there on Cic., *Acad Quæst*. i. 6.  Arist. (*Metaph*. i. 2) says
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p12.1"></span>Θεὸς γὰρ δοκει τὸ
αἴτιον πασιν εἰναι καὶ ἀρχή τις</span>, but does this refer only to
form?

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[60:1417](2080064.htm#fr_1416.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span> [Gen. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>,
“every herb of the field *before it grew*.”  There seems here an
indication of the actual creation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p13.2"></span>ποίησις</span>, being in the mind of God.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[60:1418](2080064.htm#fr_1417.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span> Fialon quotes Bossuet:  “*<span
id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>Je ne trouve point que Dieu, qui a créé
toutes choses, ait eu besoin, comme un ouvrier vulgaire, de trouver une
matiére préparée sur laquelle il travaillât, et de laquelle il dît son
ouvrage.  Mais, n’ayant besoin pour agir que de lui-même et de sa propre
puissance il a fait tout son ouvrage.  Il n’est point un simple faiseur
de formes et de figures dans une matière préexistante; il a fait et la
matière et la forme, c’est-à-dire son ouvrage dans son tout: autrement
son ouvrage ne lui doit pas tout, et dans son fond il est indépendamment
de son ouvrier.…*

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span><span id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>“O Dieu
quelle a été l’ignorance des sages du monde, qu’on a appelés philosophes
d’avoir cru que vous, parfait architecte et absolu formateur de tout ce
qui est, vous aviez trouvé sous vos mains une matière qui vous ótait
co-éternelle, informe néamoins, et qui attendait de vous sa perfection! 
Aveugles, qui n’entendaient pas que d’être capable de forme, c’est deja
quelque forme; c’est quelque perfection, que d’être capable de
perfection; et si la matière avail d’elle-même ce commencement de
perfection et de forme, elle en pouvait aussitôt avoir d’ellemême
l’entier accomplissement.

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>“*<span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>Aveugles, conducteurs d’aveugles, qui tombez
dans le prêcipice, et y jetez ceux qui vous suivent (St. Matthieu xv.
14), dites-mois qui a assujeti à Dieu ce qu’il n’a pas fait, ce qui est
de soi aussi bien que Dieu, ce qui est indépendamment de Dieu même?  Par
où a-t-il trouvé prise sur ce qui lui est étranger et independant et sa
puissance; et par quel art ou quel pouvoir se l’est-il soumis?…Mais
qu’est-ce après tout que cette matière si parfait, qu’elle ait elle-même
ce fond de son être; et si imparfaite, qu’elle attende sa perfection
d’un autre?  Dieu aura fait l’accident et n’aura pas fait la substance? 
(Bossuet, Elévations sur les mystères, 3e semaine, 2e elevat*.)

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[60:1419](2080064.htm#fr_1418.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[61:1420](2080064.htm#fr_1419.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span> [Acts xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md)<span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[61:1421](2080064.htm#fr_1420.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span> Marcion and Valentinus are roughly
lumped together as types of gnostic dualism.  On the distinction between
their systems see Dr. Salmon in *D.C.B*. iii. 820.  Marcion, said to
have been the son of a bishop of Sinope, is the most Christian of the
gnostics, and “tries to fit in his dualism with the Christian creed and
with the scriptures.”  But he expressly “asserted the existence of two
Gods.”  The Valentinian ideas and emanations travelled farther afield.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[61:1422](2080064.htm#fr_1421.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> On Manicheism, *vide*Beausobre’s
*Critical History of Manicheism*, and Walch, *Hist. Ketz.* i. 770.  With
its theory of two principles it spread widely over the empire in the 4th
c., was vigorous in Armenia in the 9th, and is said to have appeared in
France in the 12th.  (*cf*. Bayle, *Dict. s.v.*)  On the view taken of
the heresy in Basil’s time *cf*. Gregory of Nyssa, *Against Eunomius* i.
§ 35.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[61:1423](2080064.htm#fr_1422.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span> *i.e*. by those who would identify the
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>βυσσος</span> (Tehôm) of
[Gen. i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span> with that of [Luke i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#031.md)<span id="viii.iii-p25.4"></span>,
and understand it to mean the abode in prison of evil spirits.  The
Hebrew word occurs in [Job xxviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#014.md)<span id="viii.iii-p25.5"></span>
and [Deut. xxxiii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p25.6"></span> for the depth of waters.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[61:1424](2080064.htm#fr_1423.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span> With this view Plutarch charges the
Stoics.  <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>Αὐτοὶ τῶν
κακῶν ἀρχὴν ἀγαθὸν ὄντα τὸν Θεον ποιοῦσι</span>.  (c. *Stoicos,* 1976.) 
But it is his deduction from their statements—not their own statements. 
*cf*. Mosheim’s note on Cudworth iv. § 13.  Origen (*c. Celsum* vi.)
distinguishes between <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>την κακίαν καὶ τὰς ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς πράξεις</span>,
and <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p27.3"></span>κακόν</span> as
punitive and remedial; if the latter can rightly be called evil in any
sense, God is the author of it.  *cf*. [Amos iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.iii-p27.4"></span>. 
*Vide*, also, Basil’s treatment of this question in his Treatise <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p27.5"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p27.6"></span>τι οὐκ ἔστιν αἰτιος τῶν
κακῶν ὁ θεος</span>.  *cf*. Schroeck.  *<span
id="viii.iii-p27.7"></span>Kirchengeschichte* xiii. 194.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[61:1425](2080064.htm#fr_1424.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p27.8"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span> Fialon points out the correspondence
with Plat. *Phæd*. § 119, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>καί τίς εἰπε τῶν παρόντων ἀκούσας</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.2"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.3"></span>πρὸς Θεν, οὐκ ἐν τοῖς
πρόσθεν ἡμῖν λόγοις αὐτὸ τὸ ἐναντίον τῶν νυνὶ λεγομένων ὡμολογεῖτο, ἐκ
τοῦ ἐλάττονος τὸ μεῖζον γίγνεσθαι, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ μείζονος τὸ ἔλαττον, καὶ
ἀτεχνῶς αὕτη εἶναι ἡ γένεσις τοῖς ἐναντίοις ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.4"></span> ;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.5"></span>νῦν δέ μοι δοκεῖ λέγεσθαι
ὅτι τοῦτο οὐκ ἄν ποτε γένοιτο.  Καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.6"></span> …</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.7"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.8"></span>φη</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.9"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p28.10"></span>οὐκ ἐννοεῖς τὸ διαφέρον
τοῦ τι νῦν λεγομένου καί τοῦ τότε· τότε· μὲν γὰρ ἐλέγετο ἐκ τοῦ ἐναντίου
πράγματος τὸ ἐναντίον πρᾶγμα γίγνεσθαι, νῦν δὲ ὅτι αὐτὸ τὸ ἐναντίον
ἑαυτῷ ἐναντίον οὐκ ἄν ποτε γένοιτο, οὔτε τὸ ἐν ἡμῖν οὔτε τὸ ἐν φύσει·
τότε μὲν γὰρ περὶ τῶν ἐχόντων τῶν ἐναντίων ἐλέγομεν, ἐπονομάζοντες αὐτὰ
τῇ ἐκείνων ἐπωνυμί& 139·, νῦν δὲ περὶ ἐκείνων αὐτῶν ὧν ἐνόντων, ἔχει τὴν
ἐπωνυμίαν τὰ ὀνομαζόμενα, αὐτὰ δ᾽ ἐκείνα οὐκ ἄν ποτέ φαμεν ἐθεγῆσαι
γένεσιν ἀλλήλων δέξασθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[61:1426](2080064.htm#fr_1425.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p28.11"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span> “*<span id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>Cette
phrase est prise textuellement dans Denys l’Aréopagite, ou du moins dans
l’ouvrage qui lui est attribué.  (De Div. Nom. iv. 18.  Laur. Lyd. de
mensib. ed. Rœth. 186, 28.).”*  Fialon.  In the Treatise referred to,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p29.2"></span>περὶ Θείων
᾽Ονομάτων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p29.3"></span>,</span> “evil” is said to be “nothing real
and positive, but a defect, a negation only.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p29.4"></span>Στέρησις ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ κακὸν, καὶ ἔλλειψις, και
ἀσθένεια, καὶ ἀσυμμετρία</span>.”  *D.C.B.* i. 846.

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span> *cf*. “Evil is null, is nought, is
silence implying sound.”  Browning.  Abt. Vogler.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[62:1427](2080064.htm#fr_1426.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span> *cf*. Epictetus, *Ench*. i. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p32.2"></span>φ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν ὑπόληψις,
ὁρμὴ, ὄρεξις, ἔκκλισις, καὶ ἑνὶ λόγῳ ὁσα ἡμέτερα ἔργα</span>.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[62:1428](2080064.htm#fr_1427.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span> *cf*. M. Aurelius II. xi. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p33.2"></span>γὰρ χείρω μὴ ποιεῖ
ἄνθρωπον, πῶς δη τοῦτο βίον ἀνθρώπου χείρω ποιήσειεν</span>;…<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p33.3"></span>θάνατος δέ γε καὶ ζωὴ
δόξα καὶ ἀδοξία, πόνος καὶ ἡδονὴ, πλοῦτος καὶ πενία, πάντα ταῦτα ἐπίσης
συμβαίνει ἀνθρώπων τοῖς τε ἀγαθοῖς καὶ τοῖς κακοῖς, οὔτε καλὰ ὄντα οὔτε
αἰσχρά· οὐτ᾽ ἀρ᾽ ἀγαθὰ οὔτε κακά ἐστι</span>.  Also Greg. Nyss. *Orat.
Cat*. and Aug., *De Civ. Dei.* i. 8.  *Ista vero temporalia bona et mala
utrisque voluit esse communia, ut nec bona cupidius appetantur, quæ mali
quoque habere cernuntur, nec mala turpiter evitentur, quibus et boni
plerumque afficiuntur.*

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[62:1429](2080064.htm#fr_1428.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span> *cf*. [Heb. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md)<span id="viii.iii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[62:1430](2080064.htm#fr_1429.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span> *cf*. Theod. (*Quæst. in Gen. vi*.) who
is ready to accept the creation of angels before the creation of the
world.  Origen, *Hom. i. in Gen.  Hom. iv.* in Is. taught the existence
of angels “before the æons.”  Greg. Naz., *Orat*. xxxviii.  The lxx.
Trans. of [Job xxxviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p36.1"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p36.2"></span>ᾔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p36.3"></span>νεσάν με πάντες ἄγγελοί μου</span> may have
aided in the formation of the general opinion of the Greek Fathers.  The
systematization of the hierarchies is due to the pseudo, Dionysius, and
was transmitted to the west through John Erigena.  *cf*. Milman, *Lat.
Christ*. ix. 59.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[62:1431](2080064.htm#fr_1430.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span> [Prov. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>,
lxx.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[62:1432](2080064.htm#fr_1431.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span> [Col. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012.md)<span id="viii.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[62:1433](2080064.htm#fr_1432.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span> *cf*. [Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013.md)<span id="viii.iii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[62:1434](2080064.htm#fr_1433.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p42"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span id="viii.iii-p42.1"></span>,
lxxx.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[63:1435](2080064.htm#fr_1434.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p43"></span> Tillemont understands Eusebius of
Samosata.  The Ben. note prefers Ephrem Syrus, and compares Jerome,
*Quæst. Heb*. Col. 508<span id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[63:1436](2080064.htm#fr_1435.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p44"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span id="viii.iii-p44.1"></span>. 
*Vide* R.V. margin.  The word *rachaph*, “brood,” is not used of wind,
and itself appears to fix the meaning of the Spirit in the place.  An
old interpretation of the Orphic Poem *Argonautica* would identify the
brooding Spirit of Genesis with the All Wise Love of the Greek poet:

<span id="viii.iii-p45"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p45.1"></span>πρῶτα μὲν ἀρχαίου χάεος μεγαλήφατον
ὕμνον,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p46"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p46.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p46.3"></span>ἐπάμειψε φύσεις, ὥς τ᾽ οὐρανος ἐς πέρας
ἦλθεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p46.4"></span>,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p47"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p47.1"></span>γῆς τ᾽ εὐρυστέρνου γένεσιν, πυθμένας τε
θαλάσσης</span><span class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p47.2"></span>
,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p48.1"></span>πρεσβύτατόν τε καὶ αὐτοτελῆ πολ μητιν
῎Ερωτα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p48.2"></span>,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p49"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p49.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p49.2"></span>σσα τ᾽ ἔφυσεν ἅπαντα, τὰ δ᾽ ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p49.3"></span>?</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p49.4"></span>οιθεν ἄλλου ἄπ᾽
ἄλλο.</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p50"></span>Orph., *Argon*. 423–427.

<span id="viii.iii-p51"></span>On the translation of *rachaph* by
“brooding,” *cf*. Milton, P. *Lost*, vii.:

<span id="viii.iii-p52"></span> “darkness profound

<span id="viii.iii-p53"></span>Covered the abyss; but on the watery calm

<span id="viii.iii-p54"></span>His brooding wings the Spirit of God
outspread,

<span id="viii.iii-p55"></span>And vital virtue infused, and vital
warmth,

<span id="viii.iii-p56"></span>Throughout the fluid mass.”

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[63:1437](2080064.htm#fr_1436.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p57.1"></span>ζωογονία</span>.  *cf.* *De Sp. S.*§ 56, and
Bp. Pearson, *on the Creed*, Art. V.

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[63:1438](2080064.htm#fr_1437.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p59"></span> [Gen. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.iii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[63:1439](2080064.htm#fr_1438.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p60"></span> Light is said to travel straight at the
rate of about 195,000 English miles a second; a velocity estimated by
observations on the eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites.  The modern
undulatory theory of light, of which Huyghens († 1695) is generally
regarded as the author, describes light as propagated by the vibrations
of the imponderable matter termed *Ether* or *Æther*.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[63:1440](2080064.htm#fr_1439.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p61"></span> The simile seems hardly worthy of the
topic.  The practice is referred to by Plutarch, *Symp. Quæst*. i. 9,
and by Pliny, *Hist. Nat*. ii. 106.  “*Omne oleo tranquillari; et ob id
urinantes ore spargere, quoniam mitiget naturam asperam lucemque
deportet.”  “gerere*” says the Delph. note, *“tum credas oleum vicem
conspiciliorum*.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[63:1441](2080064.htm#fr_1440.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p63"></span> A statement not unlike the “Vibrations
of the elastic medium,” to which sound might now be referred.  “*Sed
vocem Stoici corpus esse contendunt:  eamque esse dicunt ictum aera: 
Plato autem non esse vocem corpus esse putat.  Non enim percussus,
inquit, aer, sed plaga ipsa atque percussio, vox est:*  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii-p63.1"></span>οὐκ ἁπλως πληγὴ αέρος
ἐστὶν ἡ φωνή· πλήττει γὰρ τὸν ἀερα καὶ δάκτυλος παραγόμενος, καὶ οὐδέπω
ποιεῖ φωνήν· ἀλλ᾽ ἡ πόση πληγὴ, καὶ σφοδρὰ, καὶ τόση δὲ ὥστε ἀκουστὴν
γενέσθαι</span>.”  Aul. Gell., *N.A.* v. 15.  So Diog. Laert. in *Vita
Zenonis*; <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p63.3"></span>στι φωνὴ αὴρ πεπληγμένος.</span>

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[63:1442](2080064.htm#fr_1441.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p63.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p64"></span> Fialon quotes Bossuet 4me <span
id="viii.iii-p64.1"></span>élév. 3me sem.:  “*<span
id="viii.iii-p64.2"></span>Le roi dit Qu’on marche; et l’armée marche;
qu’on fasse telle évolution, et elle se fait; toute une armée se remue
au seul commandement d’un prince, c’est à dire, à un seul petit mouvment
de ces livres, c’est, parmi les choses humaines, l’image la plus
excellente de la puissance de Dieu; mais au fond que c’est image est
dèfectueuse!  Dieu n’a point de lèvres à remuer; Dieu ne frappe point
l’air pour en tirer quelque son; Dieu n’a qu’à vouloir en lui même; et
tout ce qu’il veut éternellement s’accomplit comme il l’a voulu, et au
temps qu’il a marqué*.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[63:1443](2080064.htm#fr_1442.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p66"></span> [Gen. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.iii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[63:1444](2080064.htm#fr_1443.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p67"></span> St. Basil dwells rather on the sense of
“beautiful” in the lxx. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p67.1"></span>καλόν</span>.  The Vulgate has *pulchra*.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[64:1445](2080064.htm#fr_1444.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p69"></span> *cf*. Bion. xvi. 1:

<span id="viii.iii-p70"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p70.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p70.2"></span>Εσπερε, κυανέας ἱερὸν, φίλε, νυκτὸς
ἄγαλμα,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p71"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p71.1"></span>Τόσσον ἀφαυρότερος μήνας ὅσον ἔξοχος
ἄστρων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii-p71.2"></span>,</span>

<span id="viii.iii-p72"></span>and Milton, *P.L*. iv. 605:

<span id="viii.iii-p73"></span> “Hesperus, that led

<span id="viii.iii-p74"></span>The starry host, rode brightest.”

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[64:1446](2080064.htm#fr_1445.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p75"></span> [Gen. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.iii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[64:1447](2080064.htm#fr_1446.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p77"></span> [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[64:1448](2080064.htm#fr_1447.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p79"></span> [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[64:1449](2080064.htm#fr_1448.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p80"></span> lxx.  The Heb.=literally “And evening
happened and morning happened, one day.”  On the unique reckoning of the
day from evening to morning, see the late Dr. McCaul in *Replies to
Essays and Reviews*.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[64:1450](2080064.htm#fr_1449.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p81"></span> [Ps. xc.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md)<span id="viii.iii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[64:1451](2080064.htm#fr_1450.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p82"></span> [Gen. xlvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.iii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[64:1452](2080064.htm#fr_1451.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p83"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.iii-p83.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[64:1453](2080064.htm#fr_1452.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p84"></span> [Gen. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iii-p84.1"></span>,
LXX. and Heb.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[64:1454](2080064.htm#fr_1453.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p85"></span> [Joel ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md)<span id="viii.iii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[65:1455](2080064.htm#fr_1454.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p86"></span> [Amos v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018.md)<span id="viii.iii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[65:1456](2080064.htm#fr_1455.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p87"></span> The argument here is due to a
misapprehension of the meaning of the term *eighth* in [Psalm
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#000.md)<span id="viii.iii-p87.1"></span>
and xi. title.  *cf*. n. on *De Sp. S*. § 66.

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[65:1457](2080064.htm#fr_1456.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p89"></span> [Rom. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013.md)<span id="viii.iii-p89.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Firmament.](2080065.md)
