[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080146)  [Next](2080148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.lxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXIV. <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) </span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p3"></span>*To Martinianus*. <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260)

<span id="ix.lxxv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.lxxv-p5.1"></span>How</span> high do you suppose one to prize the
pleasure of our meeting one another once <span id="page_169">p.
169</span> <span id="ix.lxxv-Page_169"></span>again?  How delightful to
spend longer time with you so as to enjoy all your good qualities!  If
powerful proof is given of culture in seeing many men’s cities and
knowing many men’s ways, <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) such
I am sure is quickly given in your society.  For what is the difference
between seeing many men singly or one who has gained experience of all
together?  I should say that there is an immense superiority in that
which gives us the knowledge of good and beautiful things without
trouble, and puts within our reach instruction in virtue, pure from all
admixture of evil.  Is there question of noble deed; of words worth
handing down; of institutions of men of superhuman excellence?  All are
treasured in the store house of your mind.  Not then, would I pray, that
I might listen to you, like Alcinous to Ulysses, only for a year, but
throughout all my life; and to this end I would pray that my life might
be long, even though my state were no easy one.  Why, then, am I now
writing when I ought to be coming to see you?  Because my country in her
troubles calls me irresistibly to her side.  You know, my friend, how
she suffers.  She is torn in pieces like Pentheus by veritable Mænads,
dæmons.  They are dividing her, and dividing her again, like bad
surgeons who, in their ignorance, make wounds worse.  Suffering as she
is from this dissection, it remains for me to tend her like a sick
patient.  So the Cæsareans have urgently appealed to me by letter, and I
must go, not as though I could be of any help, but to avoid any blame of
neglect.  You know how ready men in difficulties are to hope; and ready
too, I ween, to find fault, always charging their troubles on what has
been left undone.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p8"></span>2.  Yet for this very reason I ought to
have come to see you, and to have told you my mind, or rather to implore
you to bethink you of some strong measure worthy of your wisdom; not to
turn aside from my country falling on her knees, but to betake yourself
to the Court, and, with the boldness which is all your own, not to let
them suppose that they own two provinces instead of one.  They have not
imported the second from some other part of the world, but have acted
somewhat in the same way in which some owner of horse or ox might act,
who should cut it in two, and then think that he had two instead of one,
instead of failing to make two and destroying the one he had.  Tell the
Emperor and his ministers that they are not after this fashion
increasing the empire, for power lies not in number but in condition.  I
am sure that now men are neglecting the course of events, some,
possibly, from ignorance of the truth, some from their being unwilling
to say anything offensive, some because it does not immediately concern
them.  The course likely to be most beneficial, and worthy of your high
principles, would be for you, if possible, to approach the Emperor in
person.  If this is difficult both on account of the season of the year
and of your age, of which, as you say, inactivity is the foster brother,
at all events you need have no difficulty in writing.  If you thus give
our country the aid of a letter, you will first of all have the
satisfaction of knowing that you have left nothing undone that was in
your power, and further, by showing sympathy, if only in appearance, you
will give the patient much comfort.  Would only that it were possible
for you to come yourself among us and actually see our deplorable
condition!  Thus, perhaps, stirred by the plain evidence before you, you
might have spoken in terms worthy alike of your own magnanimity and of
the affliction of Cæsarea.  But do not withhold belief from what I am
telling you.  Verily we want some Simonides, or other like poet, to
lament our troubles from actual experience.  But why name Simonides?  I
should rather mention Æschylus, or any other who has set forth a great
calamity in words like his, and uttered lamentation with a mighty voice.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p9"></span>3.  Now we have no more meetings, no more
debates, no more gatherings of wise men in the Forum, nothing more of
all that made our city famous.  In our Forum nowadays it would be
stranger for a learned or eloquent man to put in an appearance, than it
would for men, shewing a brand of iniquity or unclean hands, to have
presented themselves in Athens of old.  Instead of them we have the
imported boorishness of Massagetæ and Scythians.  And only one noise is
heard of drivers of bargains, and losers of bargains, and of fellows
under the lash.  On either hand the porticoes resound with doleful
echoes, as though they were uttering a natural and proper sound in
groaning at what is going on.  Our distress prevents our paying any
attention to locked gymnasia and nights when no torch is lighted.  There
is no small danger lest, our magistrates being removed, everything crash
down together as with fallen props.  What words can adequately describe
our calamities?  Some have <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="ix.lxxv-Page_170"></span>fled into exile, a considerable portion of
our senate, and that not the least valuable, prefering perpetual
banishment to Podandus. <span id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262)  
When I mention Podandus, suppose me to mean the Spartan Ceadas <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) or any natural pit that you may
have seen, spots breathing a noxious vapour, to which some have
involuntarily given the name Charonian.  Picture to yourself that the
evils of Podandus are a match for such a place.  So, of three parts,
some have left their homes and are in exile, wives and hearth and all;
some are being led away like captives, the majority of the best men in
the city, a piteous spectacle to their friends, fulfilling their
enemies’ prayers; if, that is, any one has ever been found to call down
so dire a curse upon our heads.  A third division yet remains:  these,
unable to endure abandonment by their old companions, and at the same
time unable to provide for themselves, have to hate their very lives.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p12"></span>This is what I implore you to make known
everywhere with an eloquence all your own, and that righteous boldness
of speech which your manner of life gives you.  One thing distinctly
state; that, unless the authorities soon change their counsels, they
will find none left on whom to exercise their clemency.  You will either
prove some help to the state, or at least you will have done as Solon
did, who, when he was unable to defend his abandoned fellow citizens on
the capture of the Acropolis, put on his armour, and sat down before the
gates, thus making it plain by this guise that he was no party to what
was going on. <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264)   Of one thing
I am assured, even though at the present moment there may be some who do
not approve of your advice, the day is not far distant when they will
give you the greatest credit for benevolence and sagacity, because they
see events corresponding with your prediction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[168:2260](2080147.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p2"></span> About the same date as the preceding.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[168:2261](2080147.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p4"></span> A dignitary of Cappadocia otherwise
unknown, whom Basil asks to intercede with the Emperor Valens to prevent
that division of Cappadocia which afterward led to so much trouble. 
Basil had left Cæsarea in the autumn of 371, on a tour of visitation, or
to consecrate his brother bishop of Nyssa (Maran, *Vit. Bas. Cap*.
xix.), and returned to Cæsarea at the appeal of his people there.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[169:2262](2080147.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p6"></span> *cf*. the opening of the *Odyssey*, and
the imitation of Horace, *De Arte Poet*. 142:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p7"></span>*“Qui mores hominum multorum vidit et
urbes*.”

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[170:2263](2080147.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p10"></span> Now Podando, in Southern Cappadocia, made
by Valens the chief town of the new division of the province.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[170:2264](2080147.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p11"></span> So the Spartans named the pit into which
condemned criminals were thrown.  Pausanias, Book IV. 18, 4.  Thucyd.,
i. 134.  Strabo, viii. 367.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[170:2265](2080147.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p13"></span> *i.e.* on the seizure of the Acropolis by
Pisistratus, Solon, resisting the instance of his friends that he should
flee, returned them for answer, when they asked him on what he relied
for protection, “on my old age.”  Plutarch, *Solon* 30.  The senate
being of the faction of Pisistratus, said that he was mad.  Solon
replied:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p14"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxxv-p14.1"></span>Δείξει δὴ μανίην μὲν ἐμὴν Βαιὸς χρόνος
ἀστοῖς,</span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p15"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxxv-p15.1"></span>Δείξει ἀληθείης ἐς μέσον ἐρχομένης.</span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p16"></span>*Diog. Laert.* 1–49

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Aburgius.](2080148)
