[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080068)  [Next](2080070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="viii.viii-p2"></span>*The creation of moving creatures*. <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604)

<span id="viii.viii-p4"></span>1.  “*And God said, Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life*” after their kind,
“*and fowl that may fly above the earth*” *after their kind*. <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605)   After the creation of the
luminaries the waters are now filled with living beings and <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="viii.viii-Page_90"></span>its own
adornment is given to this part of the world.  Earth had received hers
from her own plants, the heavens had received the flowers of the stars,
and, like two eyes, the great luminaries beautified them in concert.  It
still remained for the waters to receive their adornment.   The command
was given, and immediately the rivers and lakes becoming fruitful
brought forth their natural broods; the sea travailed with all kinds of
swimming creatures; not even in mud and marshes did the water remain
idle; it took its part in creation.  Everywhere from its ebullition
frogs, gnats and flies came forth.  For that which we see to-day is the
sign of the past.  Thus everywhere the water hastened to obey the
Creator’s command.  Who could count the species which the great and
ineffable power of God caused to be suddenly seen living and moving,
when this command had empowered the waters to bring forth life?  Let the
waters bring forth moving creatures that have life.  Then for the first
time is made a being with life and feeling.  For though plants and trees
be said to live, seeing that they share the power of being nourished and
growing; nevertheless they are neither living beings, nor have they
life. <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606)   To create these last
God said, “Let the water produce moving creatures.”

<span id="viii.viii-p7"></span>Every creature that swims, whether it
skims on the surface of the waters, or cleaves the depths, is of the
nature of a moving creature, <span id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607)
since it drags itself on the body of the water.  Certain aquatic animals
have feet and walk; especially amphibia, such as seals, crabs,
crocodiles, river horses <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) and
frogs; but they are above all gifted with the power of swimming.  Thus
it is said, Let the waters produce moving creatures.  In these few words
what species is omitted?  Which is not included in the command of the
Creator?  Do we not see viviparous animals, seals, dolphins, rays and
all cartilaginous animals?  Do we not see oviparous animals comprising
every sort of fish, those which have a skin and those which have scales,
those which have fins and those which have not?  This command has only
required one word, even less than a word, a sign, a motion of the divine
will, and it has such a wide sense that it includes all the varieties
and all the families of fish.  To review them all would be to undertake
to count the waves of the ocean or to measure its waters in the hollow
of the hand.  “Let the waters produce moving creatures.”  That is to
say, those which people the high seas and those which love the shores;
those which inhabit the depths and those which attach themselves to
rocks; those which are gregarious and those which live dispersed, the
cetaceous, the huge, and the tiny.  It is from the same power, the same
command, that all, small and great receive their existence.  “Let the
waters bring forth.”  These words show you the natural affinity of
animals which swim in the water; thus, fish, when drawn out of the
water, quickly die, because they have no respiration such as could
attract our air and water is their element, as air is that of
terrestrial animals.  The reason for it is clear.  With us the lung,
that porous and spongy portion of the inward parts which receives air by
the dilatation of the chest, disperses and cools interior warmth; in
fish the motion of the gills, which open and shut by turns to take in
and to eject the water, takes the place of respiration. <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609)   Fish have a peculiar lot, a
special nature, a nourishment of their own, a life apart.  Thus they
cannot be tamed and cannot bear the touch of a man’s hand. <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610)

<span id="viii.viii-p12"></span>2.  “Let the waters bring forth moving
creatures after their kind.”  God caused to be born the firstlings of
each species to serve as seeds for nature.  Their multitudinous numbers
are kept up in subsequent succession, when it is necessary for them to
grow and multiply.  Of another kind is the species of testacea, as
muscles, scallops, sea snails, conches, and the infinite variety of
oysters.  Another kind is that of the crustacea, as crabs and lobsters;
another of fish without shells, with soft and tender flesh, like polypi
and cuttle fish.  And amidst these last what an innumerable variety! 
There are weevers, lampreys and eels, produced in the mud of rivers and
ponds, which more resemble venomous reptiles than fish in their nature. 
Of another kind is the species of the ovipara; of another, that of the
vivipara.  Among the latter are sword-fish, cod, in one word, all
cartilaginous fish, and even the greater part of the cetacea, as
dolphins, seals, which, it is said, if they see their little ones, <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span id="viii.viii-Page_91"></span>still
quite young, frightened, take them back into their belly to protect
them. <span id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611)

<span id="viii.viii-p14"></span>*Let the waters bring forth after their
kind*.  The species of the cetacean is one; another is that of small
fish.  What infinite variety in the different kinds!  All have their own
names, different food, different form, shape, and quality of flesh.  All
present infinite variety, and are divided into innumerable classes.  Is
there a tunny fisher who can enumerate to us the different varieties of
that fish?  And yet they tell us that at the sight of great swarms of
fish they can almost tell the number of the individual ones which
compose it.  What man is there of all that have spent their long lives
by coasts and shores, who can inform us with exactness of the history of
all fish?

<span id="viii.viii-p15"></span>Some are known to the fishermen of the
Indian ocean, others to the toilers of the Egyptian gulf, others to the
islanders, others to the men of Mauretania. <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612)   Great and small were all alike
created by this first command, by this ineffable power.  What a
difference in their food!  What a variety in the manner in which each
species reproduces itself!  Most fish do not hatch eggs like birds; they
do not build nests; they do not feed their young with toil; it is the
water which receives and vivifies the egg dropped into it.  With them
the reproduction of each species is invariable, and natures are not
mixed.  There are none of those unions which, on the earth, produce
mules and certain birds contrary to the nature of their species.  With
fish there is no variety which, like the ox and the sheep, is armed with
a half-equipment of teeth, none which ruminates except, according to
certain writers, the scar. <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613)  
All have serried and very sharp teeth, for fear their food should escape
them if they masticate it for too long a time.  In fact, if it were not
crushed and swallowed as soon as divided, it would be carried away by
the water.

<span id="viii.viii-p18"></span>3.  The food of fish differs according
to their species.  Some feed on mud; others eat sea weed; others content
themselves with the herbs that grow in water.  But the greater part
devour each other, and the smaller is food for the larger, and if one
which has possessed itself of a fish weaker than itself becomes a prey
to another, the conqueror and the conquered are both swallowed up in the
belly of the last.  And we mortals, do we act otherwise when we press
our inferiors? <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614)   What
difference is there between the last fish and the man who, impelled by
devouring greed, swallows the weak in the folds of his insatiable
avarice?  Yon fellow possessed the goods of the poor; you caught him and
made him a part of your abundance.  You have shown yourself more unjust
than the unjust, and more miserly than the miser.  Look to it lest you
end like the fish, by hook, by weel, or by net.  Surely we too, when we
have done the deeds of the wicked, shall not escape punishment at the
last.

<span id="viii.viii-p22"></span>Now see what tricks, what cunning, are
to be found in a weak animal, and learn not to imitate wicked doers. 
The crab loves the flesh of the oyster; but, sheltered by its shell, a
solid rampart with which nature has furnished its soft and delicate
flesh, it is a difficult prey to seize.  Thus they call the oyster
“sherd-hide.” <span id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615)   Thanks to the
two shells with which it is enveloped, and which adapt themselves
perfectly the one to the other, the claws of the crab are quite
powerless.  What does he do?  When he sees it, sheltered from the wind,
warming itself with pleasure, and half opening its shells to the
sun, <span id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) he secretly throws in a
pebble, prevents them from closing, and takes by cunning what force had
lost. <span id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617)   Such is the malice of
these animals, deprived as they are of reason and of speech.  But I
would that you should at once rival the crab in cunning and industry,
and abstain from harming your neighbour; this animal is the image of him
who craftily approaches his brother, takes advantage of his neighbour’s
misfortunes, and finds his delight in other men’s troubles.  O copy not
the damned!  Content yourself with your own lot.  Poverty, with what is
necessary, is of more value in the eyes of the wise than all pleasures.

<span id="viii.viii-p31"></span>I will not pass in silence the cunning
and trickery of the squid, which takes the colour of the rock to which
it attaches itself.  Most fish swim idly up to the squid as they might
to a rock, and become themselves the prey of the crafty creature. <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618)   Such are men who <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="viii.viii-Page_92"></span>court
ruling powers, bending themselves to all circumstances and not remaining
for a moment in the same purpose; who praise self-restraint in the
company of the self-restrained, and license in that of the licentious,
accommodating their feelings to the pleasure of each.  It is difficult
to escape them and to put ourselves on guard against their mischief;
because it is under the mask of friendship that they hide their clever
wickedness.  Men like this are ravening wolves covered with sheep’s
clothing, as the Lord calls them. <span
id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619)   Flee then fickleness and
pliability; seek truth, sincerity, simplicity.  The serpent is shifty;
so he has been condemned to crawl.  The just is an honest man, like
Job. <span id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620)   Wherefore God setteth
the solitary in families. <span id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621)  
So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts. <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622)
  Yet a wise and marvellous order reigns among these animals.  Fish do
not always deserve our reproaches; often they offer us useful examples. 
How is it that each sort of fish, content with the region that has been
assigned to it, never travels over its own limits to pass into foreign
seas?  No surveyor has ever distributed to them their habitations, nor
enclosed them in walls, nor assigned limits to them; each kind has been
naturally assigned its own home.  One gulf nourishes one kind of fish,
another other sorts; those which swarm here are absent elsewhere.  No
mountain raises its sharp peaks between them; no rivers bar the passage
to them; it is a law of nature, which according to the needs of each
kind, has allotted to them their dwelling places with equality and
justice. <span id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623)

<span id="viii.viii-p43"></span>4.  It is not thus with us.  Why? 
Because we incessantly move the ancient landmarks which our fathers have
set. <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624)   We encroach, we add
house to house, field to field, to enrich ourselves at the expense of
our neighbour.  The great fish know the sojourning place that nature has
assigned to them; they occupy the sea far from the haunts of men, where
no islands lie, and where are no continents rising to confront them,
because it has never been crossed and neither curiosity nor need has
persuaded sailors to tempt it.  The monsters that dwell in this sea are
in size like high mountains, so witnesses who have seen tell us, and
never cross their boundaries to ravage islands and seaboard towns.  Thus
each kind is as if it were stationed in towns, in villages, in an
ancient country, and has for its dwelling place the regions of the sea
which have been assigned to it.

<span id="viii.viii-p45"></span>Instances have, however, been known of
migratory fish, who, as if common deliberation transported them into
strange regions, all start on their march at a given sign.  When the
time marked for breeding arrives, they, as if awakened by a common law
of nature, migrate from gulf to gulf, directing their course toward the
North Sea.  And at the epoch of their return you may see all these fish
streaming like a torrent across the Propontis towards the Euxine Sea. 
Who puts them in marching array?  Where is the prince’s order?  Has an
edict affixed in the public place indicated to them their day of
departure?  Who serves them as a guide?  See how the divine order
embraces all and extends to the smallest object.  A fish does not resist
God’s law, and we men cannot endure His precepts of salvation!  Do not
despise fish because they are dumb and quite unreasoning; rather fear
lest, in your resistance to the disposition of the Creator, you have
even less reason than they.  Listen to the fish, who by their actions
all but speak and say:  it is for the perpetuation of our race that we
undertake this long voyage.  <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="viii.viii-Page_93"></span>They have not the gift of reason, but they
have the law of nature firmly seated within them, to show them what they
have to do.  Let us go, they say, to the North Sea.  Its water is
sweeter than that of the rest of the sea; for the sun does not remain
long there, and its rays do not draw up all the drinkable
portions. <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625)   Even sea
creatures love fresh water. <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626)  
Thus one often sees them enter into rivers and swim far up them from the
sea.  This is the reason which makes them prefer the Euxine Sea to other
gulfs, as the most fit for breeding and for bringing up their young. 
When they have obtained their object the whole tribe returns home.  Let
us hear these dumb creatures tell us the reason.  The Northern sea, they
say, is shallow and its surface is exposed to the violence of the wind,
and it has few shores and retreats.  Thus the winds easily agitate it to
its bottom and mingle the sands of its bed with its waves.  Besides, it
is cold in winter, filled as it is from all directions by large rivers. 
Wherefore after a moderate enjoyment of its waters, during the summer,
when the winter comes they hasten to reach warmer depths and places
heated by the sun, and after fleeing from the stormy tracts of the
North, they seek a haven in less agitated seas.

<span id="viii.viii-p48"></span>5.  I myself have seen these marvels,
and I have admired the wisdom of God in all things.  If beings deprived
of reason are capable of thinking and of providing for their own
preservation; if a fish knows what it ought to seek and what to shun,
what shall we say, who are honoured with reason, instructed by law,
encouraged by the promises, made wise by the Spirit, and are
nevertheless less reasonable about our own affairs than the fish?  They
know how to provide for the future, but we renounce our hope of the
future and spend our life in brutal indulgence.  A fish traverses the
extent of the sea to find what is good for it; what will you say
then—you who live in idleness, the mother of all vices? <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627)   Do not let any one make his
ignorance an excuse.  There has been implanted in us natural reason
which tells us to identify ourselves with good, and to avoid all that is
harmful.  I need not go far from the sea to find examples, as that is
the object of our researches.  I have heard it said by one living near
the sea, that the sea urchin, a little contemptible creature, often
foretells calm and tempest to sailors.  When it foresees a disturbance
of the winds, it gets under a great pebble, and clinging to it as to an
anchor, it tosses about in safety, retained by the weight which prevents
it from becoming the plaything of the waves. <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628)   It is a certain sign for sailors
that they are threatened with a violent agitation of the winds.  No
astrologer, no Chaldæan, reading in the rising of the stars the
disturbances of the air, has ever communicated his secret to the
urchin:  it is the Lord of the sea and of the winds who has impressed on
this little animal a manifest proof of His great wisdom.  God has
foreseen all, He has neglected nothing.  His eye, which never sleeps,
watches over all. <span id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629)   He is
present everywhere and gives to each being the means of preservation. 
If God has not left the sea urchin outside His providence, is He without
care for you?

<span id="viii.viii-p52"></span>“*Husbands love your wives*.” <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630)   Although formed of two bodies you
are united to live in the communion of wedlock.  May this natural link,
may this yoke imposed by the blessing, reunite those who are divided. 
The viper, the cruelest of reptiles, unites itself with the sea lamprey,
and, announcing its presence by a hiss, it calls it from the depths to
conjugal union.  The lamprey obeys, and is united to this venomous
animal. <span id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631)   What does this
mean?  However hard, however fierce a husband may be, the wife ought to
bear with him, and not wish to find any pretext for breaking the union. 
He strikes you, but he is your husband.  He is a drunkard, but he is
united to you by nature.  He is brutal and cross, but he is henceforth
one of your members, and the most precious of all.

<span id="viii.viii-p55"></span>6.  Let husbands listen as well:  here
is a lesson for them.  The viper vomits forth its venom in respect for
marriage; and you, will you not put aside the barbarity and the
inhumanity of your soul, out of respect for your union?  Perhaps the
example of the viper contains another meaning.  The union of the viper
and of the lamprey is an adulterous violation of nature.  You, who are
plotting against other men’s wedlock, learn what creeping creature you
are like.  I have only one object, to make all I say turn to the
edification of the Church.  Let then liber<span id="page_94">p.
94</span> <span id="viii.viii-Page_94"></span>tines put a restraint on
their passions, for they are taught by the examples set by creatures of
earth and sea.

<span id="viii.viii-p56"></span>My bodily infirmity and the lateness of
the hour force me to end my discourse.  However, I have still many
observations to make on the products of the sea, for the admiration of
my attentive audience.  To speak of the sea itself, how does its water
change into salt?  How is it that coral, a stone so much esteemed, is a
plant in the midst of the sea, and when once exposed to the air becomes
hard as a rock?  Why has nature enclosed in the meanest of animals, in
an oyster, so precious an object as a pearl?  For these pearls, which
are coveted by the caskets of kings, are cast upon the shores, upon the
coasts, upon sharp rocks, and enclosed in oyster shells.  How can the
sea pinna produce her fleece of gold, which no dye has ever
imitated? <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632)   How can shells
give kings purple of a brilliancy not surpassed by the flowers of the
field?

<span id="viii.viii-p58"></span>“*Let the waters bring forth*.”  What
necessary object was there that did not immediately appear?  What object
of luxury was not given to man?  Some to supply his needs, some to make
him contemplate the marvels of creation.  Some are terrible, so as to
take our idleness to school.  “God created great whales.” <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633)   Scripture gives them the name of
“great” not because they are greater than a shrimp and a sprat, but
because the size of their bodies equals that of great hills.  Thus when
they swim on the surface of the waters one often sees them appear like
islands.  But these monstrous creatures do not frequent our coasts and
shores; they inhabit the Atlantic ocean.  Such are these animals created
to strike us with terror and awe.  If now you hear say that the greatest
vessels, sailing with full sails, are easily stopped by a very small
fish, by the remora, and so forcibly that the ship remains motionless
for a long time, as if it had taken root in the middle of the sea, <span
id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) do you not see in this little
creature a like proof of the power of the Creator?  Sword fish, saw
fish, dog fish, whales, and sharks, are not therefore the only things to
be dreaded; we have to fear no less the spike of the stingray even after
its death, <span id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635) and the
sea-hare, <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) whose mortal blows
are as rapid as they are inevitable.  Thus the Creator wishes that all
may keep you awake, so that full of hope in Him you may avoid the evils
with which all these creatures threaten you.

<span id="viii.viii-p66"></span>But let us come out of the depths of the
sea and take refuge upon the shore.  For the marvels of creation, coming
one after the other in constant succession like the waves, have
submerged my discourse.  However, I should not be surprised if, after
finding greater wonders upon the earth, my spirit seeks like Jonah’s to
flee to the sea.  But it seems to me, that meeting with these
innumerable marvels has made me forget all measure, and experience the
fate of those who navigate the high seas without a fixed point to mark
their progress, and are often ignorant of the space which they have
traversed.  This is what has happened to me; whilst my words glanced at
creation, I have not been sensible of the multitude of beings of which I
spoke to you.  But although this honourable assembly is pleased by my
speech, and the recital of the marvels of the Master is grateful to the
ears of His servants, let me here bring the ship of my discourse to
anchor, and await the day to deliver you the rest.  Let us, therefore,
all arise, and, giving thanks for what has been said, let us ask for
strength to hear the rest.  Whilst taking your food may the conversation
at your table turn upon what has occupied us this morning and this
evening.  Filled with these thoughts may you, even in sleep, enjoy the
pleasure of the day, so that you may be permitted to say, “I sleep but
my heart waketh,” <span id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) meditating
day and night upon the law of the Lord, to Whom be glory and power world
without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[89:1605](2080069.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="viii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p3"></span> LXX. creeping things.

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[89:1606](2080069.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="viii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p5"></span> [Gen. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)<span id="viii.viii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[90:1607](2080069.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="viii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p6"></span> Plants are neither <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p6.1"></span>ζῶα</span> nor <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p6.2"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p6.3"></span>μψυχα</span>.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[90:1608](2080069.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="viii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p8"></span> LXX. creeping.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[90:1609](2080069.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="viii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p9"></span> Basil uses the classical greek form
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p9.1"></span>οἱ ποτάμιοι
ἵπποι</span>, as in Herod. and Arist.  The dog-Greek hippopotamus,
properly a horse-river, is first found in Galen.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[90:1610](2080069.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="viii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p10"></span> *cf*. Arist., *De Part. Anim.* iii. 6.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p10.1"></span>διόπερ τῶν μὲν
ἰχθύων οὐδεὶς ἔχει πνεύμονα ἀλλ᾽ ἀντὶ τούτου βράγχια καθάπερ εἴρηται ἐν
τοῖς περὶ ἀναπνοῆς· ὕδατι γᾶρ ποιεῖται τὴν κατάψυξιν, τὰ δ᾽ ἀναπνέοντα
ἔχει πνεύμονα ἀναπνεῖ δὲ τὰ πεζὰ πάντα</span>.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[90:1611](2080069.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="viii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p11"></span> Here Basil is curiously in
contradiction to ancient as well as modern experience.  Martial’s
epigram on Domitian’s tame fish, “*qui norunt dominum, manumque lambunt
illam qua nihil est in orbe majus*” (iv. 30) is illustrated by the same
author’s “*natat ad magistrum delicata muræna*” (x. 30), as well as by
Ælian (*De animal*. viii. 4).  “*Apud Baulos in parte Baiana piscinam
habuit Hortensius orator, in qua murænam adeo dilexit ut exanimatam
flesse credatur:  in eadem villa Antonia Drusi murænæ quam diligebat
inaures addidit*.”  Plin. ix. 71.  So Lucian <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p11.1"></span>οὗτοι δε (ίχθύες) καὶ ὀνόματα ἔχουσι καὶ
ἔρχονται καλούμενοι</span>.  (*De Syr. Dea*. 45.)  John Evelyn (*Dairy*
1644) writes of Fontainebleau:  “The carps come familiarly to hand.” 
There was recently a tame carp at Azay le Rideau.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[91:1612](2080069.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="viii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p13"></span> Narrated by Ælian (*Anim* i. 16) of the
“glaucus,” a fish apparently unknown.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[91:1613](2080069.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="viii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p16.1"></span>Μαυρούσιοι</span>.  *cf.* Strabo, ii. 33.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[91:1614](2080069.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="viii.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p17"></span> *e.g.* Arist., *De Anim*. viii. 2 and
Ælian, ii. 54.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[91:1615](2080069.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="viii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p19"></span> *cf*. Pericles ii. i.

<span id="viii.viii-p20"></span>*3 Fish*.  Master, I marvel how the
fishes live in the sea.

<span id="viii.viii-p21"></span>*1 Fish*.  Why, as men do a-land; the
great ones eat up the little ones.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[91:1616](2080069.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="viii.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p23.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p23.2"></span>στρακόδερμος</span>.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[91:1617](2080069.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="viii.viii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p24"></span> Fialon quotes Le Fontaine *<span
id="viii.viii-p24.1"></span>Le Rat et l’Huitre*:

<span id="viii.viii-p25"></span><span id="viii.viii-p25.1"></span>Parmi
tant d’huitres toutes closes,

<span id="viii.viii-p26"></span><span id="viii.viii-p26.1"></span>Une
s’était ouverte, et baillant au soleil,

<span id="viii.viii-p27"></span>Par un doux Zéphyr réjouie,

<span id="viii.viii-p28"></span><span id="viii.viii-p28.1"></span>Humait
l’air, respirait était épanouie,

<span id="viii.viii-p29"></span><span
id="viii.viii-p29.1"></span>Blanche, grasse, et d’un goût, à la voir,
sans pareil.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[91:1618](2080069.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="viii.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p30"></span> Pliny ix. 48, says of the octopus: 
“*imposito lapillo extra corpus ne palpitatu ejiciatur:  ita securi
grassantur, extrahuntque carnes*.”

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[91:1619](2080069.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="viii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p32"></span> *cf*. Theog. 215:

<span id="viii.viii-p33"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p33.1"></span>πούλυπου ὀργὴν ἴσχε πολυπλόκου, ὃς ποτὶ
πέτρῃ</span>

<span id="viii.viii-p34"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p34.1"></span>τῇ προσομιλήσει τοῖος ἰδεῖν ἐφάνη</span>

<span id="viii.viii-p35"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p35.1"></span>Νῦν μὲν τῇς ἐφέπου, ποτὲ δ᾽ἀλλοῖος χρόα
γίγνου</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p35.2"></span>,</span>

<span id="viii.viii-p36"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p36.1"></span>κραιπνόν τοι σοφίη γίγνεται
εὐτροπίης</span><span class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p36.2"></span>
.</span>

<span id="viii.viii-p37"></span>Greg. Naz., *Or*. xxxvi.:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p37.1"></span>πολλὰς μεταλαμβάνων
χρόας ὥσπερ τὰ τῶν πετρῶν εἱ πολύποδες αἷς ἃν ὁμιλήσωσι</span>, and
Arist., *Hist. An*. ix. 37:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p37.2"></span>καὶ θηρεύει τοὺς ἰχθῦς τὸ χρῶμα μεταβάλλων
καὶ ποιῶν ὅμοιον οἷς δη πλησιάζῃ λίθοις</span>.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[92:1620](2080069.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="viii.viii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p38"></span> *cf*. [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="viii.viii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[92:1621](2080069.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="viii.viii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p39"></span> So the *Cod. Colb*. and Eustathius, who
renders *Justus nihil habet fictum sicut Job*.  The Ben. Ed. suspect
that Basil wrote Jacob and Job.  Four <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.viii-p39.1"></span>mss.</span> support Jacob alone, who,
whatever may be the meaning of the Hebrew in [Gen. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span id="viii.viii-p39.2"></span>,
is certainly <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p39.3"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p39.4"></span>πλαστος</span> only in the LXX., and a bad
instance of guilelessness.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[92:1622](2080069.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="viii.viii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p40"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span id="viii.viii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[92:1623](2080069.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="viii.viii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p41"></span> [Ps. civ.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#025)<span id="viii.viii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[92:1624](2080069.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="viii.viii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p42"></span> *cf*. Cudworth, *Int. Syst*. iii. 37,
23:  “Besides this plastick Nature which is in animals, forming their
several bodies artificially, as so many microcosms or little worlds,
there must also be a general plastick Nature in the macrocosm, the whole
corporeal universe, that which makes all things thus to conspire
everywhere, and agree together into one harmony.  Concerning which
plastick nature of the universe, the Author *De Mundo* writes after this
manner, <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p42.1"></span>καὶ τὸν
ὅλον κόσμον, διεκόσμησε μία ἡ διὰ πάντων διήκουσα δύναμις</span>, one
power, passing through all things, ordered and formed the whole world. 
Again he calls the same <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.viii-p42.2"></span>πνεῦμα καὶ ἔμψυχον καὶ γόνιμον
οὐσίαν</span>, a spirit, and a living and Generative Nature, and plainly
declares it to be a thing distinct from the Deity, but subordinate to it
and dependent on it.  But Aristotle himself, in that genuine work of his
before mentioned, speaks clearly and positively concerning the Plastick
Nature of the Universe, as well as that of animals, in these words:  ‘It
seemeth that as there is Art in Artificial things, so in the things of
Nature, there is another such like Principle or Cause, which we
ourselves partake of:  in the same manner as we do of Heat and Cold,
from the Universe.  Wherefore it is more probable that the whole world
was at first made by such a cause as this (if at least it were made) and
that it is still conserved by the same, than mortal animals should be
so:  for there is much more of order and determinate Regularity in the
Heavenly Bodies that in ourselves; but more of Fortuitousness and
inconstant Regularity among these mortal things.  Notwithstanding which,
some there are, who though they cannot but acknowledge that the Bodies
of Animals were all framed by an Artificial Nature, yet they will need
contend that the System of the Heavens sprung merely from Fortune and
Chance; although there be not the least appearance of Fortuitousness or
Temerity in it.’  And then he sums up all into this conclusion:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p42.3"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p42.4"></span>στε εἶναι φανερὸν ὅτι
ἔστι τι τοιοῦτον ὃ δὴ καὶ καλοῦμεν φύσιν</span>.  ‘Wherefore it is
manifest that there is some such thing as that which we call Nature,’
that is, that there is not only an ‘Artificial,’ ‘Methodical,’ and
Plastick Nature in Animals, by which their respective Bodies are Framed
and Conserved, but also that there is such a General Plastick Nature
likewise in the Universe, by which the Heavens and whole World are thus
Artificially Ordered and Disposed.”

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[92:1625](2080069.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="viii.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p44"></span> *cf*. [Prov. xxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#028)<span id="viii.viii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[93:1626](2080069.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="viii.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p46"></span> *cf*. Arist., *Hist. Animal*. viii. 12
and 13, and note on p. 70.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[93:1627](2080069.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="viii.viii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p47"></span> *cf*. Arist. and Theophrastus.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[93:1628](2080069.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="viii.viii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p49"></span> *Otiosa mater est nugarum noverca
omnium virtutum*.  St. Bernard.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[93:1629](2080069.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="viii.viii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p50"></span> “*Tradunt sævitiam maris præsagire eos,
correptisque opperiri lapillis, mobilitatem pondere stabilientes: 
nolunt volutatione spinas atterere, quod ubi videre nautici, statim
pluribus ancoris navigia infrænant*.”  Plin. ix. 5.  *cf*. Plut., *De
Solert. An*. 979, Oppian, *Halieut*. ii. 225, and Ælian, *Hist. An*.
vii. 33.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[93:1630](2080069.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="viii.viii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p51"></span> *cf*. [Prov. xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#003)<span id="viii.viii-p51.1"></span>: 
“The eyes of the Lord are in every place,” and [Ps. cxxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)<span id="viii.viii-p51.2"></span>. 
So Hesiod, <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p51.3"></span>πάντα
ἰδὼν Διὸς ὀφθαλμὸς καὶ πάντα νοήσας</span>.  Hes. *Works and Days*, 265.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[93:1631](2080069.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="viii.viii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p53"></span> [Eph. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span id="viii.viii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[93:1632](2080069.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="viii.viii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p54"></span> The fable is in Ælian, *Hist. An*. ix.
66, and is contradicted by Athenæus, who says (vii. p. 312):  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p54.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii-p54.2"></span>Ανδρέας δὲ ἐν τῷ περὶ
τῶν ψευδῶς πεπιστευμένων ψευδός φησιν εἶναι τὸ Μύραιναν ἔχιϊ μίγνυσθαι
προσερχομένην ἐπὶ τὸ τεναγῶδες, οὐδὲ γαρ ἐπὶ τενάγους ἔχεις νέμεσθαι,
φιληδοῦντας λιμώδεσιν ἐρημίαις.  Σώστρατος δὲ ἐν τοῖς περὶ Ζώων
συγκατατίθεται τῇ μίξει</span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[94:1633](2080069.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="viii.viii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p57"></span> The Pinna is a bivalve with a silky
beard, of which several species are found in the Mediterranean.  The
beard is called by modern naturalists byssus.  The shell of the giant
pinna is sometimes two feet long.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[94:1634](2080069.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="viii.viii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p59"></span> [Gen. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)<span id="viii.viii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[94:1635](2080069.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="viii.viii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p60"></span> “*Tamen omnia hæc, pariterque eodem
impellentia unus ac parvus admodum pisciculus, echeneis appellatus, in
se tenet.  Ruant venti licet, et sæviant procellæ imperat furori,
viresque tantas compescit, et cogit stare navigia:  quod non vincula
ulla, non anchoræ pondere, irrevocabili jactæ…Fertur Actiaco marte
tenuisse navim Antonii properantis circumire et exhortare suos donec
transiret in aliam.…Tennit et nostra memoria Caii principis ab Astura
Antium renavigantes*.”  Plin. xxxii. 1.  The popular error was long
lived.

<span id="viii.viii-p61"></span>“Life is a voyage, and, in our life’s
ways,

<span id="viii.viii-p62"></span>Countries, courts, towns, are rocks or
*remoras*.”

<span id="viii.viii-p63"></span>Donne, *To Sir Henry Wotton*.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[94:1636](2080069.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="viii.viii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p64"></span> Pliny (ix. 72) says it is sometimes
five inches long.  Ælian (*Hist. An*. i. 56) calls the wound incurable.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[94:1637](2080069.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="viii.viii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p65"></span> Pliny (ix. 72) calls it *tactu
pestilens*, and says (xxxii. 3) that no other fish eats it, except the
mullet.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[94:1638](2080069.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="viii.viii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p67"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)<span id="viii.viii-p67.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The creation of fowl and water animals.](2080070)
