[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080007)  [Next](2080009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p1.1"></span>II.—Education.</span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p2"></span>The place most closely connected with St.
Basil’s early years is neither Cæsarea nor Neocæsarea, but an
insignificant village not far from the latter place, where he was
brought up by his admirable grandmother Macrina. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)   In this neighbourhood his family had
considerable property, and here he afterwards resided.  The estate was
at Annesi on the river Iris (Jekil-Irmak), <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) and lay in the neighbourhood of scenery
of romantic beauty.  Basil’s own description <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) of his retreat on the opposite side of
the Iris matches the reference of Gregory of Nazianzus <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) to the narrow glen among lofty mountains,
which keep it always in shadow and darkness, while far below the river
foams and roars in its narrow precipitous bed.

<span id="vi.i.ii-p7"></span>There is some little difficulty in
understanding the statement of Basil in Letter CCXVI., that the house of
his brother Peter, which he visited in 375, and which we may assume to
have been on the family property (*cf*. Letter CX. § 1) was “not far
from Neocæsarea.”  As a matter of fact, the Iris nowhere winds nearer to
Neocæsarea than at a distance of about twenty miles, and Turkhal is not
at the nearest point.  But it is all a question of degree.  Relatively
to Cæsarea, Basil’s usual place of residence, Annesi is near
Neocæsarea.  An analogy would be found in the statement of a writer
usually residing in London, that if he came to Sheffield he would be not
far from Doncaster. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)

<span id="vi.i.ii-p9"></span>At Annesi his mother Emmelia erected a
chapel in honour of the Forty Martyrs of Sebaste to which their relics
were translated.  It is possible that Basil was present at the <span
id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="vi.i.ii-Page_xv"></span>dedication
services, lasting all night long, which are related to have sent his
brother Gregory to sleep. <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)   Here,
then, Basil was taught the rudiments of religion by his
grandmother, <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) and by his
father, <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) in accordance with the
teaching of the great Gregory the Wonder-worker. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)   Here he learned the Catholic faith.

<span id="vi.i.ii-p14"></span>At an early age he seems to have been sent
to school at Cæsarea, <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) and there to
have formed the acquaintance of an Eusebius, otherwise unknown, <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) Hesychius, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) and Gregory of Nazianzus, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) and to have conceived a boyish admiration
for Dianius the archbishop. <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="vi.i.ii-p20"></span>From Cæsarea Basil went to Constantinople,
and there studied rhetoric and philosophy with success.  Socrates <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) and Sozomen <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) say that he worked at Antioch under
Libanius.  It may be that both these writers have confounded Basil of
Cæsarea with the Basil to whom Chrysostom dedicated his *De Sacerdotio*,
and who was perhaps the bishop of Raphanea, who signed the creed of
Constantinople. <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36)

<span id="vi.i.ii-p24"></span>There is no corroboration of a sojourn of
Basil of Cæsarea at Antioch.  Libanius was at Constantinople in
347, <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) and there Basil may have
attended his lectures. <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)

<span id="vi.i.ii-p27"></span>From Constantinople the young Cappadocian
student proceeded in 351 to Athens.  Of an university town of the 4th
century we have a lively picture in the writings of his friend, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) and are reminded that the rough
horse-play of the modern undergraduate is a survival of a very ancient
barbarism.  The lads were affiliated to certain fraternities, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) and looked out for the arrival of every
new student at the city, with the object of attaching him to the classes
of this or that teacher.  Kinsmen were on the watch for kinsmen and
acquaintances for acquaintances; sometimes it was mere good-humoured
violence which secured the person of the freshman.  The first step in
this grotesque matriculation was an entertainment; then the guest of the
day was conducted with ceremonial procession through the agora to the
entrance of the baths.  There they leaped round him with wild cries, and
refused him admission.  At last an entry was forced with mock fury, and
the neophyte was made free of the mysteries of the baths and of the
lecture halls.  Gregory of Nazianzus, a student a little senior to
Basil, succeeded in sparing him the ordeal of this initiation, and his
dignity and sweetness of character seem to have secured him immunity
from rough usage without loss of popularity. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)   At Athens the two young Cappadocians
were noted among their contemporaries for three things:  their diligence
and success in work; their stainless and devout life; and their close
mutual affection.  Everything was common to them.  They were as one
soul.  What formed the closest bond of union was their faith.  God and
their love of what is best made them one. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)   Himerius, a pagan, and Prohæresius, an
Armenian Christian, are mentioned among the well-known professors whose
classes Basil attended. <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)   Among
early friendships, formed possibly during his university career, Basil’s
own letters name those with Terentius <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) and Sophronius. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="vi.i.ii-p38"></span>If the Libanian correspondence be accepted
as genuine, we may add Celsus, a pupil of Libanius, to the group. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)   But if we except Basil’s affection for
Gregory of Nazianzus, of none of these intimacies is the interest so
great as of that which is recorded to have been formed between Basil and
the young prince Julian. <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)   One
incident of the Athenian sojourn, which led to bitter consequences in
after days, was the brief communication with Apollinarius, and the
letter written “from layman to layman,” <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) which his opponents made a handle for
much malevolence, and perhaps for forgery.  Julian arrived at Athens
after the middle of the year 355. <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)  
Basil’s departure thence and return to Cæsarea may therefore <span
id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span id="vi.i.ii-Page_xvi"></span>be
approximately fixed early in 356. <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)  
Basil starts for his life’s work with the equipment of the most liberal
education which the age could supply.  He has studied Greek literature,
rhetoric, and philosophy under the most famous teachers.  He has been
brought into contact with every class of mind.  His training has been no
narrow hothouse forcing of theological opinion and ecclesiastical
sentiment.  The world which he is to renounce, to confront, to influence
is not a world unknown to him. <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)   He
has seen heathenism in all the autumn grace of its decline, and comes
away victorious from seductions which were fatal to some young men of
early Christian associations.  Athens no doubt contributed its share of
influence to the apostasy of Julian.  Basil, happily, was found to be
rooted more firmly in the faith. <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xiv:21](2080008.htm#fr_20) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p3"></span> *Epp*. cciv., ccx., ccxxiii.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xiv:22](2080008.htm#fr_21) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p4"></span> *Epp*. iii., ccxxiii.  The researches of
Prof. W. M. Ramsay enable the exact spot to be identified with
approximate certainty, and, with his guidance, a pilgrim to the scenes
of Basil’s boyhood and earlier monastic labours might feel himself on
fairly sure ground.  He refers to the description of St. Basil’s
hermitage given by Gregory of Nazianzus in his *Ep*. iv., a description
which may be compared with that of Basil himself in *Ep*. xiv., as one
which “can hardly refer to any other spot than the rocky glen below
Turkhal.  Ibora,” in which the diocese Annesi was situated, “cannot be
placed further down, because it is the frontier bishopric of Pontus
towards Sebasteia, and further up there is no rocky glen until the
territory of Comana is reached.  Gregory Nyssenus, in his treatise on
baptism” (Migne, iii. 324 c.) “speaks of Comana as a neighbouring city. 
Tillemont, thinking that the treatise was written at Nyssa, infers that
Nyssa and Comana were near each other.  The truth is that Gregory must
have written his treatise at Annesi.  We may therefore infer that the
territory of Ibora adjoined that of Comana on the east and that of
Sebasteia on the south, and touched the Iris from the boundary of Comana
down to the point below Turkhal.  The boundary was probably near Tokat,
and Ibora itself may have been actually situated near Turkhal.”  Prof.
W. M. Ramsay, *Hist. Geog. of Asia Minor*, p. 326.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xiv:23](2080008.htm#fr_22) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p5"></span> *Ep*. xiv.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xiv:24](2080008.htm#fr_23) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p6"></span> Greg. Naz., *Ep*. iv.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xiv:25](2080008.htm#fr_24) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p8"></span> On the visits to Peter, Prof. W. M. Ramsay
writes:  “The first and more natural interpretation is that Peter lived
at a place further up the Iris than Dazimon, in the direction of
Neocæsarea.  But on more careful consideration it is obvious that, after
the troubles in Dazimon, Basil went to take a holiday with his brother
Peter, and therefore he did not necessarily continue his journey onward
from Dazimon.  The expression of neighbourhood to the district of
Neocæsarea is doubtless only comparative.  Basil’s usual residence was
at Cæsarea.  Moreover, as Ibora has now been placed, its territory
probably touched that of Neocæsarea.”  *Hist. Geog. of A.M*. p. 328.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xv:26](2080008.htm#fr_25) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p10"></span> Greg. Nyss., *Orat. in xl. Mart*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xv:27](2080008.htm#fr_26) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p11"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xv:28](2080008.htm#fr_27) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p12"></span> *Ep*. ccxxiii.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xv:29](2080008.htm#fr_28) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p13"></span> See *Ep*. cciv. and note on p. 250.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xv:30](2080008.htm#fr_29) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p15"></span> *i.e*. the Cappadocian Cæsarea.  The
theory of Tillemont that Cæsarea of Palestine was the scene of Basil’s
early school life seems hardly to deserve the careful refutation of
Maran (*Vit. Bas*. i. 5).  *cf. Ep*. xlv. p. 148, and p. 145, n.  *cf*.
also note on p. 141 on a possible intercourse between the boy Basil and
the young princes Gallus and Julian in their seclusion at Macellum.  The
park and palace of Macellum (Amm. Marc. “*fundus*”) was near Mt. Argæus
(Soz. v. 2) and close to Cæsarea.  If Basil and Julian did ever study
the Bible together, it seems more probably that they should do so at
Macellum, while the prince was still being educated as a Christian, than
afterwards at Athens, when the residence at Nicomedia has resulted in
the apostasy.  *cf.* Maran, *Vit. Bas*. ii. 4.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xv:31](2080008.htm#fr_30) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p16"></span> *Ep*. cclxxi.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xv:32](2080008.htm#fr_31) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p17"></span> *Ep*. lxiv.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xv:33](2080008.htm#fr_32) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p18"></span> Greg. Naz. *Or*. xliii.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xv:34](2080008.htm#fr_33) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p19"></span> *Ep*. li.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xv:35](2080008.htm#fr_34) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p21"></span> *Ecc. Hist*. iv. 26.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xv:36](2080008.htm#fr_35) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p22"></span> *Ecc. Hist*. vi. 17.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xv:37](2080008.htm#fr_36) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p23"></span> Maran, *Vit. Bas*. ii., Fabricius, Ed.
Harles. vol. ix.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xv:38](2080008.htm#fr_37) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p25"></span> He does not seem to have been at Antioch
until 353, *D.C.B*. iii. 710, when Basil was at Athens.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xv:39](2080008.htm#fr_38) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p26"></span> *cf.* the correspondence with Libanius,
of which the genuineness has been questioned, in *Letters*
cccxxxv.–ccclix.  *Letter* cccxxxix. suggests a possibility of some
study of Hebrew.  But Basil always uses the LXX.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xv:40](2080008.htm#fr_39) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p28"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii., and poem *De
Vita Sua*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xv:41](2080008.htm#fr_40) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p29.1"></span>φράτριαι</span>.  Greg., *De Vita Sua*, 215.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xv:42](2080008.htm#fr_41) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p30"></span> A somewhat similar exemption is recorded
of Dean Stanley at Rugby.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xv:43](2080008.htm#fr_42) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p31"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii. 20, 21; *Carm*.
xi. 221–235:

<span id="vi.i.ii-p32"></span>“<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p32.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p32.2"></span>Ο δ᾽ εἰς ἔν ἡμᾶς διαφερόντως ἤγαγε</span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p33"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p33.1"></span>Τοῦτ ἦν θεός τε καὶ πόθος τῶν
κρεισσόνων.</span>”

<span id="vi.i.ii-p34"></span>Ullman (*Life of Greg*.) quotes Cic., *De
Amicitia*, xxv.:  “*Amicitiæ vis est in eo ut unus quasi animus fiat ex
pluribus*.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xv:44](2080008.htm#fr_43) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p35"></span> Soc. iv. 26 and Soz. vi. 17.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xv:45](2080008.htm#fr_44) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p36"></span> *Ep*. lxiv.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xv:46](2080008.htm#fr_45) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p37"></span> *Ep*. cclxxii.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xv:47](2080008.htm#fr_46) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p39"></span> *Ep*. cccvi.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xv:48](2080008.htm#fr_47) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p40"></span> Greg. Naz., *Or*. iv., *Epp*. xxxix.,
xl., xli., on the first of which see note.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xv:49](2080008.htm#fr_48) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p41"></span> *Ep*. ccxxiv. 2.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xv:50](2080008.htm#fr_49) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p42"></span> Amm. [Mark
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#002),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#008)<span id="vi.i.ii-p42.1"></span>. 
“*Permissus*” is no doubt an euphemism for “*coactus*.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xvi:51](2080008.htm#fr_50) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p43"></span> “*Non enim citius contigit anno* 355
*exeunte aut ineunte* 356*, si quidem ibi vidit Basilius Julianum, qui
in hanc urbem venit jam media parte anni* 355*elapsa:  neque etiam
serius, quia spatia inter studia litterarum et sacerdotium nimis
contrahi non patitur rerum Basilii gestarum multitudo*.”  Maran.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xvi:52](2080008.htm#fr_51) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p44"></span> On the education of Basil, Eug. Fialon
*remarks (Etude Historique et Litteraire*, p. 15):  “*Saint Grégoire,
sur le trône patriarcal de Constantinople, déclarait ne pas savoir la
langue de Rome.  Il en fut de même de Saint Basile.  Du moins, c’est
vainement qu’on chercherait dans ses ouvrages quelque trace des poètes
ou des prosateurs Latins.  Si des passages de l’Hexaméron semblent tirés
de Cicéron ou de Pline, il ne faut pas s’y méprendre.  C’étaint de
sortes de lieux cammuns qui se retrouvent dans Plutarque et dans
Élien-ceux-ci les avaient empruntés à quelque vieil auteur, Aristotle,
par exemple, et c’est à cette source première qu’avaient puisé Grecs et
Latins.  Les Grecs poussaient même si loin l’ignorance du ayant à dire
comment le mot ciel s’exprime en Latin, l’écrit a peu pres comme il
devait l’entendre prononcer aux Romains,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.i.ii-p44.1"></span>Κέλουμ</span>*, sans se préoccuper de la
quantité ni de l’etymologie…La littérature Grecque était donc le fonds
unique des études en Orient, et certes elle pouvait, à elle seule,
satisfaire de nobles intelligences…C’est dans Homère que les jeunes
Grecs apprenaient à lire.  Pendant tout le cours de leurs études, ils
expliquaient ses poèmes…Ses vers remplissent la correspondances des
pères de l’Eglise, et plus d’une comparaison profane passe de ses poèmes
dans leurs homélies.  Après Homère, venaient Hésiode et les tragiques
Hérodote et Thucydide, Démosthène, Isocrate, et Lysias.  Ainsi poètes,
historiens, orateurs, formaient l’esprit, dirigeaient le cœur, élevaient
l’âme des enfants.  Mais ces auteurs étaient les coryphées du paganisme,
et plus d’une passage de leur livres blessait la morale sévère du
christianisme.  Nul doute qu’un maitre religieux, un saint, comme le
père de Basile, á propos des dieux d’Homére,…dût plus d’une fois
déplorer l’aveuglement d’un si beau génie.…Jusqu’ici, les études de
Basile repondent à peu près á notre instruction secondaire.  Alors,
comme aujourd’hui ces première études n’etaient qu’un acheminement à des
travaux plus serieux.  Muni de ce premier bagage littéraire, un jeune
homme rich, et que voulait briller dans le monde, allait dans les grands
centres, à Antioche, à Alexandrie, à Constantinople, et surtout à
Athènes, ètudier l’éloquence et la philosophie*.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xvi:53](2080008.htm#fr_52) <span
id="vi.i.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i.ii-p45"></span> *cf*. C. Ullman, *Life of Gregory of
Naz*. chap. ii., and Greg. Naz., *Or*. xliii. 21.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.i.ii-p45.1"></span>βλαβεραὶ μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις
Αθῆναι ατ εἰς ψυχήν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Life at Cæsarea; Baptism; and Adoption of Monastic
Life.](2080009)
