[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080039)  [Next](2080041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>Against those who say that it is not right
to rank the Holy Spirit with the Father and the Son.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>24.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p3.1"></span>But</span> we must proceed to attack our
opponents, in the endeavour to confute those “oppositions” advanced
against us which are derived from “knowledge falsely so-called.” <span
id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923)

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span>It is not permissible, they assert, for the
Holy Spirit to be ranked with the Father and Son, on account of the
difference of His nature and the inferiority of His dignity.  Against
them it is right to reply in the words of the apostles, “We ought to
obey God rather than men.” <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924)

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>For if our Lord, when enjoining the baptism
of salvation, charged His disciples to baptize all nations in the name
“of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,” <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) not disdaining fellowship with Him,
and these men allege that we must not rank Him with the Father and the
Son, is it not clear that they openly withstand the commandment of God? 
If they deny that coordination of this kind is declaratory of any
fellowship and conjunction, let them tell us why it behoves us to hold
this opinion, and what more intimate mode of conjunction <span
id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) they have.

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span>If the Lord did not indeed conjoin the
Spirit with the Father and Himself in baptism, do not <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) let them lay the blame of conjunction
upon us, for we neither hold nor say anything different.  If on the
contrary the Spirit is there conjoined with the Father and the Son, and
no one is so shameless as to say anything else, then let them not lay
blame on us for following the words of Scripture.

<span id="vii.xi-p12"></span>25.  But all the apparatus of war has been
got ready against us; every intellectual missile is aimed at us; and now
blasphemers’ tongues shoot and hit and hit again, yet harder than
Stephen of old was smitten by the killers of the Christ. <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928)   And do not let them succeed in
concealing the fact that, while an attack on us serves for a pretext for
the war, the real aim of these proceedings is higher.  It is against us,
they say, that they are preparing their engines and their snares;
against us that they are shouting to one another, according to each
one’s strength or cunning, to come on.  But the object of attack is
faith.  The one aim of the whole band of opponents and enemies of “sound
doctrine” <span id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) is to shake down the
foundation of the faith of Christ by levelling apostolic tradition with
the ground, and utterly destroying it.  So like the debtors,—of course
*bona fide* debtors—they clamour for written proof, and reject as
worthless the unwritten tradition of the Fathers. <span
id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930)   But we will not slacken in our
de<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="vii.xi-Page_17"></span>fence
of the truth.  We will not cowardly abandon the cause.  The Lord has
delivered to us as a necessary and saving doctrine that the Holy Spirit
is to be ranked with the Father.  Our opponents think differently, and
see fit to divide and rend <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931)
asunder, and relegate Him to the nature of a ministering spirit.  Is it
not then indisputable that they make their own blasphemy more
authoritative than the law prescribed by the Lord?  Come, then, set
aside mere contention.  Let us consider the points before us, as
follows:

<span id="vii.xi-p17"></span>26.  Whence is it that we are Christians? 
Through our faith, would be the universal answer.  And in what way are
we saved?  Plainly because we were regenerate through the grace given in
our baptism.  How else could we be?  And after recognising that this
salvation is established through the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, shall we fling away “that form of doctrine” <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) which we received?  Would it not
rather be ground for great groaning if we are found now further off from
our salvation “than when we first believed,” <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) and deny now what we then received? 
Whether a man have departed this life without baptism, or have received
a baptism lacking in some of the requirements of the tradition, his loss
is equal. <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)   And whoever does not
always and everywhere keep to and hold fast as a sure protection the
confession which we recorded at our first admission, when, being
delivered “from the idols,” we came “to the living God,” <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) constitutes himself a “stranger” from
the “promises” <span id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) of God, fighting
against his own handwriting, <span id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937)
which he put on record when he professed the faith.  For if to me my
baptism was the beginning of life, and that day of regeneration the
first of days, it is plain that the utterance uttered in the grace of
adoption was the most honourable of all.  Can I then, perverted by these
men’s seductive words, abandon the tradition which guided me to the
light, which bestowed on me the boon of the knowledge of God, whereby I,
so long a foe by reason of sin, was made a child of God?  But, for
myself, I pray that with this confession I may depart hence to the Lord,
and them I charge to preserve the faith secure until the day of Christ,
and to keep the Spirit undivided from the Father and the Son,
preserving, both in the confession of faith and in the doxology, the
doctrine taught them at their baptism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_923"></span>[16:924](2080040.htm#fr_923) <span
id="vii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="vii.xi-p4.1"></span>.  The
intellectual championship of Basil was chiefly asserted in the
vindication of the consubstantiality of the Spirit, against the Arians
and Semi-Arians, of whom Euonomius and Macedonius were leaders, the
latter giving his name to the party who were unsound on the third Person
of the Trinity, and were Macedonians as well as Pneumatomachi.  But even
among the maintainers of the Nicene confession there was much less clear
apprehension of the nature and work of the Spirit than of the Son.  Even
so late as 380, the year after St. Basil’s death, Gregory of Nazianzus,
*Orat.* xxxi. *de Spiritu Sancto*, Cap. 5, wrote “of the wise on our
side some held it to be an energy, some a creature, some God.  Others,
from respect, they say, to Holy Scripture, which lays down no law on the
subject, neither worship nor dishonour the Holy Spirit.”  *cf*. Schaff’s
*Hist. of Christian Ch.* III. Period, Sec. 128.  In Letter cxxv. of St.
Basil will be found a summary of the heresies with which he credited the
Arians, submitted to Eusthathius of Sebaste in 373, shortly before the
composition of the present treatise for Amphilochius.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[16:925](2080040.htm#fr_924) <span
id="vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span> [Acts v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="vii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[16:926](2080040.htm#fr_925) <span
id="vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="vii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[16:927](2080040.htm#fr_926) <span
id="vii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span> The word used is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span>συνάφεια</span>, a crucial word in the
controversy concerning the union of the divine and human natures in our
Lord, *cf*. the third Anathema of Cyril against Nestorius and the use of
this word, and Theodoret’s counter statement (Theod. pp. 25, 27). 
Theodore of Mopsuestia had preferred <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p9.2"></span>συνάφεια</span> to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p9.3"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p9.4"></span>νωσις</span>; Andrew of Samosata saw no
difference between them.  Athanasius (*de Sent. Dionys*. § 17) employs
it for the mutual relationship of the Persons in the Holy Trinity: 
“<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p9.5"></span>προκαταρκτικὸν γάρ
ἐστι τῆς συναφείας τὸ ὄνομα</span>.”

<span id="fn_927"></span>[16:928](2080040.htm#fr_927) <span
id="vii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p11.1"></span>μηδέ</span>.  The note of the Ben. Eds. is,
“this reading, followed by Erasmus, stirs the wrath of Combefis, who
would read, as is found in four <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xi-p11.2"></span>mss.</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p11.3"></span>τότε ἡμῖν</span>, ‘then let them lay the blame
on us.’  But he is quite unfair to Erasmus, who has more clearly
apprehended the drift of the argument.  Basil brings his opponents to
the dilemma that the words ‘In the name of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost’ either do or do not assert a conjunction with the
Father and the Son.  If not, Basil ought not to be found fault with on
the score of ‘conjunction,’ for he abides by the words of Scripture, and
conjunction no more follows from his words than from those of our Lord. 
If they do, he cannot be found fault with for following the words of
Scripture.  The attentive reader will see this to be the meaning of
Basil, and the received reading ought to be retained.”

<span id="fn_928"></span>[16:929](2080040.htm#fr_928) <span
id="vii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p13.1"></span>Χριστοφόνοι</span>.  The compound occurs in Ps.
Ignat. *ad Philad*. vi.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[16:930](2080040.htm#fr_929) <span
id="vii.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p14"></span> [1 Tim. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)<span id="vii.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[16:931](2080040.htm#fr_930) <span
id="vii.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p15"></span> Mr. Johnston sees here a reference to the
parable of the unjust steward, and appositely quotes Greg. Naz. *Orat*.
xxxi, § 3, on the heretics’ use of Scripture, “They find a cloak for
their impiety in their affection for Scripture.”  The Arians at Nicæa
objected to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p15.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p15.2"></span>μοόυσιον</span> as unscriptural.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[17:932](2080040.htm#fr_931) <span
id="vii.xi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p16"></span> *cf*. Ep. cxx. 5<span
id="vii.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[17:933](2080040.htm#fr_932) <span
id="vii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p18"></span> [Rom. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)<span id="vii.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[17:934](2080040.htm#fr_933) <span
id="vii.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p19"></span> [Rom. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011)<span id="vii.xi-p19.1"></span>,
R.V.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[17:935](2080040.htm#fr_934) <span
id="vii.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p20"></span> The question is whether the baptism has
been solemnized, according to the divine command, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  St. Cyprian in his
controversy with Stephen, Bp. of Rome, represented the sterner view that
heretical baptism was invalid.  But, with some exceptions in the East,
the position ultimately prevailed that baptism with water, and *in the
prescribed words*, by whomsoever administered, was valid.  So St.
Augustine, “*Si evangelicus verbis in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus
Sancti Marcion baptismum consecrabat, integrum erat Sacramentum, quamvis
ejus fides sub eisdem verbis aliud opinantis quam catholica veritas
docet non esset integra*.”  (*Cont. Petil. de unico bapt*. § 3.)  So the
*VIII. Canon of Arles* (314), “*De Afris, quod propria lege sua utuntur
ut rebaptizent, placuit, ut, si ad ecclesiam aliquis de hæresi venerit,
interrogent eum symbolum; et si perviderint eum in Patre, et Filio et
Spiritu Sancto, esse baptizatum, manus ei tantum imponantur, ut accipiat
spiritum sanctum.  Quod si interrogatus non responderit hanc Trinitatem,
baptizetur*.”  So the VII. Canon of Constantinople (381) by which the
Eunomians who only baptized with one immersion, and the Montanists, here
called Phrygians, and the Sabellians, who taught the doctrine of the
Fatherhood of the Son, were counted as heathen.  *Vide* Bright’s notes
on the *Canons of the Councils*, p. 106.  Socrates, v. 24, describes how
the Eunomi-Eutychians baptized not in the name of the Trinity, but into
the death of Christ.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[17:936](2080040.htm#fr_935) <span
id="vii.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p21"></span> [1 Thess. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[17:937](2080040.htm#fr_936) <span
id="vii.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p22"></span> [Eph. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="vii.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[17:938](2080040.htm#fr_937) <span
id="vii.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p23"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p23.1"></span>χειρόγραφον</span>, more common in Latin than
in Greek, is used generally for a bond.  *cf*. Juv. *Sat*. xvi. 41,
“*<span id="vii.xi-p23.2"></span>Debitor aut sumptos pergit non reddere
nummos, vana supervacui dicens chirographa ligni*.”  On the use of the
word, *vide* Bp. Lightfoot on [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xi-p23.3"></span>. 
The names of the catechumens were registered, and the Renunciation and
Profession of Faith (*Interrogationes et Responsa*; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p23.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xi-p23.5"></span>περωτήσεις καἰ
ἀποκρίσεις</span>) may have been signed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That they who deny the Spirit are transgressors.](2080041)
