[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080001)  [Next](2080003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="iii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="iii-p3.1"></span>This</span> translation of a portion of the works
of St. Basil was originally begun under the editorial supervision of Dr.
Wace.  It was first announced that the translation would comprise the
*De Spiritu Sancto* and *Select Letters*, but it was ultimately arranged
with Dr. Wace that a volume of the series should be devoted to St.
Basil, containing, as well as the *De Spiritu Sancto*, the whole of the
*Letters*, and the *Hexæmeron*.  The *De Spiritu Sancto* has already
appeared in an English form, as have portions of the *Letters*, but I am
not aware of an English translation of the *Hexæmeron*, or of all the
*Letters*.  The *De Spiritu Sancto* was presumably selected for
publication as being at once the most famous, as it is among the most
valuable, of the extant works of this Father.  The *Letters* comprise
short theological treatises and contain passages of historical and
varied biographical interest, as well as valuable specimens of spiritual
and consolatory exhortation.  The *Hexæmeron* was added as being the
most noted and popular of St. Basil’s compositions in older days, and as
illustrating his exegetic method and skill, and his power as an
extempore preacher.

<span id="iii-p4"></span>The edition used has been that of the
Benedictine editors as issued by Migne, with the aid, in the case of the
*De Spiritu Sancto*, of that published by Rev. C. F. H. Johnston.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>The editorship of Dr. Wace terminated during
the progress of the work, but I am indebted to him, and very gratefully
acknowledge the obligation, for valuable counsel and suggestions.  I
also desire to record my thanks to the Rev. C. Hole, Lecturer in
Ecclesiastical History at King’s College, London, and to Mr. Reginald
Geare, Head Master of the Grammar School, Bishop’s Stortford, to the
former for help in the revision of proof-sheets and important
suggestions, and to the latter for aid in the translation of several of
the *Letters*.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>The works consulted in the process of
translation and attempted illustration are sufficiently indicated in the
notes.

<span id="iii-p7"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="iii-p7.1"></span>London</span>, December, 1894.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span id="iii-Page_vii"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genealogical Tables](2080003)
