[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080191)  [Next](2080193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxx"></span>

<span id="ix.cxx-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxx-p1.1"></span>Letter CXIX. <span
id="fr_2394"></span>[2395](#fn_2394.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxx-p3"></span>*To Eustathius, Bishop of Sebasteia*. <span
id="fr_2395"></span>[2396](#fn_2395.md)

<span id="ix.cxx-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxx-p5.1"></span>I address</span> you by the very honourable and
reverend brother Petrus, beseeching you now and ever to pray for me,
that I may be changed from ways dangerous and to be shunned, and may be
made one day worthy of the name of Christ.  Though I say nothing, you
will converse together about my affairs, and he will give you an exact
account of what has taken place.  But you admit without due examination,
the vile suspicions against me which will probably be raised by men who
have insulted me, in violation of the fear of God and the regard of
men.  I am ashamed to tell you what treatment I have received from the
illustrious Basilius, whom I had accepted at the hands of your reverence
as a protection for my life.  But, when you have heard what our brother
has to say, you will know every detail.  I do not thus speak to avenge
myself upon him, for I pray that it may not be put to his account by the
Lord, but in order that your affection to me may remain firm, and
because I am afraid lest it be shaken by the monstrous slanders which
these men are pretty sure to make up in defence of their fall.  Whatever
be the charges they adduce, I hope your intelligence will put these
enquiries to them.  Have they formally accused me?  Have they sought for
any correction of the error which they bring against me?  Have they made
their grievance against me plain?  As matters are, by their ignoble
flight they have made it evident that under the cheerfulness of their
countenance, and their counterfeit expressions of affection, they are
all the while hiding in their heart an immense depth of guile and of
gall.  In all this, whether I narrate it or not, your intelligence knows
perfectly well what sorrow they have caused me, and what laughter to
those who, always expressing their abomination for the pious life in
this wretched city, affirm that the pretence of virtue is practised as a
mere trick to get credit, a mere assumption to deceive.  So in these
days no mode of life is now so suspected of vice by people here as the
profession of asceticism.  Your intelligence will consider what is the
best cure for all this.

<span id="ix.cxx-p6"></span>As to the charges patched up against me by
Sophronius, far from being a prelude of blessings, they are a beginning
of division and separation, and are likely to lead to even my love
growing cold.  I implore that by your merciful kindness he may be
withheld from his injurious efforts, and that your affection may strive
rather to tighten the bonds of what is falling asunder, and not to
increase separation by joining with those who are eager for dissent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2394"></span>[192:2395](2080192.htm#fr_2394.md) <span
id="ix.cxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxx-p2"></span> Placed in the end of 372 or beginning of
373.

<span id="fn_2395"></span>[192:2396](2080192.htm#fr_2395.md) <span
id="ix.cxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxx-p4"></span> On the misconduct of Basilius and
Sophronius, two disciples of Eustathius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Meletius, bishop of Antioch.](2080193.md)
