[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080197)  [Next](2080199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXV. <span
id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p3"></span>*A transcript of the faith as dictated by
Saint Basil, and subscribed by Eustathius, bishop of Sebasteia.* <span
id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407.md)

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p5.1"></span>Both</span> men whose minds have been
preoccupied by a heterodox creed and now wish to change over to the
congregation of the orthodox, and also those who are now for the first
time desirous of being instructed in the doctrine of truth, must be
taught the creed drawn up by the blessed fathers in the Council which
met at Nicæa.  The same training would also be exceedingly useful in the
case of all who are under suspicion of being in a state of hostility to
sound doctrine, and who by ingenious and plausible excuses keep the
depravity of their sentiments out of view.  For these too this creed is
all that is needed.  They will either get cured of their concealed
unsoundness, or, by continuing to keep it concealed, will themselves
bear the load of the sentence due to their dishonesty, and will provide
us with an easy defence in the day of judgment, when the Lord will lift
the cover from the hidden things of darkness, and “make manifest the
counsels of the hearts.” <span id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408.md)   It
is therefore desirable to receive them with the confession not only that
they believe in the words put forth by our fathers at Nicæa, but also
according to the sound meaning expressed by those words.  For there are
men who even in this creed pervert the word of truth, and wrest the
meaning of the words in it to suit their own notions.  So Marcellus,
when expressing impious sentiments concerning the hypostasis of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and describing Him as being Logos and nothing more, <span
id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409.md) had the hardihood to profess to
find a pretext for his principles in that creed by affixing an improper
sense upon the Homoousion.  Some, moreover, of the impious following of
the Libyan Sabellius, who understand hypostasis and substance to be
identical, derive ground for the establishment of their blasphemy from
the same source, because of its having been written in the creed “if any
one says that the Son is of a different substance or hypostasis, the
Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes him.”  But they did not
there state hypostasis and substance to be identical.  Had the words
expressed one and the same meaning, what need of both?  It is on the
contrary clear that while by some it was denied that the Son was of the
same substance with the Father, and some asserted that He was not of the
substance and was of some other hypostasis, they thus condemned both
opinions as outside that held by the Church.  When they set forth their
own view, they declared the Son to be of the substance of the Father,
but they did not add the words “of the hypostasis.”  The <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span id="ix.cxxvi-Page_195"></span>former
clause stands for the condemnation of the faulty view; the latter
plainly states the dogma of salvation.  We are therefore bound to
confess the Son to be of one substance with the Father, as it is
written; but the Father to exist in His own proper hypostasis, the Son
in His, and the Holy Ghost in His, as they themselves have clearly
delivered the doctrine.  They indeed clearly and satisfactorily declared
in the words Light of Light, that the Light which begat and the Light
which was begotten, are distinct, and yet Light and Light; so that the
definition of the Substance is one and the same. <span
id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410.md)   I will now subjoin the actual
creed as it was drawn up at Nicæa. <span
id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411.md)

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p10"></span>2.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p10.1"></span>πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεὸν Πατέρα παντοκράτορα,
πάντων ὁρατῶν τε καὶ ἀοράτων ποιητήν· \[ποιητὴν οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς ὁρατῶν
τε πάντων καὶ ἀοράτων·\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p11.1"></span>καὶ εἰς ἕνα Κύριον Ιησοῦν Χριστόν, τὸν υἱ&
232·ν τοῦ Θεοῦ \[τὸν μονογενῆ\] γεννηθέντα ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς μονογενῆ.
 \[τὸν ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς γεννηθέντα πρὸ πάντων τών αἰ& 240·νων.\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p12.1"></span>τουτέστιν ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας τοῦ Πατρός, Θεὸν ἐκ
Θεοῦ</span> \[omit\], <span id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412.md) <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.cxxvi-p13.1"></span>Φῶς ἐκ Φῶτος, Θεὸν
ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ, γεννηθέντα οὐ ποιηθέντα, ὁμοούσιον τῷ Πατρι,
δι᾽ οἷ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο, τά τε ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ τὰ ἐν τῇ γῇ</span>
\[omit\].

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p14"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p14.1"></span>τὸν δι᾽ ἡμᾶς τοὺς ἀνθρωποὺς καὶ διὰ τὴν
ἡμέτεραν σωτηρίαν, κατελθόντα \[ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν\] καὶ σαρκωθέντα.  \[ἑκ
πνεύματος ἁγίου καὶ Μαρίας τῆς παρθένου.\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p15"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p15.1"></span>καὶ ἐνανθρωπήσαντα \[σταυρωθέντα τε ὑπὲρ ημῶν
ἐπὶ Ποντίου Πιλάτου, καὶ\], παθόντα \[καὶ ταφέντα\], καί ἀναστάντα τῇ
τρίτῃ ἡμέρα \[κατὰ τὰς γραφὰς καὶ\], ἀνελθόντα εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς.  \[καὶ
καθεζόμενον ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ Πατρός.\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p16"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p16.1"></span>καί πάλιν ἐρχόμενον \[μετὰ δόξης\] κρῖναι
ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς· \[οὗ τῆς βασιλείας οὐκ ἔσται τέλος·\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p17.1"></span>καί εἰς τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον.  \[τὸ Κύριον καὶ
τὸ ζωοποιὸν τὸ ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, τὸ σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱ& 254·
συμπροσκυνούμενον καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον, τὸ λαλῆσαν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν· εἰς
μίαν ἁγίαν καθολικὴν καὶ ἀποστολικὴν ἐκκλησίαν, ὁμολογοῦμεν ἓν βάπτισμα
εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν, προσδοκῶμεν ἀνάστασιν νεκρῶν, καὶ ζωὴν τοῦ
μέλλοντος αἰ& 242·νος.  ᾽Αμὴν.\]</span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p18"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p18.1"></span>τοῦς δὲ λέγοντας, ἦν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, καὶ
πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν, καὶ ὅτι ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων ἐγένετο, ἢ ἐξ ἑτέρας
ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας φάσκοντας εἶναι, ἢ κτιστὸν ἢ τρεπτὸν ἢ ἀλλοιωτὸν τὸν
Υἱ& 232·ν τοῦ Θεοῦ, τουτοὺς ἀναθεματίζει ἡ καθολικὴ καὶ ἀποστολικὴ
ἐκκλησια.</span>  \[Omit all the Anathemas.\]

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p19"></span>3.  Here then all points but one are
satisfactorily and exactly defined, some for the correction of what had
been corrupted, some as a precaution against errors expected to arise. 
The doctrine of the Spirit, however, is merely mentioned, as needing no
elaboration, because at the time of the Council no question was mooted,
and the opinion on this subject in the hearts of the faithful was
exposed to no attack.  Little by little, however, the growing
poison-germs of impiety, first sown by Arius, the champion of the
heresy, and then by those who succeeded to his inheritance of mischief,
were nurtured to the plague of the Church, and the regular development
of the impiety issued in blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.  Under these
circumstances we are under the necessity of putting before the men who
have no pity for themselves, and shut their eyes to the inevitable
threat directed by our Lord against blasphemers of the Holy Ghost, their
bounden duty.  They must anathematize all who call the Holy Ghost a
creature, and all who so think; all who do not confess that He is holy
by nature, as the Father is holy by nature, and the Son is holy by
nature, and refuse Him His place in the blessed divine nature.  Our not
separating Him from Father and Son is a proof of our right mind, for we
are bound to be baptized in the terms we have received and to profess
belief in the terms in which we are baptized, and as we have professed
belief in, so to give glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to hold
aloof from the communion of all who call Him creature, as from open
blasphemers.  One point must be regarded as settled; and the remark is
necessary because of our slanderers; we do not speak of the Holy Ghost
as unbegotten, for we recognise one Unbegotten and one Origin of all
things, <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413.md) the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ:  nor do we speak of the Holy Ghost as begotten, for
by the tradition of the faith we have been taught one Only-begotten: 
the Spirit of truth we have been taught to proceed from the Father, and
we confess Him to be of God without creation.  We are also bound to
anathematize all who speak of the Holy Ghost as ministerial, <span
id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414.md) inasmuch as by this term they
degrade Him to the rank of a creature.  For that the ministering spirits
are creatures we are told by Scripture in the words “they are all
ministering spirits sent forth to minister.” <span
id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415.md)   But <span id="page_196">p.
196</span> <span id="ix.cxxvi-Page_196"></span>because of men who make
universal confusion, and do not keep the doctrine of the Gospels, it is
necessary to add yet this further, that they are to be shunned, as
plainly hostile to true religion, who invert the order left us by the
Lord, and put the Son before the Father, and the Holy Spirit before the
Son.  For we must keep unaltered and inviolable that order which we have
received from the very words of the Lord, “Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.” <span id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416.md)

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p24"></span>I, Eustathius, bishop, have read to thee,
Basil, and understood; and I assent to what is written above.  I have
signed in the presence of our Fronto, Severus, the chorepiscopus, and
several other clerics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[194:2407](2080198.htm#fr_2406.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[194:2408](2080198.htm#fr_2407.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p4"></span> On Basil’s relations with Eustathius of
Sebasteia (Siwas in Armenia Minor), the Vicar of Bray of the Arian
controversies, who probably subscribed more creeds than any other
prominent bishop of his age, see *Letters* cxxx. and ccxliv., and p.
171, n.

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[194:2409](2080198.htm#fr_2408.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.cxxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[194:2410](2080198.htm#fr_2409.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p7"></span> Marcellus of Ancyra (Angora) was
represented to teach that the Son had no real personality, but was only
the outward manifestation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p7.1"></span>Πορφορικὸς Λόγος</span>) of the Father, but he
could always defend himself on the ground that he was in communion with
Julius and Athanasius, popes of Rome and Alexandria.  *cf*. Jer., *De
Vir. Ill.* chap. lxxxvi.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[195:2411](2080198.htm#fr_2410.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p8"></span> *cf. Letters* xxxviii. and xcii.  Basil
is anxious to show that his own view is identical with the Nicene, and
does not admit a development and variation in the meaning of the word
hypostasis; but on comparing such a passage as that in Athan. *c.*
*Afros*, “hypostasis is substance, and means nothing else but very
being” (<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cxxvi-p8.1"></span>ἡ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cxxvi-p8.2"></span>δὲ ὑπόστασις οὐσία
ἐστὶ καὶ οὐδὲν ἀλλὸ σημαινόμενον ἔχει ἢ αὐτὸ τὸ ὄν</span>) with St.
Basil’s words in the text it appears plain that hypostasis is not used
throughout in the same sense.  An erroneous sense of “three hypostases”
was understood to be condemned at Nicæa, though Athanasius, *e.g.* “*In
illud omnia*,” etc., Schaff and Wace’s ed., p. 90, does himself use the
phrase, writing probably about ten years after Nicæa; but he more
commonly treats <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p8.3"></span>ουσία</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p8.4"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p8.5"></span>πόστασις</span> as identical.  See specially
the *Tomus ad Antiochenos* of <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p8.6"></span>a.d.</span> 362 on the possible use of either
“three hypostases” or “one hypostasis.”  *cf*. also n. on p. 179.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[195:2412](2080198.htm#fr_2411.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p8.7"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p9"></span> I give the creed in the original Greek. 
The passages in brackets indicate the alterations of the
Constantinopolitan revision according to the text of Chalcedon.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[195:2413](2080198.htm#fr_2412.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p13"></span> “*Deum de Deo*” is inserted in the Sarum
Breviary.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[195:2414](2080198.htm#fr_2413.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p20"></span> *cf*. pp. 27 and 39, notes.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[195:2415](2080198.htm#fr_2414.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p21"></span> *cf.* *De Sp. S. §* 25, p. 17.  On those
who described the Spirit as merely a ministering spirit, *vide* Athan.,
Ad *Serap*. i. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxxvi-p21.1"></span>λεγόντων αὐτὸ μὴ μόνον κτίσμα, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν
λειτουργικῶν πνευμάτων ἓν αὐτὸ εἶναι</span>).  This new party arose in
the Delta about 362, and was first known as “Tropici.”  They were
condemned at the synod held at Alexandria on the return of Athanasius
from his third exile.  Its Synodical Letter is the *Tomus ad
Antiochenos*.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[195:2416](2080198.htm#fr_2415.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p22"></span> [Heb. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.cxxvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[196:2417](2080198.htm#fr_2416.md) <span
id="ix.cxxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxvi-p23"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.cxxvi-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Atarbius.](2080199.md)
