[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080030)  [Next](2080032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>Prefatory remarks on the need of exact
investigation of the most minute portions of theology.

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>Your</span> desire for information, my right
well-beloved and most deeply respected brother Amphilochius, I highly
commend, and not less your industrious energy.  I have been exceedingly
delighted at the care and watchfulness shewn in the expression of your
opinion that of all the terms concerning God in every mode of speech,
not one ought to be left without exact investigation.  You have turned
to good account your reading of the exhortation of the Lord, “Every one
that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth,” <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) and by your diligence in asking might,
I ween, stir even the most reluctant to give you a share of what they
possess.  And this in you yet further moves my admiration, that you do
not, according to the manners of the most part of the men of our time,
propose your questions by way of mere test, but with the honest desire
to arrive at the actual truth.  There is no lack in these days of
captious listeners and questioners; but to find a character desirous of
information, and seeking the truth as a remedy for ignorance, is very
difficult.  Just as in the hunter’s snare, or in the soldier’s ambush,
the trick is generally ingeniously concealed, so it is with the
inquiries of the majority of the questioners who advance arguments, not
so much with the view of getting any good out of them, as in order that,
in the event of their failing to elicit answers which chime in with
their own desires, they may seem to have fair ground for controversy.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>2.  If “To the fool on his asking for
wisdom, wisdom shall be reckoned,” <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705) at how high a price shall we value
“the wise hearer” who is quoted by the Prophet in the same verse with
“the admirable counsellor”? <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706)   It
is right, I ween, to hold him worthy of all approbation, and to urge him
on to further progress, sharing his enthusiasm, and in all things
toiling at his side as he presses onwards to perfection.  To count the
terms used in theology as of primary importance, and to endeavour to
trace out the hidden meaning in every phrase and in every syllable, is a
characteristic wanting in those who are idle in the pursuit of true
religion, but distinguishing all who get knowledge of “the mark” “of our
calling;” <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) for what is set before
us is, so far as is possible with human nature, to be made like unto
God.  Now without knowledge there can be no making like; and knowledge
is not got without lessons.  The beginning of teaching is speech, and
syllables and words are parts of speech.  It follows then that to
investigate syllables is not to shoot wide of the mark, nor, because the
questions raised are what might seem to some insignificant, are they on
that account to be held unworthy of heed.  Truth is always a quarry hard
to hunt, and therefore we must look everywhere for its tracks.  The
acquisition of true religion is just like that of crafts; both grow bit
by bit; apprentices must despise nothing.  If a man despise the first
elements as small and insignificant, he will never reach the perfection
of wisdom.

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>Yea and Nay are but two syllables, yet there
is often involved in these little words at once the best of all good
things, Truth, and that beyond which wickedness cannot go, a Lie.  But
why mention Yea and Nay?  Before now, a martyr bearing witness for
Christ has been judged to have paid in full the claim of true religion
by merely nodding his head. <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708)  
If, then, this be so, what term in theology is so small but that the
effect of its weight in the scales according as it be rightly or wrongly
used is not great?  Of the law we are told “not one jot nor one tittle
shall pass away;” <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) how then could
it be safe for us to leave even the least unnoticed?  The very points
which you yourself have sought to have thoroughly sifted by us are at
the same time both small and great.  Their use is the matter of a
moment, and peradventure they are therefore made of small account; but,
when we reckon the force of their meaning, they are great.  They may be
likened to the mustard plant which, though it be the least of
shrub-seeds, yet when properly cultivated and the forces latent in its
germs unfolded, rises to its own sufficient height.

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span>If any one laughs when he sees our
subtilty, to use the Psalmist’s <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710)
words, about syllables, let him know that he reaps laughter’s fruitless
fruit; and let us, neither giving in to men’s reproaches, nor yet
vanquished <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_3"></span>by their disparagement, continue our
investigation.  So far, indeed, am I from feeling ashamed of these
things because they are small, that, even if I could attain to ever so
minute a fraction of their dignity, I should both congratulate myself on
having won high honour, and should tell my brother and
fellow-investigator that no small gain had accrued to him therefrom.

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>While, then, I am aware that the
controversy contained in little words is a very great one, in hope of
the prize I do not shrink from toil, with the conviction that the
discussion will both prove profitable to myself, and that my hearers
will be rewarded with no small benefit.  Wherefore now with the help, if
I may so say, of the Holy Spirit Himself, I will approach the exposition
of the subject, and, if you will, that I may be put in the way of the
discussion, I will for a moment revert to the origin of the question
before us.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>3.  Lately when praying with the people,
and using the full doxology to God the Father in both forms, at one time
“*with* the Son *together with* the Holy Ghost,” and at another
“*through* the Son *in* the Holy Ghost,” I was attacked by some of those
present on the ground that I was introducing novel and at the same time
mutually contradictory terms. <span id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711)  
You, however, chiefly with the view of benefiting them, or, if they are
wholly incurable, for the security of such as may fall in with them,
have expressed the opinion that some clear instruction ought to be
published concerning the force underlying the syllables employed.  I
will therefore write as concisely as possible, in the endeavour to lay
down some admitted principle for the discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_704"></span>[2:705](2080031.htm#fr_704) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> [Luke xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#010)<span id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[2:706](2080031.htm#fr_705) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> [Prov. xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028)<span id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[2:707](2080031.htm#fr_706) <span
id="vii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span> [Is. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003)<span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>, lxx.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[2:708](2080031.htm#fr_707) <span
id="vii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span> [Phil. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[2:709](2080031.htm#fr_708) <span
id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span> *i.e.*, confessed or denied himself a
Christian.  The Benedictine Editors and their followers seem to have
missed the force of the original, both grammatically and historically,
in referring it to the time when St. Basil is writing; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>ἤ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p10.2"></span>δη ἐκρίθη</span> does not
mean “at the present day is judged,” but “ere now has been judged.”  And
in <span class="c14"><span id="vii.ii-p10.3"></span>a.d.</span> 374
there was no persecution of Christians such as seems to be referred to,
although Valens tried to crush the Catholics.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[2:710](2080031.htm#fr_709) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> [Matt. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)<span id="vii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[2:711](2080031.htm#fr_710) <span
id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span> [Ps. cxix.
85](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#085)<span id="vii.ii-p13.1"></span>,
lxx.  “The lawless have described subtilties for me, but not according
to thy law, O Lord;” for A.V. & R.V., “The proud have digged pits for me
which are not after thy law.”  The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p13.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p13.3"></span>δολεσχία</span> is used in a bad sense to mean
garrulity; in a good sense, keenness, subtilty.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[3:712](2080031.htm#fr_711) <span
id="vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span> It is impossible to convey in English the
precise force of the prepositions used.  “*With*” represents <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>μετά</span>, of which the
original meaning is “amid;” “*together* with,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p16.2"></span>σύν</span>, of which the original meaning is
“at the same time as.”  The Latin of the Benedictine edition translates
the first by “*cum*,” and the second by “*una cum*.”  “*Through*” stands
for <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p16.3"></span>διά</span>,
which, with the genitive, is used of the instrument; “*in*” for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii-p16.4"></span>ε'ν</span>, “*in*,” but
also commonly used of the instrument or means.  In the well known
passage in [1 Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="vii.ii-p16.5"></span>, A.V. renders <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii-p16.6"></span>δι᾽ οὗ τὰ πάντα</span> by “*through* whom are
all things;” R.V., by “*by* whom.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The origin of the heretics' close observation of
syllables.](2080032)
