[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080298)  [Next](2080300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXVI. <span
id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p3"></span>To the ascetics under him.

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p4.1"></span>It</span> may be that the holy God will
grant me the joy of a meeting with you, for I am ever longing to see you
and hear about you, because in no other thing do I find rest for my soul
than in your progress and perfection in the commandments of Christ.  But
so long as this hope remains unrealized I feel bound to visit you
through the instrumentality of our dear and God-fearing brethren, and to
address you, my beloved friends, by letter.  Wherefore I have sent my
reverend and dear brother and fellow-worker in the Gospel, Meletius the
presbyter.  He will tell you my yearning affection for you, and the
anxiety of my soul, in that, <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-Page_268"></span>night and day, I beseech the Lord in
your behalf, that I may have boldness in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ through your salvation, and that when your work is tried by the
just judgment of God you may shine forth in the brightness of the
saints.  At the same time the difficulties of the day cause me deep
anxiety, for all Churches have been tossed to and fro, and all souls are
being sifted.  Some have even opened their mouths without any reserve
against their fellow servants.  Lies are boldly uttered, and the truth
has been hidden.  The accused are being condemned without a trial, and
the accusers are believed without evidence.  I had heard that many
letters are being carried about against myself, stinging, gibbeting, and
attacking me for matters about which I have my defence ready for the
tribunal of truth; and I had intended to keep silence, as indeed I have
done; for now for three years I have been bearing the blows of calumny
and the whips of accusation, content to think that I have the Lord, Who
knows all secrets, as witness of its falsehood.  But I see now that many
men have silence as a corroboration of these slanders, and have formed
the idea that my silence was due, not to my longsuffering, but to my
inability to open my lips in opposition to the truth.  For these reasons
I have attempted to write to you, beseeching your love in Christ not to
accept these partial calumnies as true, because, as it is written, the
law judges no man unless it have heard and known his actions. <span
id="fr_2914"></span>[2915](#fn_2914)

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p6"></span>2.  Nevertheless before a fair judge the
facts themselves are a sufficient demonstration of the truth. 
Wherefore, even if I be silent, you can look at events.  The very men
who are now indicting me for heterodoxy have been seen openly numbered
with the heretical faction.  The very accusers who condemn me for other
men’s writings, are plainly contravening their own confessions, given to
me by them in writing.  Look at the conduct of the exhibitors of this
audacity.  It is their invariable custom to go over to the party in
power, to trample on their weaker friends, and to court the strong.  The
writers of those famous letters against Eudoxius and all his faction,
the senders of them to all the brotherhood, the protesters that they
shun their communion as fatal to souls, and would not accept the votes
given for their deposition, because they were given by heretics, as they
persuaded me then,—these very men, completely forgetful of all this,
have joined their faction. <span id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915)  
No room for denial is left them.  They laid their mind bare when they
embraced private communion with them at Ancyra, when they had not yet
been publicly received by them.  Ask them, then, if Basilides, who gave
communion to Ecdicius, is now orthodox, why when returning from
Dardania, did they overthrow his altars in the territory of Gangra, and
set up their own tables? <span id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916)  
Why have they comparatively recently <span
id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917) attacked the churches of Amasea and
Zela and appointed presbyters and deacons there themselves?  If they
communicate with them as orthodox, why do they attack them as
heretical?  If they hold them to be heretical, how is it that they do
not shun communion with them?  Is it not, my honourable brethren, plain
even to the intelligence of a child, that it is always with a view to
some personal advantage that they endeavour to calumniate or to give
support?  So they have stood off from me, not because I did not write in
reply (which is alleged to be the main ground of offence), nor because I
did not receive the chorepiscopi whom they assert they sent.  Those who
are trumping up the tale will render an account to the Lord.  One man,
Eustathius, <span id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) was sent and gave
a letter to the court of the vicar, and spent three days in the city. 
When he was on the point of going home, it is said that he came to my
house late in the evening, when I was asleep.  On hearing that I was
asleep, he went away; he did not come near me on the next day, and after
thus going through the mere form of discharging his duty to me,
departed.  This is the charge under which I am guilty.  This is the sin
against which these long-suffering people have neglected to weigh the
previous service wherein I served them in love.  For this error they
have made their wrath against me so severe that they have caused me to
be denounced in all the Churches throughout the world—at least, that is,
wherever they could.

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p11"></span><span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-Page_269"></span>3.  But of course this is not the real
cause of our separation.  It was when they found that they would
recommend themselves to Euzoius <span
id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) if they were alienated from me,
that they devised these pretences.  The object was to find some ground
of recommendation with the authorities for their attack upon me.  Now
they are beginning to run down even the Nicene Creed, and nickname me
*<span class="c59"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p12.1"></span>Homoousiast,</span>* because in that creed
the Only begotten Son is said to be *<span class="c59"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p12.2"></span>homoousios</span>* with God the Father. 
Not that one essence is divided into two kindred parts; God forbid! 
This was not the meaning of that holy and God-beloved synod; their
meaning was that what the Father is in essence, such is the Son.  And
thus they themselves have explained it to us, in the phrase *Light of
Light*.  Now it is the Nicene Creed, brought by themselves from the
west, which they presented to the Synod at Tyana, by which they were
received. <span id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920)   But they have an
ingenious theory as to changes of this kind; they use the words of the
creed as physicians use a remedy for the particular moment, and
substitute now one and now another to suit particular diseases.  The
unsoundness of such a sophism it is rather for you to consider than for
me to prove.  For “the Lord will give you understanding” <span
id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921) to know what is the right doctrine,
and what the crooked and perverse.  If indeed we are to subscribe one
creed to-day and another tomorrow, and shift with the seasons, then is
the declaration false of him who said, “One Lord, one faith, one
baptism.” <span id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922)   But if it is
true, then “Let no man deceive you with \[these\] vain words.”  They
falsely accuse me of introducing novelties about the Holy Spirit.  Ask
what the novelty is.  I confess what I have received, that the Paraclete
is ranked with Father and Son, and not numbered with created beings.  We
have made profession of our faith in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and we
are baptized in the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.  Wherefore we
never separate the Spirit from conjunction <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) with the Father and the Son.  For
our mind, enlightened by the Spirit, looks at the Son, and in Him, as in
an image, beholds the Father.  And I do not invent names of myself, but
call the Holy Ghost Paraclete; nor do I consent to destroy His due
glory.  These are truly my doctrines.  If any one wishes to accuse me
for them, let him accuse me; let my persecutor persecute me.  Let him
who believes in the slanders against me be ready for the judgment.  “The
Lord is at hand.”  “I am careful for nothing.” <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924)

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p18"></span>4.  If any one in Syria is writing,
this is nothing to me.  For it is said “By thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” <span
id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925)   Let my own words judge me.  Let
no one condemn me for other men’s errors nor adduce letters written
twenty years ago in proof that I would allow communion to the writers of
such things.  Before these things were written, and before any suspicion
of this kind had been stirred against them, I did write as layman to
layman.  I wrote nothing about the faith in any way like that which they
are now carrying about to calumniate me.  I sent nothing but a mere
greeting to return a friendly communication, for I shun and anathematize
as impious alike all who are affected with the unsoundness of Sabellius,
and all who maintain the opinions of Arius.  If any one says that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are the same, and supposes one thing under
several names, and one hypostasis described by three persons, I rank
such an one as belonging to the faction of the Jews. <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926)   Similarly, if any one says that
the Son is in essence unlike the Father, or degrades the Holy Ghost into
a creature, I anathematize him, and say that he is coming near to the
heathen error.  But it is impossible for the mouths of my accusers to be
restrained by my letter; rather is it likely that they are being
irritated at my defence, and are getting up new and more violent attacks
against me.  But it is not difficult for your ears to be guarded. 
Wherefore, as far as in you lies, do as I bid you.  Keep your heart
clear and unprejudiced by their calumnies; and insist on my rendering an
account to meet the charges laid against me.  If you find that truth is
on my side do not yield to lies; if on the other hand you feel that I am
feeble in defending myself, then believe my accusers as being worthy of
credit.  They pass sleepless nights to do me mischief.  I do not ask
this of you.  They are taking to a commercial career, and turning their
slanders against me into a means of profit.  I implore you on the other
hand to stop at home, and to lead a decorous life, quietly doing
Christ’s work. <span id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927)   I advise you
to avoid communication with them, for it always tends to the perversion
of their hearers.  I say this that you may keep your affection for the
uncontaminated, may preserve the faith of the Fathers in its integrity,
and may appear approved before the Lord as friends of the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[267:2914](2080299.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2914"></span>[268:2915](2080299.htm#fr_2914) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p5"></span> *cf*. [John vii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[268:2916](2080299.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p7"></span> The events referred to happened ten
years before the date assigned for this letter, when the Semi-Arians
summoned Eudoxius to Lampsacus, and sentenced him to deprivation in his
absence.  (Soc. *H.E.* iv. 2–4; Soz. *H.E.* vi. 7.)  On the refusal of
Valens to ratify the deposition and ultimate banishment of the
Anti-Eudoxians, Eustathius went to Rome to seek communion with Liberius,
subscribed the Nicene Confession, and received commendatory letters from
Liberius to the Easterns.  Soc. *H.E.* iv. 12.  Eudoxius died in 370.

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[268:2917](2080299.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p8"></span> On the action of Eustathius on this
occasion, *cf. Letter* ccli.  Basilides is described as a Paphlagonian. 
On Ecdicius, intruded by Demosthenes into the see of Paranassus, *cf.
Letter* ccxxxvii.

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[268:2918](2080299.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p9"></span> So the Ben. ed. for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxxvii-p9.1"></span>μέχρι νῦν</span>, with
the idea that the action of Eusthathius in currying favour with the
Catholics of Amasea and Zela by opposing the Arian bishops occupying
those sees, must have taken place before he had quite broken with
Basil.  Tillemont (ix. 236) takes <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p9.2"></span>νῦν</span> to mean 375.  Amasea and Zela (in
Migne erroneously Zeli.  On the name, see Ramsay’s *Hist. Geog. Asia M.*
260) are both on the Iris.

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[268:2919](2080299.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p10"></span> A chorepiscopus; not of course to be
confounded with Eustathius of Sebaste.

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[269:2920](2080299.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p12"></span> *cf*. note on p. 265.

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[269:2921](2080299.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p13"></span> *i.e.* after their return from Rome,
and another Synod in Sicily, in 367.

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[269:2922](2080299.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p14"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#007)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[269:2923](2080299.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p15"></span> [Eph. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[269:2924](2080299.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p16.1"></span>συνάφεια</span>.  *cf*. note on p. 16.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[269:2925](2080299.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p17"></span> [Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[269:2926](2080299.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p19"></span> [Matt. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[269:2927](2080299.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p20"></span> *cf. Letter* ccx. p. 249.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[269:2928](2080299.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="ix.ccxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p21"></span> *cf*. [1 Thess. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011)<span id="ix.ccxxvii-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Consolatory, to the clergy of Colonia.](2080300)
