[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080037)  [Next](2080039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>*In how many ways “*<span class="c14"><span
id="vii.ix-p2.1"></span>Through</span>*whom” is used; and in what sense
“with whom” is more suitable.  Explanation of how the Son receives a
commandment, and how He is sent.*

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>17.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>When</span>, then, the apostle “thanks God
through Jesus Christ,” <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) and again
says that “through Him” we have “received grace and apostleship for
obedience to the faith among all nations,” <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) or “through Him have access unto this
grace wherein we stand and rejoice,” <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) he sets forth the boons conferred on
us by the Son, at one time making the grace of the good gifts pass
through from the Father to us, and at another bringing us to the Father
through Himself.  For by saying “through whom we have received grace and
apostleship,” <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) he declares the
supply of the good gifts to proceed from that source; and again in
saying “through whom we have had access,” <span
id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) he sets forth our acceptance and being
made “of the household of God” <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831)
through Christ.  Is then the confession of the grace wrought by Him to
usward a detraction from His glory?  Is it not truer to say that the
recital of His benefits is a proper argument for glorifying Him?  It is
on this account that we have not found Scripture describing the Lord to
us by one name, nor even by such terms alone as are indicative of His
godhead and majesty.  At one time it uses terms descriptive of His
nature, for it recognises the “name which is above every name,” <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) the name of Son, <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) and speaks of true Son, <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) and only begotten God, <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) and Power of God, <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) and Wisdom, <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) and Word. <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838)   Then again, on account of the divers
manners <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) wherein grace is given
to us, which, because of the riches of His goodness, <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) according to his manifold <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) wisdom, he bestows on them that need,
Scripture designates Him by innumerable other titles, calling Him
Shepherd, <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) King, <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) Physician, <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) Bridegroom, <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) Way, <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) Door, <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) Fountain, <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) Bread, <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) Axe, <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) and Rock. <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851)   And these titles do not set forth
His nature, but, as I have remarked, the variety of the effectual
working which, out of His tender-heartedness to His own creation,
according to the peculiar necessity of each, He bestows upon them that
need.  Them that have fled for refuge to His ruling care, and through
patient endurance have mended their wayward ways, <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) He calls “sheep,” and confesses
Himself to be, to them that hear His voice and refuse to give heed to
strange teaching, a “shepherd.”  For “my sheep,” He says, “hear my
voice.”  To them that have now reached a higher stage and stand in need
of righteous royalty, <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) He is a
King.  And in that, through the straight way of His commandments, He
leads men to good actions, and again because He safely shuts in all who
through faith in Him betake themselves for shelter to the blessing of
the higher wisdom, <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) He is a Door.

<span id="vii.ix-p33"></span>So He says, “By me if any man enter in, he
shall go in and out and shall find pastare.” <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)   Again, because to the faithful He is
a defence strong, unshaken, and harder to break than any bulwark, He is
a Rock.  Among these titles, it is when He is styled Door, or Way, that
the phrase “through Him” is very appropriate and plain.  As, however,
God and Son, He is glorified with and together with <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) the Father, in that “at, the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="vii.ix-Page_12"></span>the glory of God the Father.” <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857)   Wherefore we use both terms,
expressing by the one His own proper dignity, and by the other His grace
to usward.

<span id="vii.ix-p37"></span>18.  For “through Him” comes every succour
to our souls, and it is in accordance with each kind of care that an
appropriate title has been devised.  So when He presents to Himself the
blameless soul, not having spot or wrinkle, <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) like a pure maiden, He is called
Bridegroom, but whenever He receives one in sore plight from the devil’s
evil strokes, healing it in the heavy infirmity of its sins, He is named
Physician.  And shall this His care for us degrade to meanness our
thoughts of Him?  Or, on the contrary, shall it smite us with amazement
at once at the mighty power and love to man <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) of the Saviour, in that He both
endured to suffer with us <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) in our
infirmities, and was able to come down to our weakness?  For not heaven
and earth and the great seas, not the creatures that live in the water
and on dry land, not plants, and stars, and air, and seasons, not the
vast variety in the order of the universe, <span
id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) so well sets forth the excellency of
His might as that God, being incomprehensible, should have been able,
impassibly, through flesh, to have come into close conflict with death,
to the end that by His own suffering He might give us the boon of
freedom from suffering. <span id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862)   The
apostle, it is true, says, “In all these things we are more than
conquerors through him that loved us.” <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863)   But in a phrase of this kind there
is no suggestion of any lowly and subordinate ministry, <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) but rather of the succour rendered “in
the power of his might.” <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865)   For
He Himself has bound the strong man and spoiled his goods, <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) that is, us men, whom our enemy had
abused in every evil activity, and made “vessels meet for the Master’s
use” <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) us who have been perfected
for every work through the making ready of that part of us which is in
our own control. <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868)   Thus we have
had our approach to the Father through Him, being translated from “the
power of darkness to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light.” <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869)   We must not, however,
regard the œconomy <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) through the
Son as a compulsory and subordinate ministration resulting from the low
estate of a slave, but rather the voluntary solicitude working
effectually for His own creation in goodness and in pity, according to
the will of God the Father.  For we shall be consistent with true
religion if in all that was and is from time to time perfected by Him,
we both bear witness to the perfection of His power, and in no case put
it asunder from the Father’s will.  For instance, whenever the Lord is
called the Way, we are carried on to a higher meaning, and not to that
which is derived from the vulgar sense of the word.  We understand by
Way that advance <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) to perfection
which is made stage by stage, and in regular order, through the works of
righteousness and “the illumination of knowledge;” <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) ever longing after what is before, and
reaching forth unto those things which remain, <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) until we shall have reached the
blessed end, the knowledge of God, which the Lord through Himself
bestows on them that have trusted in Him.  For our Lord is an
essentially good Way, where erring and straying are unknown, to that
which is essentially good, to the Father.  For “no one,” He says,
“cometh to the Father but \[“by” A.V.\] through me.” <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)   Such is our way up to God “through
the Son.”

<span id="vii.ix-p55"></span>19.  It will follow that we should next in
order point out the character of the provision of blessings bestowed on
us by the <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="vii.ix-Page_13"></span>Father “through him.”  Inasmuch as all
created nature, both this visible world and all that is conceived of in
the mind, cannot hold together without the care and providence of God,
the Creator Word, the Only begotten God, apportioning His succour
according to the measure of the needs of each, distributes mercies
various and manifold on account of the many kinds and characters of the
recipients of His bounty, but appropriate to the necessities of
individual requirements.  Those that are confined in the darkness of
ignorance He enlightens:  for this reason He is true Light. <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875)   Portioning requital in accordance
with the desert of deeds, He judges:  for this reason He is righteous
Judge. <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876)   “For the Father judgeth
no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son.” <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877)   Those that have lapsed from the
lofty height of life into sin He raises from their fall:  for this
reason He is Resurrection. <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878)  
Effectually working by the touch of His power and the will of His
goodness He does all things.  He shepherds; He enlightens; He nourishes;
He heals; He guides; He raises up; He calls into being things that were
not; He upholds what has been created.  Thus the good things that come
from God reach us “through the Son,” who works in each case with greater
speed than speech can utter.  For not lightnings, not light’s course in
air, is so swift; not eyes’ sharp turn, not the movements of our very
thought.  Nay, by the divine energy is each one of these in speed
further surpassed than is the slowest of all living creatures outdone in
motion by birds, or even winds, or the rush of the heavenly bodies:  or,
not to mention these, by our very thought itself.  For what extent of
time is needed by Him who “upholds all things by the word of His
power,” <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) and works not by bodily
agency, nor requires the help of hands to form and fashion, but holds in
obedient following and unforced consent the nature of all things that
are?  So as Judith says, “Thou hast thought, and what things thou didst
determine were ready at hand.” <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880)  
On the other hand, and lest we should ever be drawn away by the
greatness of the works wrought to imagine that the Lord is without
beginning, <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) what saith the
Self-Existent? <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882)   “I live through
\[by, A.V.\] the Father,” <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) and
the power of God; “The Son hath power \[can, A.V.\] to do nothing of
himself.” <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884)   And the
self-complete Wisdom?  I received “a commandment what I should say and
what I should speak.” <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885)   Through
all these words He is guiding us to the knowledge of the Father, and
referring our wonder at all that is brought into existence to Him, to
the end that “through Him” we may know the Father.  For the Father is
not regarded from the difference of the operations, by the exhibition of
a separate and peculiar energy; for whatsoever things He sees the Father
doing, “these also doeth the Son likewise;” <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) but He enjoys our wonder at all that
comes to pass out of the glory which comes to Him from the Only
Begotten, rejoicing in the Doer Himself as well as in the greatness of
the deeds, and exalted by all who acknowledge Him as Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, “through whom \[by whom, A.V.\] are all things, and for
whom are all things.” <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887)  
Wherefore, saith the Lord, “All mine are thine,” <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) as though the sovereignty over created
things were conferred on Him, and “Thine are mine,” as though the
creating Cause came thence to Him.  We are not to suppose that He used
assistance in His action, or yet was entrusted with the ministry of each
individual work by detailed commission, a condition distinctly menial
and quite inadequate to the divine dignity.  Rather was the Word full of
His Father’s excellences; He shines forth from the Father, and does all
things according to the likeness of Him that begat Him.  For if in
essence He is without variation, so also is He without <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="vii.ix-Page_14"></span>variation in
power. <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889)   And of those whose
power is equal, the operation also is in all ways equal.  And Christ is
the power of God, and the wisdom of God. <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890)   And so “all things are made through
\[by, A.V.\] him,” <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) and “all
things were created through \[by, A.V.\] him and for him,” <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) not in the discharge of any slavish
service, but in the fulfilment of the Father’s will as Creator.

<span id="vii.ix-p74"></span>20.  When then He says, “I have not spoken
of myself,” <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) and again, “As the
Father said unto me, so I speak,” <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) and “The word which ye hear is not
mine, but \[the Father’s\] which sent me,” <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) and in another place, “As the Father
gave me commandment, even so I do,” <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) it is not because He lacks deliberate
purpose or power of initiation, nor yet because He has to wait for the
preconcerted key-note, that he employs language of this kind.  His
object is to make it plain that His own will is connected in
indissoluble union with the Father.  Do not then let us understand by
what is called a “commandment” a peremptory mandate delivered by organs
of speech, and giving orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, concerning
what He ought to do.  Let us rather, in a sense befitting the Godhead,
perceive a transmission of will, like the reflexion of an object in a
mirror, passing without note of time from Father to Son.  “For the
Father loveth the Son and sheweth him all things,” <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) so that “all things that the Father
hath” belong to the Son, not gradually accruing to Him little by little,
but with Him all together and at once.  Among men, the workman who has
been thoroughly taught his craft, and, through long training, has sure
and established experience in it, is able, in accordance with the
scientific methods which now he has in store, to work for the future by
himself.  And are we to suppose that the wisdom of God, the Maker of all
creation, He who is eternally perfect, who is wise, without a teacher,
the Power of God, “in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge,” <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) needs piecemeal
instruction to mark out the manner and measure of His operations?  I
presume that in the vanity of your calculations, you mean to open a
school; you will make the one take His seat in the teacher’s place, and
the other stand by in a scholar’s ignorance, gradually learning wisdom
and advancing to perfection, by lessons given Him bit by bit.  Hence, if
you have sense to abide by what logically follows, you will find the Son
being eternally taught, nor yet ever able to reach the end of
perfection, inasmuch as the wisdom of the Father is infinite, and the
end of the infinite is beyond apprehension.  It results that whoever
refuses to grant that the Son has all things from the beginning will
never grant that He will reach perfection.  But I am ashamed at the
degraded conception to which, by the course of the argument, I have been
brought down.  Let us therefore revert to the loftier themes of our
discussion.

<span id="vii.ix-p81"></span>21.  “He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father; <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) not the express image,
nor yet the form, for the divine nature does not admit of combination;
but the goodness of the will, which, being concurrent with the essence,
is beheld as like and equal, or rather the same, in the Father as in the
Son. <span id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900)

<span id="vii.ix-p85"></span>What then is meant by “became
subject”? <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901)   What by “delivered
him up for us all”? <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902)   It is
meant that the Son has it of the Father that He works in goodness on
behalf of men.  But you must hear too the words, “Christ hath redeemed
us from the curse of the law;” <span id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903)
and “while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904)

<span id="vii.ix-p90"></span>Give careful heed, too, to the words of the
Lord, and note how, whenever He instructs us about His Father, He is in
the habit of using terms of personal authority, saying, “I will; be thou
clean;” <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) and “Peace, be
still;” <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) and “But I say unto
you;” <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) and “Thou dumb and deaf
spirit, I charge thee;” <span id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) and all
other expressions of the same kind, in order that by these we may
recognise our Master and Maker, and by the former may be taught the
Father of our Master and Creator. <span
id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909)   <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>
<span id="vii.ix-Page_15"></span>Thus on all sides is demonstrated the
true doctrine that the fact that the Father creates through the Son
neither constitutes the creation of the Father imperfect nor exhibits
the active energy of the Son as feeble, but indicates the unity of the
will; so the expression “through whom” contains a confession of an
antecedent Cause, and is not adopted in objection to the efficient
Cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_826"></span>[11:827](2080038.htm#fr_826) <span
id="vii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span> [Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[11:828](2080038.htm#fr_827) <span
id="vii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span> [Rom. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[11:829](2080038.htm#fr_828) <span
id="vii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span> [Rom. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)<span id="vii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[11:830](2080038.htm#fr_829) <span
id="vii.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span> [Rom. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[11:831](2080038.htm#fr_830) <span
id="vii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span> [Rom. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002)<span id="vii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[11:832](2080038.htm#fr_831) <span
id="vii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span> *cf*. [Eph. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="vii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[11:833](2080038.htm#fr_832) <span
id="vii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[11:834](2080038.htm#fr_833) <span
id="vii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span> Two <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.ix-p11.1"></span>mss.</span>, those in the B. Museum and at
Vienna, read here <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p11.2"></span>Ιησοῦ</span>.  In *Ep*. 210. 4, St. Basil
writes that the name above every name is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p11.3"></span>αὐτὸ τὸ καλεῖσθαι αὐτὸν Υιον τοῦ Θεοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[11:835](2080038.htm#fr_834) <span
id="vii.ix-p11.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span> *cf*. [Matt.
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033), [Matt.
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)<span id="vii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[11:836](2080038.htm#fr_835) <span
id="vii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>. 
*cf*. note on p.  .

<span id="fn_836"></span>[11:837](2080038.htm#fr_836) <span
id="vii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p14"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.ix-p14.1"></span>, and
possibly [Rom. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span
id="vii.ix-p14.2"></span>, if with D. we read gospel *of Christ*.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[11:838](2080038.htm#fr_837) <span
id="vii.ix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p15"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.ix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[11:839](2080038.htm#fr_838) <span
id="vii.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p16"></span> *e.g*., [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.ix-p16.1"></span>. 
*cf*. [Ps. cvii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#020)<span
id="vii.ix-p16.2"></span>; [Wis. 9:1](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#001),
[Wis. 18:15](../../../bib/apo/wis018.htm#015), [Sir.
43:20](../../../bib/apo/sir043.htm#020)<span id="vii.ix-p16.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[11:840](2080038.htm#fr_839) <span
id="vii.ix-p16.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p17.1"></span>Τὸ πολύτροπον</span>.  *cf*. [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="vii.ix-p17.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[11:841](2080038.htm#fr_840) <span
id="vii.ix-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p18.1"></span>Τὸν πλοῦτον τῆς ἀγαθότητος</span>.  *cf*. [Rom.
ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="vii.ix-p18.2"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p18.3"></span>τοῦ πλούτου τῆς
χρηστότητος</span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[11:842](2080038.htm#fr_841) <span
id="vii.ix-p18.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p19"></span> [Eph. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[11:843](2080038.htm#fr_842) <span
id="vii.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p20"></span> *e.g*., [John x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012)<span id="vii.ix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[11:844](2080038.htm#fr_843) <span
id="vii.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p21"></span> *e.g*., [Matt. xxi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[11:845](2080038.htm#fr_844) <span
id="vii.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p22"></span> *e.g*., [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="vii.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[11:846](2080038.htm#fr_845) <span
id="vii.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p23"></span> *e.g*., [Matt. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span id="vii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[11:847](2080038.htm#fr_846) <span
id="vii.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p24"></span> *e.g*., [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[11:848](2080038.htm#fr_847) <span
id="vii.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p25"></span> *e.g*., [John x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[11:849](2080038.htm#fr_848) <span
id="vii.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p26"></span> *cf*. [Rev. xxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[11:850](2080038.htm#fr_849) <span
id="vii.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p27"></span> *e.g*., [John vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#021)<span id="vii.ix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[11:851](2080038.htm#fr_850) <span
id="vii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p28"></span> *cf*. [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[11:852](2080038.htm#fr_851) <span
id="vii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p29"></span> *e.g*., [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="vii.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[11:853](2080038.htm#fr_852) <span
id="vii.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p30"></span> I translate here the reading of the
Parisian Codex called by the Benedictine Editors *Regius Secundus*,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p30.1"></span>τὸ εὐμετάβολον
κατωρθωκότας</span>.  The harder reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p30.2"></span>τὸ εὐμετάδοτον</span>, which may be rendered
“have perfected their readiness to distribute,” has the best manuscript
authority, but it is barely intelligible; and the Benedictine Editors
are quite right in calling attention to the fact that the point in
question here is not the readiness of the flock to distribute (*cf*. [1
Tim. vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018)<span
id="vii.ix-p30.3"></span>), but their patient following of their
Master.  The Benedictine Editors boldly propose to introduce a word of
no authority <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p30.4"></span>τὸ
ἀμετάβολον</span>, rendering *qui per patientiam animam immutabilem
præbuerunt*.  The reading adopted above is supported by a passage in
*Ep*. 244, where St. Basil is speaking of the waywardness of Eustathius,
and seems to fit in best with the application of the passage to the
words of our Lord, “have fled for refuge to his ruling care,”
corresponding with “the sheep follow him, for they know his voice” (St.
[John x. 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004)<span
id="vii.ix-p30.5"></span>), and “have mended their wayward ways,” with
“a stranger will they not follow,” [John
10.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p30.6"></span>. 
Mr. Johnston, in his valuable note, compares Origen’s teaching on the
Names of our Lord.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[11:854](2080038.htm#fr_853) <span
id="vii.ix-p30.7"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p31"></span> So three <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.ix-p31.1"></span>mss.</span>  Others repeat <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p31.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p31.3"></span>πιστασία</span>, translated
“ruling care” above.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p31.4"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p31.5"></span>ννομος</span> is used by Plato for “lawful” and
“law-abiding.”  (Legg. 921 C. and Rep. 424 E.)  In [1 Cor. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="vii.ix-p31.6"></span>,
A.V. renders “under the law.”

<span id="fn_854"></span>[11:855](2080038.htm#fr_854) <span
id="vii.ix-p31.7"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p32.1"></span>Τὸ τῆς γνώσεως ἀγαθόν</span>:  possibly “the
good of knowledge of him.”

<span id="fn_855"></span>[11:856](2080038.htm#fr_855) <span
id="vii.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p34"></span> [John x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[11:857](2080038.htm#fr_856) <span
id="vii.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p35"></span> *cf*. note on page 3, on <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p35.1"></span>μετά</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p35.2"></span>σόν</span>.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[12:858](2080038.htm#fr_857) <span
id="vii.ix-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p36"></span> [Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span id="vii.ix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[12:859](2080038.htm#fr_858) <span
id="vii.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p38"></span> [Eph. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="vii.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[12:860](2080038.htm#fr_859) <span
id="vii.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p39.1"></span>φιλανθρωπία</span> occurs twice in the N.T.
([Acts 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#002), [Titus
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004)<span id="vii.ix-p39.2"></span>)
and is in the former passage rendered by A.V. “*kindness*,” in the
latter by “love to man.”  The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p39.3"></span>φιλανθρωπία</span> of the Maltese barbarians
corresponds with the lower classical sense of kindliness and courtesy. 
The love of God in Christ to man introduces practically a new
connotation to the word and its cognates.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[12:861](2080038.htm#fr_860) <span
id="vii.ix-p39.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p40"></span> Or to sympathize with our infirmities.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[12:862](2080038.htm#fr_861) <span
id="vii.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p41.1"></span>ποικιλη διακόσμησις</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.2"></span>. </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.3"></span>διακόσμησις</span> was the
technical term of the Pythagorean philosophy for the orderly arrangement
of the universe (*cf*. Arist. *Metaph*. I. v. 2. “<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.5"></span>ὅλη διακόσμησις</span>);
Pythagoras being credited with the first application of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.6"></span>κόσμος</span> to the
universe.  (Plut. 2, 886 c.)  So *mundus* in Latin, whence Augustine’s
oxymoron, “*O munde immunde!*”  On the scriptural use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.7"></span>κόσμος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p41.9"></span>ιών</span> *vide* Archbp.
Trench’s *New Testament Synonyms*, p. 204.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[12:863](2080038.htm#fr_862) <span
id="vii.ix-p41.10"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p42"></span> In Hom. on [Ps.
lxv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#000)<span id="vii.ix-p42.1"></span>
Section 5, St. Basil describes the power of God the Word being most
distinctly shewn in the œconomy of the incarnation and His descent to
the lowliness and the infirmity of the manhood.  *cf*. Ath. on the
Incarnation, sect. 54, “He was made man that we might be made God; and
He manifested Himself by a body that we might receive the idea of the
unseen Father; and He endured the insolence of men that we might inherit
immortality.  For while He Himself was in no way injured, being
impassible and incorruptible and the very Word and God, men who were
suffering, and for whose sakes He endured all this, He maintained and
preserved in His own impassibility.”

<span id="fn_863"></span>[12:864](2080038.htm#fr_863) <span
id="vii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p43"></span> [Rom. viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)<span id="vii.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[12:865](2080038.htm#fr_864) <span
id="vii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p44.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p44.2"></span>πηρεσία</span>.  Lit. “under-rowing.”  The
cognate <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p44.3"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p44.4"></span>πηρέτης</span> is the word
used in [Acts xxvi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016)<span
id="vii.ix-p44.5"></span>, in the words of the Saviour to St. Paul, “to
make thee a minister,” and in [1 Cor. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)<span id="vii.ix-p44.6"></span>, “Let
a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ.”

<span id="fn_865"></span>[12:866](2080038.htm#fr_865) <span
id="vii.ix-p44.7"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p45"></span> [Eph. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[12:867](2080038.htm#fr_866) <span
id="vii.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p46"></span> *cf*. [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="vii.ix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[12:868](2080038.htm#fr_867) <span
id="vii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p47"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)<span id="vii.ix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[12:869](2080038.htm#fr_868) <span
id="vii.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p48"></span> This passage is difficult to render alike
from the variety of readings and the obscurity of each.  I have
endeavoured to represent the force of the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.2"></span>κ τῆς ἑτοιμασίας τοῦ ἐφ᾽
ἡμῖν</span>, understanding by “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p48.3"></span>τὸ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν</span>,” practically, “our free
will.”  *cf*. the enumeration of what is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p48.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p48.5"></span>φ᾽ ἡμῖν</span>, within our own control, in the
Enchiridion of Epicetus, Chap. I.  “Within our own control are impulse,
desire, inclination.”  On [Is. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)<span id="vii.ix-p48.6"></span>,
“Here am I; send me,” St. Basil writes, “He did not add ‘I will go;’ for
the acceptance of the message is within our control (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.8"></span>φ᾽ ἡμῖν</span>), but to be
made capable of going is of Him that gives the grace, of the enabling
God.”  The Benedictine translation of the text is “*per liberi arbitrii
nostri præparationem*.”  But other readings are (i) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.9"></span>τῆς ἑτοιμασίας
αὐτοῦ</span>, “the preparation which is in our own control;” (ii) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p48.10"></span>τῆς ἑτοιμασίας
αὐτοῦ</span>, “His preparation;” and (iii) the Syriac represented by
“*arbitrio suo*.”

<span id="fn_869"></span>[12:870](2080038.htm#fr_869) <span
id="vii.ix-p48.11"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p49"></span> [Col.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[12:871](2080038.htm#fr_870) <span
id="vii.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p50"></span> *cf*. note on page 7.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[12:872](2080038.htm#fr_871) <span
id="vii.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p51.1"></span>προκοπή</span>:  *cf*. [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="vii.ix-p51.2"></span>,
where it is said that our Lord <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p51.3"></span>προέκοπτε</span>, *i.e*., “continued to cut His
way forward.”

<span id="fn_872"></span>[12:873](2080038.htm#fr_872) <span
id="vii.ix-p51.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p52"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p52.1"></span>, R.V.
marg.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[12:874](2080038.htm#fr_873) <span
id="vii.ix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p53"></span> There seems to be here a recollection,
though not a quotation, of [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[12:875](2080038.htm#fr_874) <span
id="vii.ix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p54"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[13:876](2080038.htm#fr_875) <span
id="vii.ix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p56"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[13:877](2080038.htm#fr_876) <span
id="vii.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p57"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="vii.ix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[13:878](2080038.htm#fr_877) <span
id="vii.ix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p58"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="vii.ix-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[13:879](2080038.htm#fr_878) <span
id="vii.ix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p59"></span> [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="vii.ix-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[13:880](2080038.htm#fr_879) <span
id="vii.ix-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p60"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[13:881](2080038.htm#fr_880) <span
id="vii.ix-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p61"></span> [Jdt.
9:5](../../../bib/apo/jdt009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/apo/jdt009.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[13:882](2080038.htm#fr_881) <span
id="vii.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.2"></span>ναρχος</span>.  This word is used in two senses
by the Fathers.  (i) In the sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.4"></span>ΐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.5"></span>διος</span> or eternal, it is applied (a) to
the Trinity in unity.  *e.g.,* *Quæst. Misc*. v. 442 (Migne *Ath*. iv.
783), attributed to Athanasius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.6"></span>κοινον ἡ οὐσια·  κοινὸν το ἄναρχον</span>.  (b)
To the Son.  *e.g*., Greg. Naz. *Orat*. xxix. 490, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.8"></span>ὰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.9"></span>ν τὴν ἀπὸ χρόνον νοῇς ἀρχὴν
καὶ ἄναρχος ὁ υἱ& 232·ς, οὐκ ἄρχεται γὰρ ἀπὸ χρόνου ὁ χρόνων
δεσπότης</span>.  (ii) In the sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.11"></span>ναίτιος</span>, “causeless,” “*originis
principio carens*,” it is applied to the Father alone, and not to the
Son.  So Gregory of Nazianzus, in the oration quoted above, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.12"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.13"></span>υἱ& 232·ς, ἐ& 129·ν ὡς
αἴτιον τὸν πατέρα λαμβάνῃς, οὐκ ἄναρχος</span>, “the Son, if you
understand the Father as cause, is not without beginning.”  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.14"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.15"></span>ρχη γὰρ υἱοῦ πατὴρ ὡς
αἴτιος</span>.  “For the Father, as cause, is Beginning of the Son.” 
But, though the Son in this sense was not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.16"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.17"></span>ναρχος</span>, He was said to be begotten
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.18"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p62.19"></span>νάρχως</span>.  So Greg.
Naz. (*Hom*. xxxvii. 590) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.20"></span>τὸ ἴδιον ὄνομα τοῦ ἀνάρχως γεννηθέντος, υὶ&
231·ς</span>.  *Cf*. the Letter of Alexander of Alexandria to Alexander
of Constantinople.  Theod. *Ecc. Hist.* i. 3.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p62.21"></span>τὴν ἄναρχον αὐτῷ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς γέννησιν
ἀνατί θεντας</span>.  *cf*. Hooker, *Ecc. Pol*. v. 54.  “By the gift of
eternal generation Christ hath received of the Father one and in number
the self-same substance which the Father hath of himself unreceived from
any other.  For every *beginning is a father* unto that which cometh of
it; and *every offspring is a son* unto that out of which it groweth. 
Seeing, therefore, the Father alone is originally that Deity which
Christ originally is not (for Christ is God by being of God, light by
issuing out of light), it followeth hereupon that whatsoever Christ hath
common unto him with his heavenly Father, the same of necessity must be
*given* him, but naturally and eternally given.”  So Hillary *De Trin*.
xii. 21.  *“Ubi auctor eternus est, ibi et nativatis æternitas est: 
quia sicut nativitas ab auctore est, ita et ab æterno auctore æterna
nativitas est*.”  And Augustine *De Trin*. v. 15, “*Naturam præstat
filio* <span class="c14"><span id="vii.ix-p62.22"></span>sine
initio</span> *generatio*.”

<span id="fn_882"></span>[13:883](2080038.htm#fr_882) <span
id="vii.ix-p62.23"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p63.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p63.2"></span>αὐτοζωή</span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[13:884](2080038.htm#fr_883) <span
id="vii.ix-p63.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p64"></span> [John vi.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span id="vii.ix-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[13:885](2080038.htm#fr_884) <span
id="vii.ix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p65"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="vii.ix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[13:886](2080038.htm#fr_885) <span
id="vii.ix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p66"></span> [John xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049)<span id="vii.ix-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[13:887](2080038.htm#fr_886) <span
id="vii.ix-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p67"></span> [John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="vii.ix-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[13:888](2080038.htm#fr_887) <span
id="vii.ix-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p68"></span> [Heb. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p68.1"></span>. 
*cf*. [Rom. xi. 36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="vii.ix-p68.2"></span>, to which the reading of two manuscripts more
distinctly assimilates the citation.  The majority of commentators refer
[Heb. ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span
id="vii.ix-p68.3"></span>, to the Father, but Theodoret understands it
of the Son, and the argument of St. Basil necessitates the same
application.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[13:889](2080038.htm#fr_888) <span
id="vii.ix-p68.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p69"></span> [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[14:890](2080038.htm#fr_889) <span
id="vii.ix-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.2"></span>παραλλάκτως ἔχει</span>.  *cf*. [Jas. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="vii.ix-p70.3"></span>. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p70.4"></span>παρ᾽ ῷ οὐκ ἔνι
παραλλαγή</span>.  The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.6"></span>παράλλακτος</span> was at first used by the
Catholic bishops at Nicæa, as implying <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.7"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p70.8"></span>μοούσιος</span>.  *Vide* Athan. *De Decretis*,
§ 20, in Wace and Schaff’s ed., p. 163.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[14:891](2080038.htm#fr_890) <span
id="vii.ix-p70.9"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p71"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.ix-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[14:892](2080038.htm#fr_891) <span
id="vii.ix-p71.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p72"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[14:893](2080038.htm#fr_892) <span
id="vii.ix-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p73"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="vii.ix-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[14:894](2080038.htm#fr_893) <span
id="vii.ix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p75"></span> [John xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049)<span id="vii.ix-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[14:895](2080038.htm#fr_894) <span
id="vii.ix-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p76"></span> [John xii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#050)<span id="vii.ix-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[14:896](2080038.htm#fr_895) <span
id="vii.ix-p76.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p77"></span> [John xiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024)<span id="vii.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[14:897](2080038.htm#fr_896) <span
id="vii.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p78"></span> [John xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)<span id="vii.ix-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[14:898](2080038.htm#fr_897) <span
id="vii.ix-p78.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p79"></span> [John v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020)<span id="vii.ix-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[14:899](2080038.htm#fr_898) <span
id="vii.ix-p79.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p80"></span> [Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p80.1"></span>,
A.V.  *cf*. the amendment of R.V., “all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge hidden,” and Bp. Lightfoot on St. Paul’s use of the gnostic
term <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p80.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p80.3"></span>πόκρυφος</span>

<span id="fn_899"></span>[14:900](2080038.htm#fr_899) <span
id="vii.ix-p81.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p82"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[14:901](2080038.htm#fr_900) <span
id="vii.ix-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p83"></span> The argument appears to be not that Christ
is not the “express image,” or impress of the Father, as He is described
in [Heb. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="vii.ix-p83.1"></span>, or form, as in [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p83.2"></span>, but
that this is not the sense in which our Lord’s words in St. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p83.3"></span>, must
be understood to describe “seeing the Father.”  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p83.4"></span>Χαρακτὴρ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p83.5"></span>μορφὴ</span> are equivalent
to <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p83.6"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p83.7"></span>θεία φύσις</span>, and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p83.8"></span>μορφή</span> is used
by St. Basil as it is used by St. Paul,—coinciding with, if not
following, the usage of the older Greek philosophy,—to mean essential
attributes which the Divine Word had before the incarnation (*cf*.
Eustathius in *Theod. Dial*. II. \[Wace and Schaff Ed., p. 203\]; “the
express image made man,”—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p83.9"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p83.10"></span>τῷ πνεύματι σωματοποιηθεὶς ἄνθρωπος
χαρακτήρ</span>.)

<span id="vii.ix-p84"></span>The divine nature does not admit of
*combination*, in the sense of *confusion* (*cf*. the protests of
Theodoret in his Dialogues against the confusion of the Godhead and
manhood in the Christ), with the human nature in our Lord, and remains
invisible.  On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p84.1"></span>χαρακτήρ</span> *vide* Suicer, and on <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ix-p84.2"></span>μορφή</span> Archbp.
Trench’s *New Testament Synonyms* and Bp. Lightfoot on [Philippians ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p84.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[14:902](2080038.htm#fr_901) <span
id="vii.ix-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p86"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="vii.ix-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[14:903](2080038.htm#fr_902) <span
id="vii.ix-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p87"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="vii.ix-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[14:904](2080038.htm#fr_903) <span
id="vii.ix-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p88"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[14:905](2080038.htm#fr_904) <span
id="vii.ix-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p89"></span> [Rom. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="vii.ix-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[14:906](2080038.htm#fr_905) <span
id="vii.ix-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p91"></span> [Matt. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[14:907](2080038.htm#fr_906) <span
id="vii.ix-p91.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p92"></span> [Mark iv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039)<span id="vii.ix-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[14:908](2080038.htm#fr_907) <span
id="vii.ix-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p93"></span> [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="vii.ix-p93.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[14:909](2080038.htm#fr_908) <span
id="vii.ix-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p94"></span> [Mark ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025)<span id="vii.ix-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[14:910](2080038.htm#fr_909) <span
id="vii.ix-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p95"></span> There is a difficulty in following the
argument in the foregoing quotations.  F. Combefis, the French Dominican
editor of Basil, would boldly interpose a “not,” and read ‘whenever he
does *not* instruct us concerning the Father.’  But there is no <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.ix-p95.1"></span>ms.</span> authority for this
violent remedy.  The Benedictine Editors say all is plain if we render
“*postquam nos de patre erudivit*.”  But the Greek will not admit of
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Definitive conceptions about the Spirit which conform to the
teaching of the Scriptures.](2080039)
