[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080062)  [Next](2080064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>In the Beginning God made the Heaven and
the Earth.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ii-p3.1"></span>It</span> is right that any one beginning to
narrate the formation of the world should begin with the good order
which reigns in visible things.  I am about to speak of the creation of
heaven and earth, which was not spontaneous, as some have imagined, but
drew its origin from God.  What ear is worthy to hear such a tale?  How
earnestly the soul should prepare itself to receive such high lessons! 
How pure it should be from carnal affections, how unclouded by worldly
disquietudes, how active and ardent in its researches, how eager to find
in its surroundings an idea of God which may be worthy of Him!

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span>But before weighing the justice of these
remarks, before examining all the sense contained in these few words,
let us see who addresses them to us.  Because, if the weakness of our
intelligence does not allow us to penetrate the depth of the thoughts of
the writer, yet we shall be involuntarily drawn to give faith to his
words by the force of his authority.  Now it is Moses who has composed
this history; Moses, who, when still at the breast, is described as
exceeding fair; <span id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) Moses, whom
the daughter of Pharaoh adopted; who received from her a royal
education, and who had for his teachers the wise men of Egypt; <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) Moses, who disdained the pomp of
royalty, and, to share the humble condition of his compatriots,
preferred to be persecuted with the people of God rather than to enjoy
the fleeting delights of sin; Moses, who received from nature such a
love of justice that, even before the leadership of the people of God
was committed to him, he was impelled, by a natural horror of evil, to
pursue malefactors even to the point of punishing them by death; Moses,
who, banished by those whose benefactor he had been, hastened to escape
from the tumults of Egypt and took refuge in Ethiopia, living there far
from former pursuits, and passing forty years in the contemplation of
nature; Moses, finally, who, at the age of eighty, saw God, as far as it
is possible for man to see Him; or rather as it had not previously been
granted to man to see Him, according to the testimony of God Himself,
“If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto
him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.  My servant Moses
is not so, who is faithful in all mine house, with him will I speak
mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in dark speeches.” <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366)   It is this man, whom God judged
worthy to behold Him, face to face, like the angels, who imparts to us
what he has learnt from God.  Let us listen then to these words of truth
written without the help of the “enticing words of man’s wisdom” <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) by the dictation of the Holy
Spirit; words destined to produce not the applause of those who hear
them, but the salvation of those who are instructed by them.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span><span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_53"></span>2.  “In the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth.” <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368)   I stop
struck with admiration at this thought.  What shall I first say?  Where
shall I begin my story?  Shall I show forth the vanity of the Gentiles? 
Shall I exalt the truth of our faith?  The philosophers of Greece have
made much ado to explain nature, and not one of their systems has
remained firm and unshaken, each being overturned by its successor.  It
is vain to refute them; they are sufficient in themselves to destroy one
another.  Those who were too ignorant to rise to a knowledge of a God,
could not allow that an intelligent cause presided at the birth of the
Universe; a primary error that involved them in sad consequences.  Some
had recourse to material principles and attributed the origin of the
Universe <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) to the elements of
the world.  Others imagined that atoms, <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) and indivisible bodies, molecules
and ducts, form, by their union, the nature of the visible world.  Atoms
reuniting or separating, produce births and deaths and the most durable
bodies only owe their consistency to the strength of their mutual
adhesion:  a true spider’s web woven by these writers who give to
heaven, to earth, and to sea so weak an origin and so little
consistency!  It is because they knew not how to say “In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth.”  Deceived by their inherent
atheism it appeared to them that nothing governed or ruled the universe,
and that was all was given up to chance. <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371)   To guard us against this error
the writer on the creation, from the very first words, enlightens our
understanding with the name of God; “In the beginning God created.” 
What a glorious order!  He first establishes a beginning, so that it
might not be supposed that the world never had a beginning.  Then he
adds “Created” to show that which was made was a very small part of the
power of the Creator.  In the same way that the potter, after having
made with equal pains a great number of vessels, has not exhausted
either his art or his talent; thus the Maker of the Universe, whose
creative power, far from being bounded by one world, could extend to the
infinite, needed only the impulse of His will to bring the immensities
of the visible world into being.  If then the world has a beginning, and
if it has been created, enquire who gave it this beginning, and who was
the Creator:  or rather, in the fear that human reasonings may make you
wander from the truth, Moses has anticipated enquiry by engraving in our
hearts, as a seal and a safeguard, the awful name of God:  “In the
beginning God created”—It is He, beneficent Nature, Goodness without
measure, a worthy object of love for all beings endowed with reason, the
beauty the most to be desired, the origin of all that exists, the source
of life, intellectual light, impenetrable wisdom, it is He who “in the
beginning created heaven and earth.”

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>3.  Do not then imagine, O man! that the
visible world is without a beginning; and because the celestial bodies
move in a circular course, and it is difficult for our senses to define
the point where the circle begins, do not believe that bodies impelled
by a circular movement are, from their nature, without a beginning. 
Without doubt the circle (I mean the plane figure described by a single
line) is beyond our perception, and it is impossible for us to find out
where it begins or where it ends; but we ought not on this account to
believe it to be without a beginning.  Although we are not sensible of
it, it really begins at some point where the draughtsman has begun to
draw it at a certain radius from the centre. <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372)   Thus seeing that figures which
move in a circle always return upon themselves, without for a single
instant interrupting the regularity of their course, do not vainly
imagine to yourselves that the world has neither beginning nor end. 
“For the fashion of this world passeth away” <span
id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373) and “Heaven and earth shall pass
away.” <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374)   The dogmas of the
end, and of the renewing of the world, are announced beforehand in these
short words put at the head of the inspired history.  “In the beginning
God made.”  That which was begun in time is condemned to come to an end
in time.  If there has been a beginning do not doubt of the end. <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375)   Of what use then are geometry—the
calculations of arithmetic—the study of solids and <span id="page_54">p.
54</span> <span id="viii.ii-Page_54"></span>far-famed astronomy, this
laborious vanity, if those who pursue them imagine that this visible
world is co-eternal with the Creator of all things, with God Himself; if
they attribute to this limited world, which has a material body, the
same glory as to the incomprehensible and invisible nature; if they
cannot conceive that a whole, of which the parts are subject to
corruption and change, must of necessity end by itself submitting to the
fate of its parts?  But they have become “vain in their imaginations and
their foolish heart was darkened.  Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools.” <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376)   Some
have affirmed that heaven co-exists with God from all eternity; <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) others that it is God Himself
without beginning or end, and the cause of the particular arrangement of
all things. <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378)

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span>4.  One day, doubtless, their terrible
condemnation will be the greater for all this worldly wisdom, since,
seeing so clearly into vain sciences, they have wilfully shut their eyes
to the knowledge of the truth.  These men who measure the distances of
the stars and describe them, both those of the North, always shining
brilliantly in our view, and those of the southern pole visible to the
inhabitants of the South, but unknown to us; who divide the Northern
zone and the circle of the Zodiac into an infinity of parts, who observe
with exactitude the course of the stars, their fixed places, their
declensions, their return and the time that each takes to make its
revolution; these men, I say, have discovered all except one thing:  the
fact that God is the Creator of the universe, and the just Judge who
rewards all the actions of life according to their merit.  They have not
known how to raise themselves to the idea of the consummation of all
things, the consequence of the doctrine of judgment, and to see that the
world must change if souls pass from this life to a new life.  In
reality, as the nature of the present life presents an affinity to this
world, so in the future life our souls will enjoy a lot conformable to
their new condition.  But they are so far from applying these truths,
that they do but laugh when we announce to them the end of all things
and the regeneration of the age.  Since the beginning naturally precedes
that which is derived from it, the writer, of necessity, when speaking
to us of things which had their origin in time, puts at the head of his
narrative these words—“In the beginning God created.”

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span>5.  It appears, indeed, that even before
this world an order of things <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379)
existed of which our mind can form an idea, but of which we can say
nothing, because it is too lofty a subject for men who are but beginners
and are still babes in knowledge.  The birth of the world was preceded
by a condition of things suitable for the exercise of supernatural
powers, outstripping the limits of time, eternal and infinite.  The
Creator and Demiurge of the universe perfected His works in it,
spiritual light for the happiness of all who love the Lord, intellectual
and invisible natures, all the orderly arrangement <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380) of pure intelligences who are
beyond the reach of our mind and of whom we cannot even discover the
names.  They fill the essence of this invisible world, as Paul teaches
us.  “For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible whether they be thrones or dominions
or principalities or powers” <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381)
or virtues or hosts of angels or the dignities of archangels.  To this
world at last it was necessary to add a new world, both a school and
training place where the souls of men should be taught and a home for
beings destined to be born and to die.  Thus was created, of a nature
analogous to that of this world and the animals and plants which live
thereon, the succession of time, for ever pressing on and passing away
and never stopping in its course.  Is not this the nature of time, where
the past is no more, the future does not exist, and the present escapes
before being recognised?  And such also is the nature of the creature
which lives in time,—condemned to grow or to perish without rest and
without certain stability.  It is therefore fit that the bodies of
animals and plants, obliged to follow a sort of current, and carried
away by the motion which leads them to birth or to death, should live in
the midst of surroundings whose nature is in accord with beings subject
to change. <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382)   <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span id="viii.ii-Page_55"></span>Thus the
writer who wisely tells us of the birth of the Universe does not fail to
put these words at the head of the narrative.  “In the beginning God
created;” that is to say, in the beginning of time.  Therefore, if he
makes the world appear in the beginning, it is not a proof that its
birth has preceded that of all other things that were made.  He only
wishes to tell us that, after the invisible and intellectual world, the
visible world, the world of the senses, began to exist.

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span>The first movement is called beginning. 
“To do right is the beginning of the good way.” <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383)   Just actions are truly the first
steps towards a happy life.  Again, we call “beginning” the essential
and first part from which a thing proceeds, such as the foundation of a
house, the keel of a vessel; it is in this sense that it is said, “The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,” <span
id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) that is to say that piety is, as it
were, the groundwork and foundation of perfection.  Art is also the
beginning of the works of artists, the skill of Bezaleel *began* the
adornment of the tabernacle. <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385)
  Often even the good which is the final cause is the *beginning* of
actions.  Thus the approbation of God is the beginning of almsgiving,
and the end laid up for us in the promises the beginning of all virtuous
efforts.

<span id="viii.ii-p35"></span>6.  Such being the different senses of the
word beginning, see if we have not all the meanings here.  You may know
the epoch when the formation of this world began, it, ascending into the
past, you endeavour to discover the first day.  You will thus find what
was the first movement of time; then that the creation of the heavens
and of the earth were like the foundation and the groundwork, and
afterwards that an intelligent reason, as the word beginning indicates,
presided in the order of visible things. <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386)   You will finally discover that
the world was not conceived by chance and without reason, but for an
useful end and for the great advantage of all beings, since it is really
the school where reasonable souls exercise themselves, the training
ground where they learn to know God; since by the sight of visible and
sensible things the mind is led, as by a hand, to the contemplation of
invisible things.  “For,” as the Apostle says, “the invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made.” <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387)  
Perhaps these words “In the beginning God created” signify the rapid and
imperceptible moment of creation.  The beginning, in effect, is
indivisible and instantaneous.  The beginning of the road is not yet the
road, and that of the house is not yet the house; so the beginning of
time is not yet time and not even the least particle of it.  If some
objector tell us that the beginning is a time, he ought then, as he
knows well, to submit it to the division of time—a beginning, a middle
and an end.  Now it is ridiculous to imagine a beginning of a
beginning.  Further, if we divide the beginning into two, we make two
instead of one, or rather make several, we really make an infinity, for
all that which is divided is divisible to the infinite. <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388)   Thus then, if it is said, “In the
beginning God created,” it is to teach us that at the will of God the
world arose in less than an instant, and it is to convey this meaning
more clearly that other interpreters have said:  “God made summarily”
that is to say all at once and in a moment. <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389)   But enough concerning the
beginning, if only to put a few points out of many.

<span id="viii.ii-p40"></span>7.  Among arts, some have in view
production, some practice, others theory. <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390)   The object of the last is the
exercise of thought, that of the second, the motion of the body.  Should
it cease, all stops; nothing more is to be seen.  Thus dancing and music
have nothing behind; they have no object but themselves.  In creative
arts on the contrary the work lasts after the operation.  Such is
architecture—such are the arts which work in wood and brass and weaving,
all those indeed which, even when the artisan has disappeared, serve to
show an industrious intelligence and to cause the architect, the worker
in brass or the weaver, to be admired on account of his work.  Thus,
then, to show that the world is a work of art displayed for the
beholding of all people; to make them know Him who <span id="page_56">p.
56</span> <span id="viii.ii-Page_56"></span>created it, Moses does not
use another word.  “In the beginning,” he says “God created.”  He does
not say “God worked,” “God formed,” but “God created.”  Among those who
have imagined that the world co-existed with God from all eternity, many
have denied that it was created by God, but say that it exists
spontaneously, as the shadow of this power.  God, they say, is the cause
of it, but an involuntary cause, as the body is the cause of the shadow
and the flame is the cause of the brightness. <span
id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391)   It is to correct this error that
the prophet states, with so much precision, “In the beginning God
created.”  He did not make the thing itself the cause of its
existence. <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392)   Being good, He
made it an useful work.  Being wise, He made it everything that was most
beautiful.  Being powerful He made it very great. <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393)   Moses almost shows us the finger
of the supreme artisan taking possession of the substance of the
universe, forming the different parts in one perfect accord, and making
a harmonious symphony result from the whole. <span
id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394)

<span id="viii.ii-p46"></span>“In the beginning God made heaven and
earth.”  By naming the two extremes, he suggests the substance of the
whole world, according to heaven the privilege of seniority, and putting
earth in the second rank.  All intermediate beings were created at the
same time as the extremities.  Thus, although there is no mention of the
elements, fire, water and air, <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) imagine that they were all
compounded together, and you will find water, air and fire, in the
earth.  For fire leaps out from stones; iron which is dug from the earth
produces under friction fire in plentiful measure.  A marvellous fact! 
Fire shut up in bodies lurks there hidden without harming them, but no
sooner is it released than it consumes that which has hitherto preserved
it.  The earth contains water, as diggers of wells teach us.  It
contains air too, as is shown by the vapours that it exhales under the
sun’s warmth <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) when it is
damp.  Now, as according to their nature, heaven occupies the higher and
earth the lower position in space, (one sees, in fact, that all which is
light ascends towards heaven, and heavy substances fall to the ground);
as therefore height and depth are the points the most opposed to each
other it is enough to mention the most distant parts to signify the
inclusion of all which fills up intervening Space.  Do not ask, then,
for an enumeration of all the elements; guess, from what Holy Scripture
indicates, all that is passed over in silence.

<span id="viii.ii-p49"></span>8.  “In the beginning God created the
heaven and the earth.”  If we were to wish to discover the essence of
each of the beings which are offered for our contemplation, or come
under our senses, we should be drawn away into long digressions, and the
solution of the problem would require more words than I possess, to
examine fully the matter.  To spend time on such points would not prove
to be to the edification of the Church.  Upon the essence of the heavens
we are contented with what Isaiah says, for, in simple language, he
gives us sufficient idea of their nature, “The heaven was made like
smoke,” <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) that is to say, He
created a subtle substance, without solidity or density, from which to
form the heavens.  As to the form of them we also content ourselves with
the language of the same prophet, when praising God “that stretcheth out
the heavens as a curtain and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell
in.” <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398)   In the same way, as
concerns the earth, let us resolve not to torment ourselves by trying to
find out its essence, not to tire our reason by seeking for the
substance which it conceals.  Do not let us seek for any nature devoid
of qualities by the conditions of its existence, but let us know that
all the phenomena with which we see it clothed regard the conditions of
its existence and complete its essence.  Try to take away by reason each
of the qualities it possesses, and you will arrive at nothing.  Take
away black, cold, weight, density, the qualities which concern taste, in
one word all these which we see in it, and the substance vanishes. <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399)

<span id="viii.ii-p53"></span><span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_57"></span>If I ask you to leave these vain questions,
I will not expect you to try and find out the earth’s point of support. 
The mind would reel on beholding its reasonings losing themselves
without end.  Do you say that the earth reposes on a bed of air? <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400)   How, then, can this soft
substance, without consistency, resist the enormous weight which presses
upon it?  How is it that it does not slip away in all directions, to
avoid the sinking weight, and to spread itself over the mass which
overwhelms it?  Do you suppose that water is the foundation of the
earth? <span id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401)   You will then always
have to ask yourself how it is that so heavy and opaque a body does not
pass through the water; how a mass of such a weight is held up by a
nature weaker than itself.  Then you must seek a base for the waters,
and you will be in much difficulty to say upon what the water itself
rests.

<span id="viii.ii-p56"></span>9.  Do you suppose that a heavier body
prevents the earth from falling into the abyss?  Then you must consider
that this support needs itself a support to prevent it from falling. 
Can we imagine one?  Our reason again demands yet another support, and
thus we shall fall into the infinite, always imagining a base for the
base which we have already found. <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402)   And the further we advance in
this reasoning the greater force we are obliged to give to this base, so
that it may be able to support all the mass weighing upon it.  Put then
a limit to your thought, so that your curiosity in investigating the
incomprehensible may not incur the reproaches of Job, and you be not
asked by him, “Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened?” <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403)   If ever you hear in the Psalms,
“I bear up the pillars of it;” <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404) see in these pillars the power
which sustains it.  Because what means this other passage, “He hath
founded it upon the sea,” <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) if
not that the water is spread all around the earth?  How then can water,
the fluid element which flows down every declivity, remain suspended
without ever flowing?  You do not reflect that the idea of the earth
suspended by itself throws your reason into a like but even greater
difficulty, since from its nature it is heavier.  But let us admit that
the earth rests upon itself, or let us say that it rides the waters, we
must still remain faithful to thought of true religion and recognise
that all is sustained by the Creator’s power.  Let us then reply to
ourselves, and let us reply to those who ask us upon what support this
enormous mass rests, “In His hands are the ends of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406)   It is a doctrine as infallible
for our own information as profitable for our hearers.

<span id="viii.ii-p62"></span>10.  There are inquirers into nature <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) who with a great display of words
give reasons for the immobility of the earth.  Placed, they say, in the
middle of the universe and not being able to incline more to one side
than the other because its centre is everywhere the same distance from
the surface, it necessarily rests upon itself; since a weight which is
everywhere equal cannot lean to either side.  It is not, they go on,
without reason or by chance that the earth occupies the centre of the
universe.  It is its natural and necessary position.  As the celestial
body occupies the higher extremity of space all heavy bodies, they
argue, that we may suppose to have fallen from these high regions, will
be carried from all directions to the centre, and the point towards
which the parts are tending will evidently be the one to which the whole
mass will be thrust together.  If stones, wood, all terrestrial bodies,
fall from above downwards, this must be the proper and natural place of
the whole earth.  If, on the contrary, a light body is separated from
the centre, it is evident that it will ascend towards the higher
regions.  Thus heavy bodies move from the top to the bottom, and
following this reasoning, the bottom is none other than the centre of
the world.  Do not then be surprised that the world never falls:  it
occupies the centre of the universe, its natural place.  By necessity it
is obliged to remain in its place, unless a movement contrary to nature
should displace it. <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408)   If
there is anything in this system which might appear probable to you,
keep your admiration for the source of such perfect order, for the
wisdom of God.  Grand phenomena do not strike us the less when we have
discovered something of their wonderful mechanism.  Is it otherwise
here?  At all events let us prefer the simplicity of faith to the
demonstrations of reason.

<span id="viii.ii-p65"></span>11.  We might say the same thing of the
<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_58"></span>heavens.  With what a noise of words the
sages of this world have discussed their nature!  Some have said that
heaven is composed of four elements as being tangible and visible, and
is made up of earth on account of its power of resistance, with fire
because it is striking to the eye, with air and water on account of the
mixture. <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409)   Others have
rejected this system as improbable, and introduced into the world, to
form the heavens, a fifth element after their own fashioning.  There
exists, they say, an æthereal body which is neither fire, air, earth,
nor water, nor in one word any simple body.  These simple bodies have
their own natural motion in a straight line, light bodies upwards and
heavy bodies downwards; now this motion upwards and downwards is not the
same as circular motion; there is the greatest possible difference
between straight and circular motion.  It therefore follows that bodies
whose motion is so various must vary also in their essence.  But, it is
not even possible to suppose that the heavens should be formed of
primitive bodies which we call elements, because the reunion of contrary
forces could not produce an even and spontaneous motion, when each of
the simple bodies is receiving a different impulse from nature.  Thus it
is a labour to maintain composite bodies in continual movement, because
it is impossible to put even a single one of their movements in accord
and harmony with all those that are in discord; since what is proper to
the light particle, is in warfare with that of a heavier one.  If we
attempt to rise we are stopped by the weight of the terrestrial element;
if we throw ourselves down we violate the igneous part of our being in
dragging it down contrary to its nature.  Now this struggle of the
elements effects their dissolution.  A body to which violence is done
and which is placed in opposition to nature, after a short but energetic
resistance, is soon dissolved into as many parts as it had elements,
each of the constituent parts returning to its natural place.  It is the
force of these reasons, say the inventors of the fifth kind of body for
the genesis of heaven and the stars, which constrained them to reject
the system of their predecessors and to have recourse to their own
hypothesis. <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410)   But yet another
fine speaker arises and disperses and destroys this theory to give
predominance to an idea of his own invention.

<span id="viii.ii-p74"></span>Do not let us undertake to follow them for
fear of falling into like frivolities; let them refute each other, and,
without disquieting ourselves about essence, let us say with Moses “God
created the heavens and the earth.”  Let us glorify the supreme
Artificer for all that was wisely and skillfully made; by the beauty of
visible things let us raise ourselves to Him who is above all beauty; by
the grandeur of bodies, sensible and limited in their nature, let us
conceive of the infinite Being whose immensity and omnipotence surpass
all the efforts of the imagination.  Because, although we ignore the
nature of created things, the objects which on all sides attract our
notice are so marvellous, that the most penetrating mind cannot attain
to the knowledge of the least of the phenomena of the world, either to
give a suitable explanation of it or to render due praise to the
Creator, to Whom belong all glory, all honour and all power world
without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[52:1365](2080063.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span> [Acts vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)<span id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>,
A.V.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[52:1366](2080063.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="viii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span> *cf*. Joseph. ii. x. 2.  So Justin M.,
*Cohort. ad gent*., Philio, *Vit. Moys*, and Clem. Al., *Strom*. i. 
*Vide* Fialon, *Et. Hist*. 302.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[52:1367](2080063.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span> [Num.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[52:1368](2080063.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="viii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[53:1369](2080063.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[53:1370](2080063.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="viii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span> *cf*. note on Letter viii. on the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p11.1"></span>στοιχεῖα</span> or
elements which the Ionian philosophers made the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p11.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p11.3"></span>ρχαι</span> of the
universe.  *Vide* Plato, *Legg*. x. § 4 and Arist., *Met*. i. 3.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[53:1371](2080063.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="viii.ii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span> Posidonius the Stoic names Moschus, or
Mochus of Sidon, as the originator of the atomic theory “before the
Trojan period.”  *Vide* Strabo, xvi. 757.  But the most famous Atomists,
Leucippus and Democritus of Abdera, in the 5th c. <span
class="c14"><span id="viii.ii-p12.1"></span>b.c.</span>, arose in
opposition to the Eleatic school, and were followed in the 3d by
Epicurus.  *Vide* Diog. Laert. ix. § 30, *sq*. and Cicero, *De Nat.
Deor*. i. 24–26.  *Ista enim flagitia Democriti, sive etiam ante
Leucippi, esse corpuscula quædam lævia, alia aspera, rotunda alia,
partim autem angulata, curvata quædam, et quasi adunca; ex his effectum
esse cœlum atque terram, nulla cogente natura, sed concursu quodam
fortuito.  Atqui, si haec Democritea non audisset, quid audierat? quid
est in physicis Epicuri non a Democrito?  Nam, etsi quædam commodavit,
ut, quod paulo ante de inclinatione atomorum dixi:  tamen pleraque dixit
eadem; atomos, inane, imagines, infinitatem locorum,
innumerabilitatemque mundorum eorum ortus, interitus, omnia fere, quibus
naturæ ratio continetur.*

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[53:1372](2080063.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="viii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span> *cf*. the *Fortuna gubernans* of
Lucretius (v. 108).

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[53:1373](2080063.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="viii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span> Fialon refers to Aristotle (*De Cœlo*. i.
5) on the non-infinitude of the circle.  The conclusion is <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p15.1"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p15.2"></span>Ο</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p15.3"></span>τι μὲν οὖν τὸ κύκλῳ
κινούμενον οὐκ ἔστιν ἀτελεύτητον οὐδ᾽ ἄπειρον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔχει τέλος,
φανερόν</span>

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[53:1374](2080063.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="viii.ii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[53:1375](2080063.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="viii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[53:1376](2080063.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="viii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span> *cf*. Arist. *De Cœlo*. i. 12, 10.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>Δῆλον δ᾽ ὅτι καὶ εἰ
γενητὸν ἢ φθαρτόν, οὐκ ἀ& 188·διον</span>.

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[54:1377](2080063.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="viii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span> [Rom.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[54:1378](2080063.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="viii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span> Arist., *De Cœlo*. ii. 1. 1. calls it
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p20.1"></span>εἷς καὶ ἀ&
188·διος</span>.  *cf*. the end of the *Timæus*.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[54:1379](2080063.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="viii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span> *cf*. Cic., *De nat. Deo*. i. 14,
*“Cleanthes*” (of Assos, c. 264 <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>b.c.</span>, a disciple of Zeno) “*autem tum
ipsum mundum Deum dicit esse; tum totius naturæ menti atque animo
tribuit hoc nomen; tum ultimum, et altissimum, atque undique
circumfusum, et extremum, omnia cingentem atque complexum, ardorem, qui
æther nominetur, certissimum Deum judicat*,” and *id*. 15,
“*Chrysippus*” (of Tarsus, † c. 212 <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ii-p21.2"></span>b.c.</span>)…“*ipsum mundum Deum dicit
esse*.”  Yet the *Hymn of Cleanthes* (apud Stobœum) begins:

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>Κύδιστ᾽ ἀθανάτων, πολυώνομε, παγκρατὲς
αἰεὶ,</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>Ζεὺς, φύσεως ἀρχηγὲ, νόμον μέτα πάντα
κυβερνῶν.</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span>*cf.* Orig., *v. Celsum* V. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p24.1"></span>σαφῶς δὴ τὸν ὅλον κόσμον
(῞Ελληνες) λέγουσιν εἶναι θεόν, Στωικοὶ μὲν τὸν πρῶτον. οἰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ
Πλάτωνος τὸν δεύτερον, τινὲς δ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸν τρίτον</span>; and Athan., *De
Incarn*. § 2.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[54:1380](2080063.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span> *cf*. Origen, *De Principiis*, ii. 1, 3.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[54:1381](2080063.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="viii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p28.1"></span>διακόσμησις</span>.  *cf*. Arist., *Met*. i.
5, 2.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[54:1382](2080063.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="viii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[54:1383](2080063.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="viii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span> *cf*. Plato, *Timæus*, § 14, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>χρόνος δ᾽ οὖν μετ᾽ οὐρανοῦ
γέγονεν ἵνα ἅμα γεννηθέντες ἅμα καὶ λυθῶσιν, ἄν ποτε λύσις τις αὐτῶν
γἰγνηται καὶ κατὰ τὸ παρὰδειγμα τῆς αἰωνἰας φύσεως ἵν, ὡς ὁμοιότατος
αὐτῷ κατὰ δύναμιν ᾖ</span>   Fialon (p. 311) quotes Cousin’s translation
at greater length, and refers also to Plotinus, *Enn*. II. vii. 10–12. 
The parallel transistoriness of time and things has become the
commonplace of poets.  “*Immortalia ne speres monet annus et almun Quæ
rapit hora diem.” * Hor.,*Carm*. iv. 7.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[55:1384](2080063.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="viii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p32"></span> [Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii-p32.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[55:1385](2080063.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="viii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p33"></span> [Prov. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[55:1386](2080063.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="viii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p34"></span> *cf*. Arist., *Met*. iv. 1.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p34.1"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p34.2"></span>Αρχη ἡ μὲν λέγεται ὅθεν ἄν
τι τοῦ πράγματος κινηθείη πρῶτον· οἱον τοῦ μήκους, καὶ ὁδοῦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p34.3"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p34.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p34.5"></span>δὲ ὅθεν ἂν κάλλιστα
ἕκαστον γένοιτο· οἷον καὶ μαθήσεως, οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου καὶ τῆς τοῦ
πράγματος ἀρχῆς ἐνίοτε ἀρκτέον, ἀλλ᾽ ὅθεν ρᾷστ᾽ ἂν μάθοι, ἡ δὲ, ὅθεν
πρῶτον γινεται ἐνυπάρχοντος· οἷον ὡς πλοίου τρόπις, καὶ οἰκίας
θεμέλιος</span>.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[55:1387](2080063.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="viii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p36"></span> In the *Homily* of Origen extant in the
Latin of Rufinus (Migne Pat. Gr. xii. 146) <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p36.2"></span>ρχή</span> is used of the Divine Word, “*In
principio.  Quod est omnium principium nisi Dominus noster Christus
Iesus?…In hoc ergo principio, hoc est in Verbo suo, Deus cœlum et terram
fecit*.”  An interpretation of [John viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="viii.ii-p36.3"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p36.4"></span>τὴν ἀρχὴν ὅτι καὶ
λαλῶ ὑμιν</span> widely prevalent at all events in the Latin church, was
“*Initium quod et loquor vobis;*” “I am the Beginning, that which I am
even saying to you.”  See note to *Sp. Comment*. on [John
viii.](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#000)<span id="viii.ii-p36.5"></span>
*ad fin*.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[55:1388](2080063.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="viii.ii-p36.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p37"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="viii.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[55:1389](2080063.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="viii.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p38"></span> On the inconceivability either of an
absolute minimum of space or of its infinite divisibility, *cf*. Sir Wm.
Hamilton, *Met*. ii. 371.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[55:1390](2080063.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="viii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p39"></span> Aquila’s version in the *Hexapla* of
Origen for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p39.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p39.2"></span>ν ἀρχᾐ</span> has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p39.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p39.4"></span>ν κεφαλαί& 251· ἔκτισεν</span>.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[55:1391](2080063.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="viii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p41.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p41.2"></span>ἅπασα διάνοια ἢ πρακτικὴ ἢ ποιητικὴ ἢ
θεωρητική</span>.  Arist., *Met*. v. i.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[56:1392](2080063.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="viii.ii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p42"></span> The *one* and the *perfect* continually
overflows, and from it Being, Reason, and Life are perpetually derived,
without deducting anything from its substance, inasmuch as it is simple
in its nature, and not, like matter, compound.  (*Enn*. iv. ix. 9.) 
This derivation of all things from unity does not resemble creation,
which has reference to time, but takes place purely in conformity with
the principles of causality and order, without volition, because to will
is to change.  (*Enn*. iv. 5, i. 6)”  Tennemann on Plotinus, *Hist.
Phil*. § 207.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[56:1393](2080063.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="viii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p43"></span> The Ben. note is “*neque idipsum in causa
fuit cur esset, hoc est, non res cæca, non res coacta, non res invite et
præter voluntatem agens in causa fuit cur mundus exstiterit.  Hoc igitur
dicit Basilius Deum aliter agere atque corpora opaca aut lucida.  Nam
corpus producit umbram vi atque necessitate, nec liberius agit corpus
lucidum:  Deus vero omnia nutu conficit et voluntate.  Illud* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.2"></span>ποιησεν</span>, *etc.,
alio modo intellexit et interpretatus est Eustathius.  Illius subjicimus
verba:  non causam præstitit ut esset solum, sed fecit ut bonus
utilem*.”

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[56:1394](2080063.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="viii.ii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p44"></span> *cf*. Plat., *Tim.* § 10.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p44.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p44.2"></span>Αγαθὸς ἦν, ἀγαθῷ δὲ ουδεὶς
περὶ οὐδενὸς οὐδέποτε ἐγγίγνεται φθόνος, τούτου δ᾽ ἐκτὸς ὢν πάντα ὅτι
μάλιστα γενέσθαι ἐβουλήθη παραπλήσια ἑαυτῷ</span>.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[56:1395](2080063.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="viii.ii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p45"></span> *cf*. Huxley, *Lay Sermons*, xii. p. 286,
on the “delicate finger” of the “hidden artist” in the changes in an
egg.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[56:1396](2080063.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="viii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p47"></span> *cf*. note on *Letter* viii.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[56:1397](2080063.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="viii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p48.1"></span>φαμὲν δὲ πῦρ καὶ ἀ& 153·ρα καὶ ὕδωρ γίγνεσθαι
ἐξ ἀλλήλων καὶ ἕκαστον ἐν ἑκάστῳ ὑπάρχειν τούτων δυνάμει</span>. 
Arist., *Meteor*. i. 3.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[56:1398](2080063.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="viii.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p50"></span> [Isa. li.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p50.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[56:1399](2080063.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="viii.ii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p51"></span> [Isa. xl.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)<span id="viii.ii-p51.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[56:1400](2080063.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="viii.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p52"></span> Fialon points to the coincidence with
Arist., *Met*. vii. 3.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p52.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p52.2"></span>Αλλὰ μὴν ἀφαιρουμένου μήκους καὶ πλάτους καὶ
βάθους, οὐδὲν ὁρῶμεν ὑπολειπόμενον πλὴν ἐ& 176· τι ἐστὶ τὸ ὁριζόμενον
ὑπὸ τούτων, ὥστε τὴν ὕλην ἀνάγκη φαὶνεσθαι μόνην οὐσίαν οὕτω
σκοπουμένοις.  Λέγω δ᾽ ὕλην ἢ καθ᾽ αὑτὴν μήτε τὶ, μήτε ποσὸν, μήτε ἄλλο
μηδὲν λέγεται οἷς ὥρισται τὸ ὄν· ἔστι γὰρ τι καθ᾽ οὗ κατηγορεῖται τούτων
ἕκαστον, ᾧ τὸ εἶναι ἕτερον, καὶ τῶν κατηγορεῶν ἑκάστῃ.  Τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα
τῆς οὐσίας κατηγορεῖται· αὕτη δὲ, τῆς ὕλης.  & 169·Ωστε τὸ ἔσχατον, καθ᾽
αὑτὸ οὔτε τὶ, οὔτε ποσὸν, οὔτε ἄλλο οὐδέν ἐστιν· οὐδὲ δὴ αἰ
ἀποφάσεις</span>

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[57:1401](2080063.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="viii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p54"></span> *cf*. Arist., *De Cœlo*. ii. 13, 16. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p54.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p54.2"></span>Α</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p54.3"></span>ναξιμένης δὲ καὶ ᾽Αναξάγο
ρας καὶ Δημόκριτος τὸ πλάτος αἴτιον εἶναί φασι τοῦ μένειν αὐτήν· οὐ γὰρ
τέμνειν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιπωματίζειν</span> (covers like a lid) <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p54.4"></span>τὸν ἀ& 153·ρα τὸν κάτωθεν,
ὅπερ φαίνεται τὰ πλάτος ἔχοντα τῶν σωματων ποιεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[57:1402](2080063.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="viii.ii-p54.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p55"></span> The theory of Thales.  *cf*. note on
*Letter* viii. 2 and Arist., *De Cœlo*. ii. 13, 13 where he speaks of
Thales describing the earth floating like wood on water.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[57:1403](2080063.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="viii.ii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p57"></span> *cf*. Arist., *De Cœlo*. ii. 13 (Grote’s
tr.):  “The Kolophonian Xenophanes affirmed that the lower depths of the
earth were rooted downwards to infinity, in order to escape the
troublesome obligation of looking for a reason why it remained
stationary.”  To this Empedokles objected, and suggested velocity of
rotation for the cause of the earth’s maintaining its position.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[57:1404](2080063.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="viii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p58"></span> [Job xxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[57:1405](2080063.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="viii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p59"></span> [Ps. lxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[57:1406](2080063.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="viii.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p60"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[57:1407](2080063.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="viii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p61"></span> [Ps. xcv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii-p61.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[57:1408](2080063.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="viii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p63.1"></span>οἱ φυσικοὶ</span> was the name given to the
Ionic and other philosophers who preceded Socrates.  Lucian (*Ner*. 4)
calls Thales <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p63.2"></span>φυσικώτατος</span>.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[57:1409](2080063.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="viii.ii-p63.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p64"></span> *cf*. *De Cœlo*. ii. 14, 4.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p64.1"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p64.2"></span>Ε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p64.3"></span>τι δ᾽ ἡ φορὰ τῶν μορίων
καὶ ὅλης αὐτῆς ἠ κατὰ φύσιν ἐπἰ τὸ μέσον τοῦ παντός ἐστιν, διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ
καὶ τυγχάνει κειμένη νῦν ἐπὶ τοῦ κέντρου</span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[58:1410](2080063.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="viii.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p66"></span> This is the doctrine of Plato *vide
Tim*.  The Combef. <span class="c14"><span
id="viii.ii-p66.1"></span>mss.</span> reads not <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p66.2"></span>μίξις</span>, mixture, but
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p66.3"></span>μέθεξις</span>,
participation.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[58:1411](2080063.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="viii.ii-p66.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p67"></span> Here appears to be a reference to Arist.,
*De Gen. Ann*. ii. 3, 11, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.1"></span>πάσης μὲν ουν ψυχῆς δύναμις ἑτέρον σώματος ἐ&
231·ικε κεκοινωνηκέναι καὶ θειοτέρου τῶν καλουμένων στοιχείων· ὡς δὲ
διαφέρουσι τιμιότητι αἱ ψυχαὶ καὶ ἀτιμί& 139· ἀλλήλων οὕτω καὶ ἡ τοιαύτη
διαφέρει φύσις</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.2"></span>,</span> and again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.3"></span>πνεῦμα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.4"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p67.6"></span>νάλογον οὖσα τῷ τῶν ἄστρων στοιχεί&
251·</span>.  On the fifth element of Aristotle *cf*. Cic., *Tusc.
Disp*. i. 10.  *Aristoteles…cum quatuor illa genera principiorum erat
complexus, equibus omnia orirentur, quintam quandam naturam censet esse,
equa sit mens*.  Aug., *De Civ. Dei* xxii. 11. 2, and Cudworth’s *Int.
Syst.* (Harrison’s Ed. 1845) iii. p. 465.  Hence the word
“quintessence,” for which the Dictionaries quote Howard’s *Translation
of Plutarch*, “Aristoteles hath put…for elements foure; and for a fifth
quintessence, the heavenly body which is immutable.”  Skeat s. v. points
out that “the idea is older than Aristotle:  *cf*. the five Skt.
*bhútas*, or elements, which were earth, air, fire, and water, and
æther.  Thus the fifth essence is æther, the subtlest and highest.”  It
is evident that Milton had these theories in mind when he wrote (*Par.
Lost*, iii. 716):

<span id="viii.ii-p68"></span>“Swift to their several quarters hasted
then

<span id="viii.ii-p69"></span>The cumbrous elements, earth, flood, air,
fire;

<span id="viii.ii-p70"></span>And this ethereal quintessence of heaven

<span id="viii.ii-p71"></span>Flew upward, spirited with various forms,

<span id="viii.ii-p72"></span>That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars

<span id="viii.ii-p73"></span>Numberless.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: “The Earth was Invisible and Unfinished.”](2080064)
