[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080203)  [Next](2080205.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxxii"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxxii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXI. <span
id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p3"></span>*To Olympius*. <span
id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436.md)

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxxii-p5.1"></span>Truly</span> unexpected tidings make both
ears tingle.  This is my case.  These compositions against me, which are
being carried about, have fallen upon ears by this time pretty well
seasoned, on account of my having formerly received the letter,
appropriate enough to my sins, but which I should never have expected to
be written by those who sent it.  Nevertheless what followed did seem to
me so extraordinarily cruel as to blot out all that had gone before. 
How could I fail to be driven almost out of my senses when I read the
letter addressed to the reverend brother Dazinas, full of outrageous
insults and calumnies and of attacks against me, as though I had been
convicted of much pernicious designs against the Church?  Moreover
proofs were forthwith offered of the truth of the calumnies against me,
from the document of whose authorship I am ignorant.  Parts I recognise,
I own, as having been written by Apollinarius of Laodicea.  These I had
purposely not even ever read, but I had heard of them from the report of
others.  Other portions I found included, which I had never either read
or heard of from any one else; of the truth of this there is a faithful
witness in heaven.  How then can men who shun lies, who have learnt that
love is the fulfilling of the law, who profess to bear the burdens of
the weak, have consented to bring these calumnies against me and to
condemn me out of other men’s writings?  I have often asked myself this
question, but I cannot imagine the reason, unless it be, as I have said
from the beginning, that my pain in all this is a part of the punishment
which is due to my sins.

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p6"></span>2.  First of all I sorrowed in soul that
truths were lessened by the sons of men; in the second place I feared
for my own self, lest in addition to my other sins, I should become a
misanthrope, believing no truth and honour to be left in any man; if
indeed those whom I have most greatly trusted are proved to be so
disposed both to me and to the truth.  Be sure then, my brother, and
every one who is a friend of the truth, that the composition is not
mine; I do not approve of it, for it is not drawn up according to my
views.  Even if I did write, a good many years ago, to Apollinarius or
to any one else, I ought not to be blamed.  I find no fault myself if
any member of any society has been cut off into heresy (and you know
perfectly well whom I mean though I mention nobody by name), because
each man will die in his own sin.

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p7"></span>This is my reply to the document sent me,
that you may know the truth, and make it plain to all who wish not to
hold the truth in unrighteousness.  If it prove necessary to defend
myself more at length on each separate count, I will do so, God being my
helper.  I, brother Olympius, neither maintain three Gods, nor
communicate with Apollinarius. <span
id="fr_2437"></span>[2438](#fn_2437.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[199:2436](2080204.htm#fr_2435.md) <span
id="ix.cxxxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[199:2437](2080204.htm#fr_2436.md) <span
id="ix.cxxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p4"></span> *cf. Letters* xii. and xiii.

<span id="fn_2437"></span>[199:2438](2080204.htm#fr_2437.md) <span
id="ix.cxxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxii-p8"></span> *cf. Letter* cxxv. and Greg. Naz.,
*Orat*. i. and xxix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Abramius, bishop of Batnæ.](2080205.md)
