[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080213)  [Next](2080215.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxlii"></span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxlii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXLI. <span
id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p3"></span>*To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata*. <span
id="fr_2466"></span>[2467](#fn_2466.md)

<span id="ix.cxlii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxlii-p5.1"></span>I have</span> now received two letters from
your divine and most excellent wisdom, whereof the one told me clearly
how I had been expected by the laity under the jurisdiction of your
holiness, and what disappointment I had caused by failing to attend the
sacred synod.  The other, which from the writing I conjecture to be of
the earlier date, though it was delivered later, gave me advice, at once
honourable to yourself and necessary to me, not to neglect the interests
of God’s Churches, nor little by little to allow the guidance of affairs
to pass to our opponents, whereby their interests must win, and ours
lose.  I think that I answered both.  But, as I am uncertain whether my
replies were preserved by those who were entrusted with the duty of
conveying them, I will make my defence over again.  As to my absence, I
can put in an unimpeachable plea, as to which I think intelligence must
have reached your holiness, that I have been detained by illness which
has brought me to the very gates of death.  Even now as I write about
it, the remains of sickness are still upon me.  And they are such as to
another man might be unendurable.

<span id="ix.cxlii-p6"></span>2.  As to the fact of its not being owing
to my neglect that the interests of the Churches have been betrayed to
our opponents, I wish your reverence to know that the bishops in
communion with me, from lack of earnestness, or because they suspect me
and are not open with me, or because the devil is always at hand to
oppose good works, are unwilling to cooperate with me.  Formerly,
indeed, the majority of us were united with one another, including the
excellent Bosporius. <span id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467.md)   In
reality they give me no aid in what is most essential.  The consequence
of all this is, that to a great extent my recovery is hindered by my
distress, and <span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="ix.cxlii-Page_205"></span>the sorrow I feel brings back my worst
symptoms.  What, however, can I do alone and unaided, when the canons,
as you yourself know, do not allow points of this kind to be settled by
one man? <span id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468.md)   And yet what
remedy have I not tried?  Of what decision have I failed to remind them,
some by letter and some in person?  They even came to the city, when
they heard a report of my death; when, by God’s will, they found me yet
alive I made them such a speech as was proper to the occasion.  In my
presence they respect me, and promise all that is fit, but no sooner
have they got back again than they return to their own opinion.  In all
this I am a sufferer, like the rest, for the Lord has clearly abandoned
us, whose love has grown cold because iniquity abounds.  For all this
may your great and powerful intercession with God be sufficient for me. 
Perhaps we shall either become of some use, or, even if we fail in our
object, we may escape condemnation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[204:2466](2080214.htm#fr_2465.md) <span
id="ix.cxlii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2466"></span>[204:2467](2080214.htm#fr_2466.md) <span
id="ix.cxlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p4"></span> On his being hindered from traveling by
ill health, and on his difficulties with the bishops in communion with
him.

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[204:2468](2080214.htm#fr_2467.md) <span
id="ix.cxlii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p7"></span> *cf. Letter* li.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[205:2469](2080214.htm#fr_2468.md) <span
id="ix.cxlii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxlii-p8"></span> The Ben. note is:  “*Canones illos qui
apostolis afficti fuere, nonnunquam citat Basilius in Epistolis
canonicis.  Videtur hoc loco respicere ad vigesimum* (?xxxvii.)
*septimum, ubi præscribitur, ut in unaquaque provincia episcopi nihil
majoris rei incipiant sine sententia illius, qui inter eos primus, ac
unus quisque iis contentus sit, quæ ad parœciam suam pertinent:  sed nec
ille absque omnium voluntate quidquam faciat.  Erat Basilius hujus
canonis observandi studiosus, et quamvis nominis fama et sedis dignitate
plurimum posset, nunquam ab eo communionis restitutionem impetrare
potuerunt Marcelli discipuli, antequam Petri Alexandrini auctoritates
accessisset:  et cum ab Episcopis in Palæstina Exsulantibus non ex
spectato aliorum Episcoporum consensu restituti fuissent, factum moleste
tulit et libere reprehendit.”  Epist*. cclxv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the prefects' accountant.](2080215.md)
