[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080166)  [Next](2080168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xcv"></span>

<span id="ix.xcv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xcv-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIV. <span
id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332) </span>

<span id="ix.xcv-p3"></span>*To Elias, Governor of the Province*.

<span id="ix.xcv-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xcv-p4.1"></span>I too</span> have been very anxious to meet your
excellency, lest by my failure to do so I might come off worse than my
accusers; but bodily sickness has prevented me, attacking me even more
seriously than usual, and so I am perforce reduced to address you by
letter.  When, not long ago, most excellent sir, I had the pleasure of
meeting your excellency, I was anxious to communicate with your wisdom
about all my affairs; and I was also anxious to address you on behalf of
the Churches, that no ground might be left for future calumnies.  But I
restrained myself, thinking it altogether superfluous and importunate to
add troubles outside his own necessary business to a man charged with so
many responsibilities.  At the same time (for the truth shall be told) I
did shrink from being driven to wound your soul by our mutual
recriminations, when it ought in pure devotion to God to reap the
perfect reward of piety.  For really, if I attract your attention to me,
I shall leave you but scant leisure for your public duties; shall act
something like a man overloading with additional luggage some boatmen
managing a new boat in very rough water, when all the while he ought to
lessen the cargo and do his best to lighten the craft.  For this very
reason, I think, our great Emperor, after seeing how fully occupied I
am, leaves me to manage the Churches by myself.  Now I should like <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="ix.xcv-Page_180"></span>those who
are besieging your impartial ears to be asked what harm the government
suffers from me?  What depreciation is suffered by any public interests,
be they small or great, by my administration of the Churches?  Still,
possibly, it might be urged that I have done damage to the government by
erecting a magnificently appointed church to God, and round it a
dwelling house, one liberally assigned to the bishop, and others
underneath, allotted to the officers of the Church in order, the use of
both being open to you of the magistracy and your escort.  But to whom
do we do any harm by building a place of entertainment for strangers,
both for those who are on a journey and for those who require medical
treatment on account of sickness, and so establishing a means of giving
these men the comfort they want, physicians, doctors, means of
conveyance, and escort? <span id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333)   All
these men must learn such occupations as are necessary to life and have
been found essential to a respectable career; they must also have
buildings suitable for their employments, all of which are an honour to
the place, and, as their reputation is credited to our governor, confer
glory on him.  Not indeed that for this reason you were unwillingly
induced to accept the responsibility of ruling us, for you alone are
sufficient by your high qualities to restore our ruins, to people
deserted districts and turn wildernesses into towns.  Would it be better
to harrass and annoy, or to honour and reverence an associate in the
discharge of these duties?  Do not think, most excellent sir, that what
I say is mere words.  We have already, in the meanwhile, begun providing
material.  So much for our defence, before our ruler.  As to what is to
be said in answer to the charges of our accusers, to a Christian and to
a friend who cares for my opinion, I must now say no more; the subject
is too long for a letter, and cannot, besides, be safely committed to
writing.  But lest, before we have an opportunity of meeting, you are
driven by the inducement of some men’s calumnies to give up any of your
good will towards me, do as Alexander did.  The story is, as you
remember, that, when one of his friends was being calumniated, he left
one ear open to the slanderer, and carefully closed the other with his
hand, with the object of showing that he whose duty is to judge ought
not to be easily and wholly given over to the first occupants of his
attention, but should keep half his hearing open for the defence of the
absent. <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[179:2333](2080167.htm#fr_2332) <span
id="ix.xcv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xcv-p2"></span> Placed in 372, at the departure of Valens.

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[180:2334](2080167.htm#fr_2333) <span
id="ix.xcv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xcv-p5"></span> Among the honourable functions of the
clergy was that of acting as guides and escort, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.xcv-p5.1"></span>παραπέμποντες.</span>  *cf.
Letters* xcviii. and ccxliii.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[180:2335](2080167.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="ix.xcv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xcv-p6"></span> The church and hospital, of which mention
is here made, were built in the suburbs of Cæsarea.  Gregory of
Nazianzus calls it a new town.  *cf*. Greg. Naz., *Or*. xx. and
Theodoret, *Ecc. Hist*. iv. 19, and Sozomen, vi. 34.  On Alexander’s
ear, *cf. Letter* xxiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.](2080168)
