[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080212)  [Next](2080214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxli"></span>

<span id="ix.cxli-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxli-p1.1"></span>Letter CXL. <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) </span>

<span id="ix.cxli-p3"></span>*To the Church of Antioch*.

<span id="ix.cxli-p4"></span>1.  “<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxli-p4.1"></span>Oh</span> that I had wings like a dove for then
would I fly away” <span id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463) to you, and
satisfy my longing to meet you.  But now it is not only wings that I
want, but a whole body, for mine has suffered from long sickness, and
now is quite worn away with continuous <span id="page_204">p. 204</span>
<span id="ix.cxli-Page_204"></span>affliction.  For no one can be so
hard of heart, so wholly destitute of sympathy and kindness, as to hear
the sigh that strikes my ear from every quarter, as though from some sad
choir chanting a symphony of lamentation, without being grieved at
heart, being bent to the ground, and wasting away with these
irremediable troubles.  But the holy God is able to provide a remedy for
the irremediable, and to grant you a respite from your long toils.  I
should like you to feel this comfort and, rejoicing in the hope of
consolation, to submit to the present pain of your afflictions.  Are we
paying the penalty of our sins?  Then our plagues are such as to save us
for the future from the wrath of God.  Are we called upon through these
temptations to fight for the truth?  Then the righteous Giver of the
prizes will not suffer us to be tried above that which we are able to
bear, but, in return for our previous struggles, will give us the crown
of patience and of hope in Him.  Let us, therefore, not flinch from
fighting a good fight on behalf of the truth, nor, in despair, fling
away the labours we have already achieved.  For the strength of the soul
is not shewn by one brave deed, nor yet by effort only for a short time;
but He Who tests our hearts wishes us to win crowns of righteousness
after long and protracted trial.  Only let our spirit be kept unbroken,
the firmness of our faith in Christ be maintained unshaken, and ere long
our Champion will appear; He will come and will not tarry.  Expect
tribulation after tribulation, hope upon hope; yet a little while; yet a
little while.  Thus the Holy Ghost knows how to comfort His nurslings by
a promise of the future.  After tribulations comes hope, and what we are
hoping for is not far off, for let a man name the whole of human life,
it is but a tiny interval compared with the endless age which is laid up
in our hopes.

<span id="ix.cxli-p6"></span>2.  Now I accept no newer creed written for
me by other men, nor do I venture to propound the outcome of my own
intelligence, lest I make the words of true religion merely human words;
but what I have been taught by the holy Fathers, that I announce to all
who question me.  In my Church the creed written by the holy Fathers in
synod at Nicæa is in use.  I believe that it is also repeated among you;
but I do not refuse to write its exact terms in my letter, lest I be
accused of taking too little trouble.  It is as follows: <span
id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464)   This is our faith.  But no
definition was given about the Holy Ghost, the Pneumatomachi not having
at that date appeared.  No mention was therefore made of the need of
anathematizing those who say that the Holy Ghost is of a created and
ministerial nature.  For nothing in the divine and blessed Trinity is
created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[203:2463](2080213.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="ix.cxli-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxli-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[203:2464](2080213.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="ix.cxli-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxli-p5"></span> [Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="ix.cxli-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[204:2465](2080213.htm#fr_2464) <span
id="ix.cxli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxli-p7"></span> Here follows in the text the Nicene Creed
with the anathemas.  The Ben. note points out that the Nicene Creed was
brought to Cæsarea by St. Leontius, and was vigorously defended by his
successor Hermogenes.  *cf. Letter* lxxxi.  Dianius, who next followed
in the see, signed several Arian formulæ.  The Nicene Creed, however,
had been maintained at Cæsarea, and in *Letter* li. Dianius is described
as supporting it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.](2080214)
