[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080261)  [Next](2080263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxc"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxc-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXXIX. <span
id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) </span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p3"></span>*To Eustathius the physician*. <span
id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651)

<span id="ix.cxc-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxc-p5.1"></span>Humanity</span> is the regular business of all
you who practise as physicians.  And, in my opinion, to put your science
at the head and front of life’s pursuits is to decide reasonably and
rightly.  This at all events seems to be the case if man’s most precious
possession, life, is painful and not worth living, unless it be lived in
health, and if for health we are dependent on your skill.  In your own
case medicine is seen, as it were, with two right hands; you enlarge the
accepted limits of philanthropy by not confining the application of your
skill to men’s bodies, but by attending also to the cure of the diseases
of their souls.  It is not only in accordance with popular report that I
thus write.  I am moved by the personal experi<span id="page_229">p.
229</span> <span id="ix.cxc-Page_229"></span>ence which I have had on
many occasions and to a remarkable degree at the present time, in the
midst of the unspeakable wickedness of our enemies, which has flooded
our life like a noxious torrent.  You have most skilfully dispersed it
and by pouring in your soothing words have allayed the inflammation of
my heart.  Having regard to the successive and diversified attacks of my
enemies against me, I thought that I ought to keep silence and to bear
their successive assaults without reply, and without attempting to
contradict foes armed with a lie, that terrible weapon which too often
drives its point through the heart of truth herself.  You did well in
urging me not to abandon the defence of truth, but rather to convict our
calumniators, lest haply, by the success of lies, many be hurt.

<span id="ix.cxc-p6"></span>2.  In adopting an unexpected attitude of
hatred against me my opponents seem to be repeating the old story in
Æsop.  He makes the wolf bring certain charges against the lamb, as
being really ashamed to seem to kill a creature who had done him no harm
without some reasonable pretext; then when the lamb easily rebuts the
slander, the wolf, none the less, continues his attack, and, though
defeated in equity, comes off winner in biting.  Just so with those who
seem to count hatred to me as a virtue.  They will perhaps blush to hate
me without a cause, and so invent pleas and charges against me, without
abiding by any of their allegations, but urging as the ground of their
detestation now this, now that, and now something else.  In no single
case is their malice consistent; but when they are baulked in one charge
they cling to another and, foiled in this, have recourse to a third; and
if all their accusations are scattered they do not drop their ill-will. 
They say that I preach three Gods, dinning the charge into the ears of
the mob and pressing the calumny plausibly and persistently. 
Nevertheless, truth is fighting on my side; and both in public to all
the world, and in private to all whom I meet, I prove that I
anathematize every one who maintains three Gods and do not even allow
him to be a Christian.  No sooner do they hear this than Sabellius is
handy for them to urge against me, and it is noised abroad that my
teaching is tainted with his error.  Once more I hold out in my defence
my wonted weapon of truth, and demonstrate that I shudder at
Sabellianism as much as at Judaism.

<span id="ix.cxc-p7"></span>3.  What then?  After all these efforts were
they tired?  Did they leave off?  Not at all.  They are charging me with
innovation, and base their charge on my confession of three hypostases,
and blame me for asserting one Goodness, one Power, one Godhead.  In
this they are not wide of the truth, for I do so assert.  Their
complaint is that their custom does not accept this, and that Scripture
does not agree.  What is my reply?  I do not consider it fair that the
custom which obtains among them should be regarded as a law and rule of
orthodoxy.  If custom is to be taken in proof of what is right, then it
is certainly competent for me to put forward on my side the custom which
obtains here.  If they reject this, we are clearly not bound to follow
them.  Therefore let God-inspired Scripture decide between us; and on
whichever side be found doctrines in harmony with the word of God, in
favour of that side will be cast the vote of truth.  What then is the
charge?  Two points are advanced at one and the same time in the
accusations levelled against me.  I am accused on the one hand of
parting the hypostases asunder; on the other of never using in the
plural any one of the nouns relating to the Divinity, but of always
speaking in the singular number of one Goodness, as I have already said;
of one Power; one Godhead; and so on.  As to the parting of the
hypostases, there ought to be no objection nor opposition on the part of
those who assert in the case of the divine nature a distinction of
essences.  For it is unreasonable to maintain three essences and to
object to three hypostases.  Nothing, then, is left but the charge of
using words of the divine nature in the singulars.

<span id="ix.cxc-p8"></span>4.  I have quite a little difficulty in
meeting the second charge.  Whoever condemns those who assert that the
Godhead is one, must of necessity agree with all who maintain many
godheads, or with those who maintain that there is none.  No third
position is conceivable.  The teaching of inspired Scripture does not
allow of our speaking of many godheads, but, wherever it mentions the
Godhead, speaks of it in the singular number; as, for instance, “in him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.” <span
id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652)   And again; “for the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead.” <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653)   If, then, to
multiply godheads is the special mark of the victims of polytheistic
error, and to deny the Godhead altogether is to fall into atheism, what
sense is there in this charge against me of con<span id="page_230">p.
230</span> <span id="ix.cxc-Page_230"></span>fessing one Godhead?  But
they make a plainer disclosure of the end they have in view; namely, in
the case of the Father to agree that He is God, and consenting in like
manner that the Son be honoured with the attribute of Godhead; but to
refuse to comprehend the Spirit, though reckoned with Father and with
Son in the idea of Godhead.  They allow that the power of the Godhead
extends from the Father to the Son, but they divide the nature of the
Spirit from the divine glory.  Against this view, to the best of my
ability, I must enter a brief defence of my own position.

<span id="ix.cxc-p11"></span>5.  What, then, is my argument?  In
delivering the Faith of Salvation to those who are being made disciples
in His doctrine, the Lord conjoins with Father and with Son the Holy
Spirit also.  That which is conjoined once I maintain to be conjoined
everywhere and always.  There is no question here of a ranking together
in one respect and isolation in others.  In the quickening power whereby
our nature is transformed from the life of corruption to immortality,
the power of the Spirit is comprehended with Father and with Son, and in
many other instances, as in the conception of the good, the holy, the
eternal, the wise, the right, the supreme, the efficient, and generally
in all terms which have the higher meaning, He is inseparably united. 
Wherefrom I judge it right to hold that the Spirit, thus conjoined with
Father and Son in so many sublime and divine senses, is never
separated.  Indeed I am unaware of any degrees of better or worse in the
terms concerning the divine nature, nor can I imagine its being reverent
and right to allow the Spirit a participation in those of lesser
dignity, while He is judged unworthy of the higher.  For all conceptions
and terms which regard the divine are of equal dignity one with another,
in that they do not vary in regard to the meaning of the subject matter
to which they are applied.  Our thought is not led to one subject by the
attribution of good, and to another by that of wise, powerful, and just;
mention any attributes you will, the thing signified is one and the
same.  And if you name God, you mean the same Being whom you understood
by the rest of the terms.  Granting, then, that all the terms applied to
the divine nature are of equal force one with another in relation to
that which they describe, one emphasizing one point and another another,
but all bringing our intelligence to the contemplation of the same
object; what ground is there for conceding to the Spirit fellowship with
Father and Son in all other terms, and isolating Him from the Godhead
alone?  There is no escape from the position that we must either allow
the fellowship here, or refuse it everywhere.  If He is worthy in every
other respect, He is certainly not unworthy in this.  If, as our
opponents argue, He is too insignificant to be allowed fellowship with
Father and with Son in Godhead, He is not worthy to share any single one
of the divine attributes:  for when the terms are carefully considered,
and compared with one another, by the help of the special meaning
contemplated in each, they will be found to involve nothing less than
the title of God.  A proof of what I say lies in the fact that even many
inferior objects are designated by this name.  Nay, Holy Scripture does
not even shrink from using this term in the case of things of a totally
opposite character, as when it applies the title *god* to idols.  “Let
the gods,” it is written, “who have not made heaven and earth, be taken
away, and cast beneath the earth;” <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) and again, “the gods of the nations
are idols.” <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655)   And the witch,
when she called up the required spirits for Saul, is said to have seen
gods. <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)   Balaam too, an augur
and seer, with the oracles in his hand, as Scripture says, when he had
got him the teaching of the demons by his divine ingenuity, is described
by Scripture as taking counsel with God. <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657)   From many similar instances in
Holy Scripture it may be proved that the name of God has no pre-eminence
over other words which are applied to the divine, since, as has been
said, we find it employed without distinction even in the case of things
of quite opposite character.  On the other hand we are taught by
Scripture that the names holy, incorruptible, righteous, and good, are
nowhere indiscriminately used of unworthy objects.  It follows, then,
that if they do not deny that the Holy Spirit is associated with the Son
and with the Father, in the names which are specially applied, by the
usage of true religion, to the divine nature alone, there is no
reasonable ground for refusing to allow the same association in the case
of that word alone which, as I have shown, is used as a recognised
homonym even of demons and idols.

<span id="ix.cxc-p16"></span>6.  But they contend that this title sets
forth the nature of that to which it is applied; that the nature of the
Spirit is not a nature shared in common with that of Father and of Son;
and that, for this reason, the Spirit ought not to be allowed the common
use of the name.  It is, therefore, for them to show by what means they
have per<span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="ix.cxc-Page_231"></span>ceived this variation in the nature.  If it
were indeed possible for the divine nature to be contemplated in itself;
could what is proper to it and what is foreign to it be discovered by
means of visible things; we should then certainly stand in no need of
words or other tokens to lead us to the apprehension of the object of
the enquiry.  But the divine nature is too exalted to be perceived as
objects of enquiry are perceived, and about things which are beyond our
knowledge we reason on probable evidence.  We are therefore of necessity
guided in the investigation of the divine nature by its operations. 
Suppose we observe the operations of the Father, of the Son, of the Holy
Ghost, to be different from one another, we shall then conjecture, from
the diversity of the operations that the operating natures are also
different.  For it is impossible that things which are distinct, as
regards their nature, should be associated as regards the form of their
operations; fire does not freeze; ice does not warm; difference of
natures implies difference of the operations proceeding from them. 
Grant, then, that we perceive the operation of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost to be one and the same, in no respect showing difference or
variation; from this identity of operation we necessarily infer the
unity of the nature.

<span id="ix.cxc-p17"></span>7.  The Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost
alike hallow, quicken, enlighten, and comfort.  No one will attribute a
special and peculiar operation of hallowing to the operation of the
Spirit, after hearing the Saviour in the Gospel saying to the Father
about His disciples, sanctify them in Thy name. <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658)   In like manner all other
operations are equally performed, in all who are worthy of them, by the
Father and by the Son and by the Holy Ghost; every grace and virtue,
guidance, life, consolation, change into the immortal, the passage into
freedom and all other good things which come down to man.  Nay even the
dispensation which is above us in relation to the creature considered
both in regard to intelligence and sense, if indeed it is possible for
any conjecture concerning what lies above us to be formed from what we
know, is not constituted apart from the operation and power of the Holy
Ghost, every individual sharing His help in proportion to the dignity
and need of each.  Truly the ordering and administration of beings above
our nature is obscure to our perception; nevertheless any one, arguing
from what is known to us, would find it more reasonable to conclude that
the power of the Spirit operates even in those beings, than that He is
excluded from the government of supramundane things.  So to assert is to
advance a blasphemy bare and unsupported; it is to support absurdity on
fallacy.  On the other hand to agree that even the world beyond us is
governed by the power of the Spirit, as well as by that of the Father
and of the Son, is to advance a contention, supported on the plain
testimony of what is seen in human life.  Identity of operation in the
case of Father and of Son and of Holy Ghost clearly proves invariability
of nature.  It follows that, even if the name of Godhead does signify
nature, the community of essence proves that this title is very properly
applied to the Holy Spirit.

<span id="ix.cxc-p19"></span>8.  I am, however, at a loss to understand
how our opponents with all their ingenuity can adduce the title of
Godhead in proof of nature, as though they had never heard from
Scripture that nature does not result from institution and
appointment. <span id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659)   Moses was
made <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) a god of the Egyptians
when the divine voice said, “See I have made thee a god to
Pharaoh. <span id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661)   The title
therefore does give proof of a certain authority of oversight or of
action.  The divine nature, on the other hand, in all the words which
are contrived, remains always inexplicable, as I always teach.  We have
learnt that it is beneficent, judicial, righteous, good, and so on; and
so have been taught differences of operations.  But we are,
nevertheless, unable to understand the nature of the operator through
our idea of the operations.  Let any one give an account of each one of
these names, and of the actual nature to which they are applied, and it
will be found that the definition will not in both cases be the same. 
And where the definition is not identical the nature is different. 
There is, then, a distinction to be observed between the essence, of
which no explanatory term has yet been discovered, and the meaning of
the names applied to it in reference to some operation or dignity.  That
there should be no difference in the operations we infer from the
community of terms.  But, we derive no clear proof of variation in
nature, because, as has been said, identity of operations indicates
community of nature.  If then Godhead be the name of an operation, we
say that the Godhead is one, as there is one operation of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; if, however, as is popularly supposed, the name of
Godhead indicates nature, then, <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="ix.cxc-Page_232"></span>since we find no variation in the nature, we
reasonably define the Holy Trinity to be of one Godhead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[228:2651](2080262.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="ix.cxc-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p2"></span> Placed in 374 or the beginning of 375.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[228:2652](2080262.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="ix.cxc-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p4"></span> *cf. Letter* cli.  This doctrinal statement
is also found among the works of Gregory of Nyssa; but is more probably
to be attributed to Basil.  *Vide* Tillem. *<span
id="ix.cxc-p4.1"></span>Mém. Ecc*. ix. 678.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[229:2653](2080262.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="ix.cxc-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p9"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ix.cxc-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[229:2654](2080262.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="ix.cxc-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p10"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="ix.cxc-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[230:2655](2080262.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="ix.cxc-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p12"></span> [Jer. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="ix.cxc-p12.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[230:2656](2080262.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="ix.cxc-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p13"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="ix.cxc-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[230:2657](2080262.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="ix.cxc-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p14"></span> [1 Sam. xxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#013)<span id="ix.cxc-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[230:2658](2080262.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="ix.cxc-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p15"></span> [Num. xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#020)<span id="ix.cxc-p15.1"></span>. 
Contrast Bp. Butler, *Serm*. vii.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[231:2659](2080262.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="ix.cxc-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p18"></span> *cf*. St. [John
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017)<span id="ix.cxc-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[231:2660](2080262.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="ix.cxc-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxc-p20.1"></span>χειροτονητή</span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[231:2661](2080262.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="ix.cxc-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxc-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cxc-p21.2"></span>χειροτονήθη</span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[231:2662](2080262.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="ix.cxc-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.cxc-p22"></span> [Ex. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)<span id="ix.cxc-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.](2080263)
