[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080086)  [Next](2080088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>Letter XIV. <span
id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891.md) </span>

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>*To Gregory his friend*.

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xv-p4.1"></span>My</span> brother Gregory writes me word that he
has long been wishing to be with me, and adds that you are of the same
mind; however, I could not wait, partly as being hard of belief,
considering I have been so often disappointed, and partly because I find
myself pulled all ways by business.  I must at once make for Pontus,
where, perhaps, God willing, I may make an end of wandering.  After
renouncing, with trouble, the idle hopes which I once had, \[about
you\] <span id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892.md) or rather the dreams,
(for it is well said that hopes are waking dreams), I departed into
Pontus in quest of a place to live in.  There God has opened on me a
spot exactly answering to my taste, so that I actually see before my
eyes what I have often pictured to my mind in idle fancy.  There is a
lofty mountain covered with thick woods, watered towards the north with
cool and transparent streams.  A plain lies beneath, enriched by the
waters which are ever draining off from it; and skirted by a spontaneous
profusion of trees almost thick enough to be a fence; so as even to
surpass Calypso’s Island, which Homer seems to have considered the most
beautiful spot on the earth.  Indeed it is like an island, enclosed as
it is on all sides; for deep hollows cut off two sides of it; the river,
which has lately fallen down a precipice, runs all along the front and
is impassable as a wall; while the mountain extending itself behind, and
meeting the hollows in a crescent, stops up the path at its roots. 
There is but one pass, and I am master of it.  Behind my abode there is
another gorge, rising into a ledge up above, so as to command the extent
of the plains and the stream <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="ix.xv-Page_125"></span>which bounds it, which is not less beautiful,
to my taste, than the Strymon as seen from Amphipolis. <span
id="fr_1893"></span>[1894](#fn_1893.md)   For while the latter flows
leisurely, and swells into a lake almost, and is too still to be a
river, the former is the most rapid stream I know, and somewhat turbid,
too, from the rocks just above; from which, shooting down, and eddying
in a deep pool, it forms a most pleasant scene for myself or any one
else; and is an inexhaustible resource to the country people, in the
countless fish which its depths contain.  What need to tell of the
exhalations from the earth, or the breezes from the river?  Another
might admire the multitude of flowers, and singing birds; but leisure I
have none for such thoughts.  However, the chief praise of the place is,
that being happily disposed for produce of every kind, it nurtures what
to me is the sweetest produce of all, quietness; indeed, it is not only
rid of the bustle of the city, but is even unfrequented by travellers,
except a chance hunter.  It abounds indeed in game, as well as other
things, but not, I am glad to say, in bears or wolves, such as you have,
but in deer, and wild goats, and hares, and the like.  Does it not
strike you what a foolish mistake I was near making when I was eager to
change this spot for your Tiberina, <span
id="fr_1894"></span>[1895](#fn_1894.md) the very pit of the whole earth?

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>Pardon me, then, if I am now set upon it; for
not Alcmæon himself, I suppose, could endure to wander further when he
had found the Echinades. <span id="fr_1895"></span>[1896](#fn_1895.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[124:1892](2080087.htm#fr_1891.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span> Placed after Basil’s choice of his Pontic
retreat.  Translated by Newman, whose version is here given (*Church of
the Fathers*, 126).  On the topography, *cf. Letters* iii., x.,
ccxxiii., and remarks in the *Prolegomena*.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[124:1893](2080087.htm#fr_1892.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span> Omitted by Newman.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[125:1894](2080087.htm#fr_1893.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span> The hill, of which the western half is
covered by the ruins of Amphipolis, is insulated by the Strymon on the
north-west and south, and a valley on the east.  To the north-west the
Strymon widens into a lake, compared by Dr. Arnold to that formed by the
Mincio at Mantua.  *cf*. Thucyd. iv. 108 and v. 7.

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[125:1895](2080087.htm#fr_1894.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span> Tiberina was a district in the neighbourhood
of Gregory’s home at Arianzus.  *cf.* Greg. Naz., *Ep*. vi. and vii.

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[125:1896](2080087.htm#fr_1895.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span> “Alcmæon slew his mother; but the awful
Erinnys, the avenger of matricide, inflicted on him a long and terrible
punishment, depriving him of his reason, and chasing him about from
place to place without the possibility of repose or peace of mind.  He
craved protection and cure from the god at Delphi, who required him to
dedicate at the temple, as an offering, the precious necklace of Kadmus,
that irresistible bribe which had originally corrupted Eriphyle.  He
further intimated to the unhappy sufferer that, though the whole earth
was tainted with his crime and had become uninhabitable for him, yet
there was a spot of ground which was not under the eye of the sun at the
time when the matricide was committed, and where, therefore, Alcmæon
might yet find a tranquil shelter.  The promise was realised at the
mouth of the river Achelous, whose turbid stream was perpetually
depositing new earth and forming additional islands.  Upon one of these
Alcmæon settled permanently and in peace.”  Grote, *Hist. Gr.* i. 381.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Arcadius, Imperial Treasurer.](2080088.md)
