[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080362)  [Next](2080364.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxci"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxci-p1"></span> <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="ix.ccxci-Page_315"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxci-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXC. <span
id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxci-p3"></span>To Nectarius.

<span id="ix.ccxci-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxci-p4.1"></span>May</span> many blessings rest on those who
encourage your excellency in maintaining a constant correspondence with
me!  And regard not such a wish as conventional merely, but as
expressing my sincere conviction of the value of your utterances.  Whom
could I honour above Nectarius—known to me from his earliest days as a
child of fairest promise, who now through the exercise of every virtue
has reached a position of the highest eminence?—So much so, that of all
my friends the dearest is the bearer of your letter.

<span id="ix.ccxci-p5"></span>Touching the election of those set over
districts, <span id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253.md) God forbid that I
should do anything for the gratification of man, through listening to
importunities or yielding to fear.  In that case I should be not a
steward, but a huckster, battering the gift of God for the favour of
man.  But seeing that votes are given but by mortals, who can only bear
such testimony as they do from outward appearances, while the choice of
fit persons is committed in all humility to Him Who knows the secrets of
the heart, haply it is best for everybody, when he has tendered the
evidence of his vote, to abstain from all heat and contention, as though
some self-interest were involved in the testimony, and to pray to God
that what is advantageous may not remain unknown.  Thus the result is no
longer attributable to man, but a cause for thankfulness to God.  For
these things, if they be of man, cannot be said to be; but are pretence
only, altogether void of reality.

<span id="ix.ccxci-p7"></span>Consider also, that when a man strives
with might and main to gain his end, there is no small danger of his
drawing even sinners to his side; and there is much sinfulness, such is
the weakness of man’s nature, even where we should least expect it.

<span id="ix.ccxci-p8"></span>Again, in private consultation we often
offer our friends good advice, and, though we do not find them taking
it, yet we are not angry.  Where then it is not man that counsels, but
God that determines, shall we feel indignation at not being preferred
before the determination of God?

<span id="ix.ccxci-p9"></span>And if these things were given to man by
man, what need were there for us to ask them of ourselves?  Were it not
better for each to take them from himself?  But if they are the gift of
God, we ought to pray and not to grieve.  And in our prayer we should
not seek our own will, but leave it to God who disposes for the best.

<span id="ix.ccxci-p10"></span>Now may the holy God keep from your home
all taste of sorrow; and grant to you and to your family a life exempt
from harm and sickness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[315:3253](2080363.htm#fr_3252.md) <span
id="ix.ccxci-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxci-p2"></span> Placed in the episcopate.

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[315:3254](2080363.htm#fr_3253.md) <span
id="ix.ccxci-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxci-p6"></span> On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxci-p6.1"></span>συμμορίας</span> the Ben. note is:  “*Hac voce
non designatur tota diocesis, sed certos quidam pagorum numerus
chorepiscopo commissus, ut patet ex epist.* cxlii*.,” q.v., “erat autem
chorepiscoporum sedes insigni alicui affixa pago, cui alii pagi
attribuebantur.  Unde Basilius in epist.* clxxxviii. § 10.  *Auctor est
Amphilochio ut agrum Mestiæ subjectum Vasodis subjiciat*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Timotheus the Chorepiscopus.](2080364.md)
