[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080171)  [Next](2080173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.c"></span>

<span id="ix.c-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.c-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIX. <span
id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346.md) </span>

<span id="ix.c-p3"></span>*To Count Terentius*. <span
id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347.md)

<span id="ix.c-p5"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.c-p5.1"></span>have</span> had every desire and have really done
my best to obey, if only in part, the imperial order and the friendly
letter of your excellency.  I am sure that your every word and every
thought are full of good intentions and right sentiments.  But I have
not been permitted to show my ready concurrence by practical action. 
The truest cause is my sins, which always rise before me and always
hamper my steps.  Then, again, there is the alienation of the bishop who
had been appointed to cooperate with me, why, I know <span
id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span id="ix.c-Page_183"></span>not; but my
right reverend brother Theodotus, who promised from the beginning to act
with me, had cordially invited <span
id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348.md) me from Getasa to Nicopolis. <span
id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349.md)   When however he saw me in the
town, he was so shocked at me, and so afraid of my sins, that he could
not bear to take me either to morning or evening prayer.  In this he
acted quite justly so far as my deserts go, and quite as befits my
course of life, but not in a manner likely to promote the interests of
the Churches.  His alleged reason was that I had admitted the very
reverend brother Eustathius to communion.  What I have done is as
follows.  When invited to a meeting held by our brother Theodotus, and
wishful, for love’s sake, to obey the summons, that I might not make the
gathering fruitless and vain, I was anxious to hold communication with
the aforementioned brother Eustathius. I put before him the accusations
concerning the faith, advanced against him by our brother Theodotus, and
I asked him, if he followed the right faith, to make it plain to me,
that I might communicate with him; if he were of another mind he must
know plainly that I should be separated from him.  We had much
conversation on the subject, and all that day was spent in its
examination; when evening came on we separated without arriving at any
definite conclusion.  On the morrow, we had another sitting in the
morning and discussed the same points, with the addition of our brother
Pœmenius, the presbyter of Sebasteia, who vehemently pressed the
argument against me.  Point by point I cleared up the questions on which
he seemed to be accusing me, and brought them to agree to my
propositions.  The result was, that, by the grace of the Lord, we were
found to be in mutual agreement, even on the most minute particulars. 
So about the ninth hour, after thanking God for granting us to think and
say the same thing, we rose up to go to prayer.  In addition to this I
ought to have got some written statement from him, so that his assent
might be made known to his opponents and the proof of his opinion might
be sufficient for the rest.  But I was myself anxious, with the desire
for great exactitude, to meet my brother Theodotus, to get a written
statement of the faith from him, and to propose it to Eustathius; that
so both objects might be obtained at once, the confession of the right
faith by Eustathius and the complete satisfaction of Theodotus and his
friends, and they would have no ground for objection after the
acceptance of their own propositions.  But Theodotus, before learning
why we were met and what had been the result of our intercourse, decided
not to allow us to take part in the meeting.  So midway on our journey
we set out back again, disappointed that our efforts for the peace of
the Churches had been counteracted.

<span id="ix.c-p8"></span>3.  After this, when I was compelled to
undertake a journey into Armenia, knowing the man’s character, and with
the view both of making my own defence before a competent witness, for
what had taken place and of satisfying him, I travelled to Getasa, into
the territory of the very godly bishop Meletius, the aforementioned
Theodotus being with me; and while there, on being accused by him of my
communication with Eustathius, I told him that the result of our
intercourse was my finding Eustathius to be in all things in agreement
with myself.  Then he persisted that Eustathius, after leaving me, had
denied this and asseverated to his own disciples that he had never come
to any agreement with me about the faith.  I, therefore, combated this
statement; and see, O most excellent man, if the answer I made was not
most fair and most complete.  I am convinced, I said, judging from the
character of Eustathius, that he cannot thus lightly be turning from one
direction to another, now confessing now denying what he said; that a
man, shunning a lie, even in any little matter, as an awful sin, is not
likely to choose to run counter to the truth in matters of such vast
importance and so generally notorious:  but if what is reported among
you turns out to be true, he must be confronted with a written statement
containing the complete exposition of the right faith; then, if I find
him ready to agree in writing, I shall continue in communion with him;
but, if I find that he shrinks from the test, I shall renounce all
intercourse with him.  The bishop Meletius agreed to these arguments,
and the brother Diodorus the presbyter, who was present, and then the
right reverend brother Theodotus, assented, and invited me to go to
Nicopolis, both to visit the Church there, and to keep him company as
far as Satala.  But he left me at Getasa, and, when I reached Nicopolis,
forgetting all that he heard from me, and the agreement he had made with
me, dismissed me, disgraced by the insults and dishonours which I have
mentioned.

<span id="ix.c-p9"></span>4.  How, then, right honourable sir, was it
possible for me to perform any of the in<span id="page_184">p.
184</span> <span id="ix.c-Page_184"></span>junctions laid on me, and to
provide bishops for Armenia?  How could I act, when the sharer of my
responsibilities was thus disposed towards me,—the very man by whose aid
I was expecting to be able to find suitable persons, because of his
having in his district reverend and learned men, skilled in speech, and
acquainted with the other peculiarities of the nation?  I know their
names, but I shall refrain from mentioning them, lest there arise any
hindrance to the interests of Armenia being served at some future time.

<span id="ix.c-p10"></span>Now, after getting as far as Satala in such a
state of health, I seemed to settle the rest by the grace of God.  I
made peace between the Armenian bishops, and made them a suitable
address, urging them to put away their customary indifference, and
resume their ancient zeal in the Lord’s cause.  Moreover, I delivered
them rules as to how it behoved them to give heed to iniquities
generally practised in Armenia.  I further accepted a decision of the
Church of Satala, asking that a bishop might be given them through me. 
I was also careful to inquire into the calumnies promulgated against our
brother Cyril, the Armenian bishop, and by God’s grace I have found them
to be started by the lying slanders of his enemies.  This they confessed
to me.  And I seemed to some extent to reconcile the people to him, so
that they avoid communion with him no more.  Small achievements these,
maybe, and not worth much, but in consequence of the mutual discord
caused by the wiles of the devil, it was impossible for me to effect
more.  Even this much I ought not to have said, so as not to seem to be
publishing my own disgrace.  But as I could not plead my cause before
your excellency in any other way, I was under the necessity of telling
you the entire truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[182:2347](2080172.htm#fr_2346.md) <span
id="ix.c-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.c-p2"></span> Placed in 372.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[182:2348](2080172.htm#fr_2347.md) <span
id="ix.c-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.c-p4"></span> *cf. Letter* ccxiv.  On Terentius *vide* Amm.
Marcellinus, xxvii. 12 and xxxi.  He was an orthodox Christian, though
in favour with Valens.  In 372 he was in command of twelve legions in
Georgia, and Basil communicates with him about providing bishops for the
Armenian Church.  According to some manuscripts of *Letter* cv., *q.v*.,
his three daughters were deaconesses.

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[183:2349](2080172.htm#fr_2348.md) <span
id="ix.c-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.c-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.c-p6.1"></span>καταγαγών</span> .  So six <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.c-p6.2"></span>mss.</span>, but the Ben. Ed. seem rightly to
point out that the invitation never resulted in actual “conducting.”

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[183:2350](2080172.htm#fr_2349.md) <span
id="ix.c-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.c-p7"></span> *i.e.* The Armenian Nicopolis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.](2080173.md)
