[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080021)  [Next](2080023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_lv">p. lv</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lv"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>IV.—Homiletical.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p2"></span>Twenty-four homilies on miscellaneous
subjects, published under St. Basil’s name, are generally accepted as
genuine.  They are conveniently classified as (i) Dogmatic and Exegetic,
(ii) Moral, and (iii) Panegyric.  To Class (i) will be referred

<span id="vi.ii.v-p3"></span>III.  *In Illud, Attende tibi ipsi*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p4"></span>VI.  *In Illud, Destruam horrea, etc*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p5"></span>IX.  *In Illud, Quod Deus non est auctor
malorum*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p6"></span>XII.  *In principium Proverbiorum*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p7"></span>XV.  *De Fide*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p8"></span>XVI.  *In Illud, In principio erat Verbum*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p9"></span>XXIV.  *Contra Sabellianos et Arium et
Anomœos*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p10"></span>Class (ii) will include

<span id="vi.ii.v-p11"></span>I. and II.  *De Jejunio*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p12"></span>IV.  *De gratiarum actione*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p13"></span>VII.  *In Divites*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p14"></span>VIII.  *In famem et siccitatem*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p15"></span>X.  *Adversus beatos*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p16"></span>XI.  *De invidia*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p17"></span>XIII.  *In Sanctum Baptismum*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p18"></span>XIV.  *In Ebriosos*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p19"></span>XX.  *De humilitate*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p20"></span>XXI.  *Quod rebus mundanis adhærendum non
sit, et de incendio extra ecclesiam facto*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p21"></span>XXII.  *Ad adolescentes, de legendis
libris Gentilium*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p22"></span>The Panegyric (iii) are

<span id="vi.ii.v-p23"></span>V.  *In martyrem Julittam*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p24"></span>XVII.  *In Barlaam martyrem*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p25"></span>XVIII.  *In Gordium martyrem*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p26"></span>XIX.  *In sanctos quadraginta martyres*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p27"></span>XXIII.  *In Mamantem martyrem*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p28"></span>Homily III. on [Deut. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p28.1"></span>, <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) is
one of the eight translated by Rufinus.  Section 2 begins:

<span id="vi.ii.v-p30"></span>“‘Take heed,’ it is written, ‘to
thyself.’  Every living creature possesses within himself, by the gift
of God, the Ordainer of all things, certain resources for self
protection.  Investigate nature with attention, and you will find that
the majority of brutes have an instinctive aversion from what is
injurious; while, on the other hand, by a kind of natural attraction,
they are impelled to the enjoyment of what is beneficial to them. 
Wherefore also God our Teacher has given us this grand injunction, in
order that what brutes possess by nature may accrue to us by the aid of
reason, and that what is performed by brutes unwittingly may be done by
us through careful attention and constant exercise of our reasoning
faculty.  We are to be diligent guardians of the resources given to us
by God, ever shunning sin as brutes shun poisons, and ever hunting after
righteousness, as they seek for the herbage that is good for food.  Take
heed to thyself, that thou mayest be able to discern between the noxious
and the wholesome.  This taking heed is to be understood in a twofold
sense.  Gaze with the eyes of the body at visible objects.  Contemplate
incorporeal objects with the intellectual faculty of the soul.  If we
say that obedience to the charge of the text lies in the action of our
eyes, we shall see at once that this is impossible.  How can there be
apprehension of the whole self through the eye?  The eye cannot turn its
sight upon itself; the head is beyond it; it is ignorant of the back,
the countenance, the disposition of the intestines.  Yet it were impious
to argue that the charge of the Spirit cannot be obeyed.  It follows
then that it must be understood of intellectual action.  ‘Take heed to
thyself.’  Look at thyself round about from every point of view.  <span
id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lvi"></span>Keep thy
soul’s eye sleepless <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) in
ceaseless watch over thyself.  ‘Thou goest in the midst of
snares.’ <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575)   Hidden nets are set
for thee in all directions by the enemy.  Look well around thee, that
thou mayest be delivered ‘as a gazelle from the net and a bird from the
snare.’ <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576)   It is because of her
keen sight that the gazelle cannot be caught in the net.  It is her keen
sight that gives her her name. <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577)  
And the bird, if only she take heed, mounts on her light wing far above
the wiles of the hunter.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p35"></span>“Beware lest in self protection thou prove
inferior to brutes, lest haply thou be caught in the gins and be made
the devil’s prey, and be taken alive by him to do with thee as he will.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p36"></span>A striking passage from the same Homily is
thus rendered by Rufinus:  “*Considera ergo primo omnium quod homo es,
id est solum in terres animal ipsis divinis manibus formatum.  Nonne
sufficeret hoc solum recte atque integre sapienti ad magnum summumque
solutium, quod ipsius Dei manibus qui omnia reliqua præcepti solius
fecit auctoritate subsistere, homo fictus es et formatus?  Tum deinde
quod cum ad imaginem Creatoris et similitudinem sis, potes sponte etiam
ad angelorum dignitatem culmenque remeare.  Animam namque accepisti
intellectualem, et rationalem, per quam Deum possis agnoscere, et
naturam rerum conspicabili rationis intelligentia contemplari: 
sapientiæ dulcissimis fructibus perfrui præsto est.  Tibi omnium cedit
animantium genus, quæ per connexa montium vel prærupta rupium aut opaca
silvarum feruntur; omne quod vel aquis tegitur, vel præpetibus pennis in
aere suspenditur.  Omne, inquam, quod hujus mundi est, servitis et
subjectioni tuæ liberalis munificentia conditoris indulsit.  Nonne tu,
sensu tibi rationabili suggerente, diversitates artium reperisti?  Nonne
tu urbes condere, omnemque earum reliquum usum pernecessarium viventibus
invenisti?  Nonne tibi per rationem quæ in te est mare pervium fit? 
Terra, flumina, fontesque tuis vel usibus vel voluptatibus famulantur. 
Nonne aer hic et cœlum ipsum atque omnes stellarum chori vitæ mortalium
ministerio cursus suos atque ordines servant?  Quid ergo deficis animo,
et deesse tibi aliquid putas, si non tibi equus producitur phaleris
exornatus et spumanti ore frena mandens argentea?  Sed sol tibi
producitur, veloci rapidoque cursu ardentes tibi faces caloris simul ac
luminis portans.  Non habes aureos et argenteos discos:  sed habes lunæ
discum purissimo et blandissimo splendore radiantem.  Non ascendis
currum, nec rotarum lupsibus veheris, sed habes pedum tuorum vehiculum
tecum natum.  Quid ergo beatos censes eos qui aurum quidem possisent,
alienis autem pedibus indigent, ad necessarios commeatus?  Non recubas
eburneis thoris, sed adjacent fecundi cespites viridantes et herbidi
thori, florum varietate melius quam fucatis coloribus Tyrii muricis
picti, in quibus dulces et salubres somni nullis curarum morsibus
effugantur.  Non te contegunt aurata laquearia; sed cœlum te contegit
ineffabili fulgore stellarum depictum.  Hæc quidem quantum ad communem
humanitatis attinet vitam.  Accipe vero majora.  Propter te Deus in
hominibus, Spiritus sancti distributio, mortis ablatio, resurrectionis
spes.  Propter te divina præcepta hominibus delata, quæ te perfectam
doceant vitam, et iter tuum ad Deum per mandatorum tramitem dirigant. 
Tibi panduntur regna cœlorum, tibi coronæ justitiæ præparantur; si tamen
labores et ærumnas pro justitia ferre non refugis*.” <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p38"></span>Homily VI., on [Luke xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018)<span id="vi.ii.v-p38.1"></span>, is
on selfish wealth and greed.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p39"></span>Beware, says the preacher, <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) lest the fate of the fool of the text
be thine.  “These things are written that we may shun their imitation. 
Imitate the earth, O man.  Bear fruit, as she does, lest thou prove
inferior to that which is without life.  She produces her fruits, not
that she may enjoy them, but for thy service.  Thou dost gather for
thyself whatever fruit of good works thou hast strewn, because the grace
of good works returns to the giver.  Thou hast given to the poor, and
the gift becomes thine own, and comes back with increase.  Just as grain
that has fallen on the earth becomes a gain to the sower, so the loaf
thrown to the hungry man renders abundant fruit thereafter.  Be the end
of thy husbandry the beginning of the heavenly sowing.  ‘Sow,’ it is
written, ‘to yourselves in righteousness.’ <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580)   Why then art thou distressed?  Why
dost thou harass thyself in thy efforts to shut up thy riches in clay
and bricks?  ‘A good name is rather to be chosen than great
riches.’ <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581)   If thou admire riches
because of the honour that comes from them, bethink thee how very much
more it tends to thine honour that thou shouldst be called the father of
<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lvii"></span>innumerable children than that thou
shouldst possess innumerable staters in a purse.  Thy wealth thou wilt
leave behind thee here, even though thou like it not.  The honour won by
thy good deeds thou shalt convey with thee to the Master.  Then all
people standing round about thee in the presence of the universal Judge
shall hail thee as feeder and benefactor, and give thee all the names
that tell of loving kindness.  Dost thou not see theatre-goers flinging
away their wealth on boxers and buffoons and beast-fighters, fellows
whom it is disgusting even to see, for the sake of the honour of a
moment, and the cheers and clapping of the crowd?  And art thou a
niggard in thy expenses, when thou art destined to attain glory so
great?  God will welcome thee, angels will laud thee, mankind from the
very beginning will call thee blessed.  For thy stewardship of these
corruptible things thy reward shall be glory everlasting, a crown of
righteousness, the heavenly kingdom.  Thou thinkest nothing of all
this.  Thy heart is so fixed on the present that thou despisest what is
waited for in hope.  Come then; dispose of thy wealth in various
directions.  ‘Be generous and liberal in thy expenditure on the poor. 
Let it be said of thee, ‘He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor;
his righteousness endureth for ever.’ <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582)   Do not press heavily on necessity
and sell for great prices.  Do not wait for a famine before thou openest
thy barns.  ‘He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse
him.’ <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583)   Watch not for a time of
want for gold’s sake—for public scarcity to promote thy private profit. 
Drive not a huckster’s bargains out of the troubles of mankind.  Make
not God’s wrathful visitation an opportunity for abundance.  Wound not
the sores of men smitten by the scourge.  Thou keepest thine eye on thy
gold, and wilt not look at thy brother.  Thou knowest the marks on the
money, and canst distinguish good from bad.  Thou canst not tell who is
thy brother in the day of distress.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p45"></span>The conclusion is <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) “‘Ah!’—it is said—‘words are all very
fine:  gold is finer.’  I make the same impression as I do when I am
preaching to libertines against their unchastity.  Their mistress is
blamed, and the mere mention of her serves but to enkindle their
passions.  How can I bring before your eyes the poor man’s sufferings
that thou mayest know out of what creep groanings thou art accumulating
thy treasures, and of what high value will seem to thee in the day of
judgment the famous words, ‘Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:  for I was an
hungred and ye gave me meat:  I was thirsty and ye gave me drink:…I was
naked and ye clothed me.’ <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585)   What
shuddering, what sweat, what darkness will be shed round thee, as thou
hearest the words of condemnation!—‘Depart from me, ye cursed, into
outer darkness prepared for the devil and his angels:  for I was an
hungred and ye gave me no meat:  I was thirsty and ye gave me no
drink:…I was naked and ye clothed me not.’ <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586)   I have told thee what I have thought
profitable.  To thee now it is clear and plain what are the good things
promised for thee if thou obey.  If thou disobey, for thee the threat is
written.  I pray that thou mayest change to a better mind and thus
escape its peril.  In this way thy own wealth will be thy redemption. 
Thus thou mayest advance to the heavenly blessings prepared for thee by
the grave of Him who hath called us all into His own kingdom, to Whom be
glory and might for ever and ever.  Amen.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p49"></span>Homily IX. is a demonstration that *God is
not the Author of Evil*.  It has been conjectured that it was delivered
shortly after some such public calamity as the destruction of Nicæa in
368.  St. Basil naturally touches on passages which have from time to
time caused some perplexity on this subject.  He asks <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) if God is not the Author of evil, how
is it said “I form the light and create darkness, I make peace and
create evil,” <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) and again, “The
evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem,” <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) and again, “Shall there be evil in a
city and the Lord hath not done it,” <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) and in the great song of Moses, “See
now that I, even I, am he and there is no god with me:  I kill and I
make alive, I wound and I heal”? <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591)
  But to any one who understands the meaning of Scripture no one of
these passages accuses God of being the Cause and Creator of evil.  He
who uses the words, “I form the light and create darkness,” describes
Himself not as Creator of any evil, but as Demiurge of creation.  “It is
lest thou shouldst suppose that there is one cause of light and another
of darkness that He described Himself as being Creator and Artificer of
parts of creation which seem to be mutually opposed.  It is to prevent
thy seeking one Demiurge of fire, another of water, one of air and
another of earth, these seeming to have a kind of mutual opposition and
contrariety of qualities.  By adopting these views many <span
id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lviii"></span>have ere now fallen into polytheism, but
He makes peace and creates evil.  Unquestionably He makes peace in thee
when He brings peace into thy mind by His good teaching, and calms the
rebel passions of thy soul.  And He creates evil, that is to say, He
reduces those evil passions to order, and brings them to a better state
so that they may cease to be evil and may adopt the nature of good. 
‘Create in me a clean heart, O God.’ <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592)   This does not mean *Make now for the
first time*; <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) it means *Renew the
heart that had become old from wickedness*.  The object is that He may
make both one. <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594)   The word create
is used not to imply the bringing out of nothing, but the bringing into
order those which already existed.  So it is said, ‘If any man be in
Christ he is a new creature.’ <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595)  
Again, Moses says, ‘Is not He thy Father that hath bought thee?  Hath He
not made thee and created thee?’ <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596)
  Now, the creation put in order after the making evidently teaches us
that the word creation, as is commonly the case, is used with the idea
of improvement.  And so it is thus that He makes peace, out of creating
evil; that is, by transforming and bringing to improvement. 
Furthermore, even if you understand peace to be freedom from war, and
evil to mean the troubles which are the lot of those who make war;
marches into far regions, labours, vigils, terrors, sweatings, wounds,
slaughters, taking of towns, slavery, exile, piteous spectacles of
captives; and, in a word, all the evils that follow upon war, all these
things, I say, happen by the just judgment of God, Who brings vengeance
through war on those who deserve punishment.  Should you have wished
that Sodom had not been burnt after her notorious wickedness?  Or that
Jerusalem had not been overturned, nor her temple made desolate after
the horrible wickedness of the Jews against the Lord?  How otherwise was
it right for these things to come to pass than by the hands of the
Romans to whom our Lord had been delivered by the enemies of His life,
the Jews?  Wherefore it does sometimes come to pass that the calamities
of war are righteously inflicted on those who deserve them—if you like
to understand the words ‘I kill and I make alive’ in their obvious
sense.  Fear edifies the simple.  ‘I wound and I heal’ is at once
perceived to be salutary.  The blow strikes terror; the cure attracts to
love.  But it is permissible to thee to find a higher meaning in the
words, ‘I kill’—by sin; ‘I make alive’—by righteousness.  ‘Though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.’ <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597)   He does not kill one and make
another alive, but He makes the same man alive by the very means by
which He kills him; He heals him by the blows which He inflicts upon
him.  As the proverb has it, ‘Thou shalt beat him with the rod and shalt
deliver his soul from hell.’ <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598)  
The flesh is smitten that the soul may be healed; sin is put to death
that righteousness may live.  In another passage <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) it is argued that death is not an
evil.  Deaths come from God.  Yet death is not absolutely an evil,
except in the case of the death of the sinner, in which case departure
from this world is a beginning of the punishments of hell.  On the other
hand, of the evils of hell the cause is not God, but ourselves.  The
origin and root of sin is what is in our own control and our free will.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p63"></span>Homily XII. is “on the beginning of the
proverbs.”  “The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of
Israel.” <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p65"></span>“The name proverbs (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p65.1"></span>παροιμίαι</span>) has been
by heathen writers used of common expressions, and of those which are
generally used in the streets.  Among them a way is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p65.2"></span>οἰμος</span>, whence they
define a <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p65.3"></span>παροιμία</span> to be a common expression,
which has become trite through vulgar usage, and which it is possible to
transfer from a limited number of subjects to many analogous
subjects. <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601)   With Christians the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p66.3"></span>παροιμία</span> is a
serviceable utterance, conveyed with a certain amount of obscurity,
containing an obvious meaning of much utility, and at the same time
involving a depth of meaning in its inner sense.  Whence the Lord says: 
‘These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh
when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you
plainly of the Father.’” <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p68"></span>On the “wisdom and instruction” of verse
2, it is said:  Wisdom is the science of things both human and divine,
and of their causes.  He, therefore, who is an effective
theologian <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) knows wisdom.  The
quotation of [1 Cor. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p69.3"></span>, follows.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p70"></span>On general education it is said, <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) “The acquisition of sciences is termed
education, <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) as it is written of
Moses, that he was learned <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians. <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)
  But it is of no small importance, with a view to man’s sound
condition, <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) that he should not
<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lix"></span>devote himself to any sciences whatsoever,
but should become acquainted with the education which is most
profitable.  It has ere now happened that men who have spent their time
in the study of geometry, the discovery of the Egyptians, or of
astrology, the favourite pursuit of the Chaldæans, or have been addicted
to the loftier natural philosophy <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) which is concerned with figures and
shadows, have looked with contempt on the education which is based upon
the divine oracles.  Numbers of students have been occupied with paltry
rhetoric, and the solution of sophisms, the subject matter of all of
which is the false and unreal.  Even poetry is dependent for its
existence on its myths. <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610)  
Rhetoric would not be but for craft in speech.  Sophistics must have
their fallacies.  Many men for the sake of these pursuits have
disregarded the knowledge of God, and have grown old in the search for
the unreal.  It is therefore necessary that we should have a full
knowledge of education, in order to choose the profitable, and to reject
the unintelligent and the injurious.  Words of wisdom will be discerned
by the attentive reader of the Proverbs, who thence patiently extracts
what is for his good.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p78"></span>The Homily concludes with an exhortation
to rule life by the highest standard.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p79"></span>“Hold fast, then, to the rudder of life. 
Guide thine eye, lest haply at any time through thine eyes there beat
upon thee the vehement wave of lust.  Guide ear and tongue, lest the one
receive aught harmful, or the other speak forbidden words.  Let not the
tempest of passion overwhelm thee.  Let no blows of despondency beat
thee down; no weight of sorrow drown thee in its depths.  Our feelings
are waves.  Rise above them, and thou wilt be a safe steersman of life. 
Fail to avoid each and all of them skilfully and steadily, and, like
some untrimmed boat, with life’s dangers all round about thee, thou wilt
be sunk in the deep sea of sin.  Hear then how thou mayest acquire the
steersman’s skill.  Men at sea are wont to lift up their eyes to
heaven.  It is from heaven that they get guidance for their cruise; by
day from the sun, and by night from the Bear, or from some of the
ever-shining stars.  By these they reckon their right course.  Do thou
too keep thine eye fixed on heaven, as the Psalmist did who said, ‘Unto
thee lift I up mine eye, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.’ <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611)   Keep thine eyes on the Sun of
righteousness.  Directed by the commandments of the Lord, as by some
bright constellations, keep thine eye ever sleepless.  Give not sleep to
thine eyes or slumber to thine eyelids, <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) that the guidance of the commandments
may be unceasing.  ‘Thy word,’ it is said, ‘is a lamp unto my feet, and
a light unto my paths.’ <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613)   Never
slumber at the tiller, so long as thou livest here, amid the unstable
circumstances of this world, and thou shalt receive the help of the
Spirit.  He shall conduct thee ever onward.  He shall waft thee securely
by gentle winds of peace, till thou come one day safe and sound to yon
calm and waveless haven of the will of God, to Whom be glory and majesty
for ever and ever, Amen.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p83"></span>Homilies XV. and XVI. are more distinctly
dogmatic.  They do not present the doctrines of which they treat in any
special way.  XV., *De Fide*, is concerned rather with the frame of mind
of the holder and expounder of the Faith than with any dogmatic formula.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p84"></span>XVI., on [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.v-p84.1"></span>,
begins by asserting that every utterance of the gospels is grander than
the rest of the lessons of the Spirit, inasmuch as, while in the latter
He has spoken to us through His servants the prophets, in the gospels
the Master has conversed with us face to face.  “The most mighty voiced
herald of the actual gospel proclamation, who uttered words loud beyond
all hearing and lofty beyond all understanding, is John, the son of
thunder, the prelude of whose gospel is the text.”  After repeating the
words the preacher goes on to say that he has known many who are not
within the limits of the word of truth, many of the heathen, that is,
“who have prided themselves upon the wisdom of this world, who in their
admiration for these words have ventured to insert them among their own
writings.  For the devil is a thief, and carries off our property for
the use of his own prophets.” <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p86"></span><span id="page_lx">p. lx</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lx"></span>“If the wisdom of the flesh has been so
smitten with admiration for the force of the words, what are we to do,
who are disciples of the Spirit?…Hold fast to the text, and you will
suffer no harm from men of evil arts.  Suppose your opponent to argue,
‘If He was begotten, He was not,’ do you retort, ‘In the beginning He
was.’  But, he will go on, ‘Before He was begotten, in what way was
He?’  Do not give up the words ‘He was.’  Do not abandon the words ‘In
the beginning.’  The highest point of beginning is beyond comprehension;
what is outside beginning is beyond discovery.  Do not let any one
deceive you by the fact that the phrase has more than one meaning. 
There are in this world many beginnings of many things, yet there is one
beginning which is beyond them all.  ‘Beginning of good way,’ says the
Proverb.  But the beginning of a way is the first movement whereby we
begin the journey of which the earlier part can be discovered.  And,
‘The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.’ <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615)   To this beginning is prefixed
something else, for elementary instruction is the beginning of the
comprehension of arts.  The fear of the Lord is then a primary element
of wisdom, but there is something anterior to this beginning—the
condition of the soul, before it has been taught wisdom and apprehended
the fear of the Lord.…The point is the beginning of the line, and the
line is the beginning of the surface, and the surface is the beginning
of the body, and the parts of speech are the beginnings of grammatical
utterance.  But the beginning in the text is like none of these.…*In the
beginning was the Word!*  Marvellous utterance!  How all the words are
found to be combined in mutual equality of force!  ‘Was’ has the same
force as ‘In the beginning.’  Where is the blasphemer?  Where is the
tongue that fights against Christ?  Where is the tongue that said,
‘There was when He was not’?  Hear the gospel:  ‘*In the beginning was.*
’  If He was in the beginning, when was He not?  Shall I bewail their
impiety or execrate their want of instruction?  But, it is argued,
before He was begotten, He was not.  Do you know when He was begotten,
that you may introduce the idea of priority to the time?  For the word
‘before’ is a word of time, placing one thing before another in
antiquity.  In what way is it reasonable that the Creator of time should
have a generation subjected to terms of time?  ‘*In the beginning
was—*’  Never give up the *was*, and you never give any room for the
vile blasphemy to slip in.  Mariners laugh at the storm, when they are
riding upon two anchors.  So will you laugh to scorn this vile agitation
which is being driven on the world by the blasts of wickedness, and
tosses the faith of many to and fro, if only you will keep your soul
moored safely in the security of these words.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p88"></span>In § 4 on the force of *with God*. <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616)   “Note with admiration the exact
appropriateness of every single word.  It is not said ‘The Word was *in*
God.’  It runs ‘was *with* God.’  This is to set forth the proper
character of the hypostasis.  The Evangelist did not say ‘*in* God,’ to
avoid giving any pretext for the confusion of the hypostasis.  That is
the vile blasphemy of men who are endeavouring to confound all things
together, asserting that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, form one subject
matter, and that different appellations are applied to one thing.  The
impiety is vile, and no less to be shunned than that of those who
blasphemously maintain that the Son is in essence unlike God the
Father.  *The Word was with God*.  Immediately after using the term Word
to demonstrate the impassibility of the generation, he forthwith gives
an explanation to do away with the mischief arising in us from the term
Word.  As though suddenly rescuing Him from the blasphemers’ calumny, he
asks, what is the Word?  *The Word was God.*  Do not put before me any
ingenious distinctions of phrase; do not with your wily cleverness
blaspheme the teachings of the Spirit.  You have the definitive
statement.  Submit to the Lord.  *The Word was God.”*

<span id="vi.ii.v-p90"></span>Homily XXIV., against the Sabellians,
Arians, and Anomœans, repeats points which are brought out again and
again in the *De Spiritu Sancto*, in the work *Against Eunomius*, and in
some of the *Letters*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p91"></span>Arianism is practical paganism, for to
make the Son a creature, and at the same time to offer Him worship, is
to reintroduce polytheism.  Sabellianism is practical Judaism,—a denial
of the Son. <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617)   [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007), [John
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028), [John
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii.v-p92.1"></span>
are quoted against both extremes.  There may be a note of time in the
admitted impatience of the auditory at hearing of every other subject
than the Holy Spirit.  The preacher is constrained to speak upon this
topic, and he speaks with the combined caution and completeness which
characterize the *De Spiritu Sancto.*  “Your ears,” he says, “are all
eager to hear something concerning the Holy Ghost.  My wish would be, as
I have received in all simplicity, as I <span id="page_lxi">p.
lxi</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxi"></span>have assented with
guileless agreement, so to deliver the doctrine to you my hearers.  I
would if I could avoid being constantly questioned on the same point.  I
would have my disciples convinced of one consent.  But you stand round
me rather as judges than as learners.  Your desire is rather to test and
try me than to acquire anything for yourselves.  I must therefore, as it
were, make my defence before the court, again and again giving answer,
and again and again saying what I have received.  And you I exhort not
to be specially anxious to hear from me what is pleasing to yourselves,
but rather what is pleasing to the Lord, what is in harmony with the
Scriptures, what is not in opposition to the Fathers.  What, then, I
asserted concerning the Son, that we ought to acknowledge His proper
Person, this I have also to say concerning the Holy Spirit.  The Spirit
is not identical with the Father, because of its being written ‘God is a
Spirit.’ <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618)   Nor on the other hand
is there one Person of Son and of Spirit, because it is said, ‘If any
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his.…Christ is in
you.’ <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)   From this passage some
persons have been deceived into the opinion that the Spirit and Christ
are identical.  But what do we assert?  That in this passage is declared
the intimate relation of nature and not a confusion of persons.  For
there exists the Father having His existence perfect and independent,
root and fountain of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.  There exists also
the Son living in full Godhead, Word and begotten offspring of the
Father, independent.  Full too is the Spirit, not part of another, but
contemplated whole and perfect in Himself.  The Son is inseparably
conjoined with the Father and the Spirit with the Son.  For there is
nothing to divide nor to cut asunder the eternal conjunction.  No age
intervenes, nor yet can our soul entertain a thought of separation as
though the Only-begotten were not ever with the Father, or the Holy
Ghost not co-existent with the Son.  Whenever then we conjoin the
Trinity, be careful not to imagine the Three as parts of one undivided
thing, but receive the idea of the undivided and common essence of three
perfect incorporeal \[existences\].  Wherever is the presence of the
Holy Spirit, there is the indwelling of Christ:  wherever Christ is,
there the Father is present.  ‘Know ye not that your body is the temple
of the Holy Ghost which is in you ?’” <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p96"></span>First of the Homilies on moral topics come
I. and II. on Fasting.  The former is of uncontested genuineness. 
Erasmus rejected the latter, but it is accepted without hesitation by
Garnier, Maran, and Ceillier, and is said by the last named to be quoted
as Basil’s by John of Damascus and Symeon Logothetes.  From Homily I.
two passages are cited by St. Augustine against the Pelagians. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)   The text is [Ps. lxxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii.v-p97.1"></span>. 
“Reverence,” says one passage, <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622)
“the hoary head of fasting.  It is coæval with mankind.  Fasting was
ordained in Paradise.  The first injunction was delivered to Adam, ‘Of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat.’ <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623)   ‘Thou shalt not eat’ is a law of
fasting and abstinence.”  The general argument is rather against excess
than in support of ceremonial abstinence.  In Paradise there was no
wine, no butchery of beasts, no eating of flesh.  Wine came in after the
flood.  Noah became drunk because wine was new to him.  So fasting is
older than drunkenness.  Esau was defiled, and made his brother’s slave,
for the sake of a single meal.  It was fasting and prayer which gave
Samuel to Hannah.  Fasting brought forth Samson.  Fasting begets
prophets, strengthens strong men.  Fasting makes lawgivers wise, is the
soul’s safeguard, the body’s trusty comrade, the armour of the champion,
the training of the athlete.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p100"></span>The conclusion is a warning against mere
carnal abstinence. <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624)   “Beware of
limiting the good of fasting to mere abstinence from meats.  Real
fasting is alienation from evil.  ‘Loose the bands of wickedness.’ <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625)   Forgive your neighbour the mischief
he has done you.  Forgive him his trespasses against you.  Do not ‘fast
for strife and debate.’ <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626)   You do
not devour flesh, but you devour your brother.  You abstain from wine,
but you indulge in outrages.  You wait for evening before you take food,
but you spend the day in the law courts.  Wo to those who are ‘drunken,
but not with wine.’ <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627)   Anger is
the intoxication of the soul, and makes it out of its wits like wine. 
Drunkenness, too, is sorrow, and drowns our intelligence.  Another
drunkenness is needless fear.  In a word, whatever passion makes the
soul beside herself may be called drunkenness.…Dost thou know Whom thou
art ordained to receive as thy guest?  He Who has promised that He and
His Father will come and make their abode with thee. <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628)   Why do you allow drunkenness to
enter in, and shut the door on the Lord?  Why allow the foe to come in
and occupy your strongholds?  Drunkenness dare not receive the Lord; it
drives away the <span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxii"></span>Spirit.  Smoke drives away bees, and
debauch drives away the gifts of the Spirit.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p106"></span>Wilt thou see the nobility of fasting? 
Compare this evening with to-morrow evening:  thou wilt see the town
turned from riot and disturbance to profound calm.  Would that to-day
might be like to-morrow in solemnity, and the morrow no less cheerful
than to-day.  May the Lord Who has brought us to this period of time
grant to us, as to gladiators and wrestlers, that we may shew firmness
and constancy in the beginning of contests, and may reach that day which
is the Queen of Crowns; that we may remember now the passion of
salvation, and in the age to come enjoy the requital of our deeds in
this life, in the just judgment of Christ.” <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p108"></span>Homily IV. on the giving of thanks (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p108.1"></span>περὶ εὐχαριστίας</span>),
is on text [1 Thess. v. 16](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p108.2"></span>.  Our Lord, it is remarked, wept over
Lazarus, and He called them that mourn blessed.  How <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) is this to be reconciled with the
charge “Rejoice alway”?  “Tears and joy have not a common origin.  On
the one hand, while the breath is held in round the heart, tears
spontaneously gush forth, as at some blow, when an unforeseen calamity
smites upon the soul.  Joy on the other hand is like a leaping up of the
soul rejoicing when things go well.  Hence come different appearances of
the body.  The sorrowful are pale, livid, chilly.  The habit of the
joyous and cheerful is blooming and ruddy; their soul all but leaps out
of their body for gladness.  On all this I shall say that the
lamentations and tears of the saints were caused by their love to God. 
So, with their eyes ever fixed on the object of their love, and from
hence gathering greater joy for themselves, they devoted themselves to
the interests of their fellow-servants.  Weeping over sinners, they
brought them to better ways by their tears.  But just as men standing
safe on the seashore, while they feel for those who are drowning in the
deep, do not lose their own safety in their anxiety for those in peril,
so those who groan over the sins of their neighbours do not destroy
their own proper cheerfulness.  Nay, they rather increase it, in that,
through their tears over their brother, they are made worthy of the joy
of the Lord.  Wherefore, blessed are they that weep; blessed are they
that mourn; for they shall themselves be comforted; they themselves
shall laugh.  But by laughter is meant not the noise that comes out
through the cheeks from the boiling of the blood, but cheerfulness pure
and untainted with despondency.  The Apostle allows us to weep with
weepers, for this tear is made, as it were, a seed and loan to be repaid
with everlasting joy.  Mount in mind with me, and contemplate the
condition of the angels; see if any other condition becomes them but one
of joy and gladness.  It is for that they are counted worthy to stand
beside God, and to enjoy the ineffable beauty and glory of our Creator. 
It is in urging us on to that life that the Apostle bids us always
rejoice.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p110"></span>The Homily contains an eloquent
exhortation to Christian fortitude in calamity, and concludes with the
charge to look beyond present grief to future felicity.  “Hast thou
dishonour?  Look to the glory which through patience is laid up for thee
in heaven.  Hast thou suffered loss?  Fix thine eyes on the heavenly
riches, and on the treasure which thou hast put by for thyself through
thy good works.  Hast thou suffered exile?  Thy fatherland is the
heavenly Jerusalem.  Hast thou lost a child?  Thou hast angels, with
whom thou shalt dance about the throne of God, and shalt be glad with
everlasting joy.  Set expected joys over against present griefs, and
thus thou wilt preserve for thyself that calm and quiet of the soul
whither the injunction of the Apostle calls us.  Let not the brightness
of human success fill thy soul with immoderate joy; let not grief bring
low thy soul’s high and lofty exaltation through sadness and anguish. 
Thou must be trained in the lessons of this life before thou canst live
the calm and quiet life to come.  Thou wilt achieve this without
difficulty, if thou keep ever with thee the charge to rejoice alway. 
Dismiss the worries of the flesh.  Gather together the joys of the
soul.  Rise above the sensible perception of present things.  Fix thy
mind on the hope of things eternal.  Of these the mere thought suffices
to fill the soul with gladness, and to plant in our hearts the happiness
of angels.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p111"></span>Homily VII., against the rich, follows
much the same line of argument as VI.  Two main considerations are urged
against the love of worldly wealth; firstly, the thought of the day of
judgment; secondly, the fleeting and unstable nature of the riches
themselves.  The luxury of the fourth century, as represented by Basil,
is much the same as the luxury of the nineteenth.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p112"></span>“I am filled with amazement,” says the
preacher, “at the invention of superfluities.  <span id="page_lxiii">p.
lxiii</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxiii"></span>The vehicles are
countless, some for conveying goods, others for carrying their owners;
all covered with brass and with silver.  There are a vast number of
horses, whose pedigrees are kept like men’s, and their descent from
noble sires recorded.  Some are for carrying their haughty owners about
the town, some are hunters, some are hacks.  Bits, girths, collars, are
all of silver, all decked with gold.  Scarlet cloths make the horses as
gay as bridegrooms.  There is a host of mules, distinguished by their
colours, and their muleteers with them, one after another, some before
and some behind.  Of other household servants the number is endless, who
satisfy all the requirements of men’s extravagance; agents, stewards,
gardeners, and craftsmen, skilled in every art that can minister to
necessity or to enjoyment and luxury; cooks, confectioners, butlers,
huntsmen, sculptors, painters, devisers and creators of pleasure of
every kind.  Look at the herds of camels, some for carriage, some for
pasture; troops of horses, droves of oxen, flocks of sheep, herds of
swine with their keepers, land to feed all these, and to increase men’s
riches by its produce; baths in town, baths in the country; houses
shining all over with every variety of marble,—some with stone of
Phrygia, others with slabs of Spartan or Thessalian. <span
id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631)   There must be some houses warm in
winter, <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) and others cool in
summer.  The pavement is of mosaic, the ceiling gilded.  If any part of
the wall escapes the slabs, it is embellished with painted flowers.…You
who dress your walls, and let your fellow-creatures go bare, what will
you answer to the Judge?  You who harness your horses with splendour,
and despise your brother if he is ill-dressed; who let your wheat rot,
and will not feed the hungry; who hide your gold, and despise the
distressed?  And, if you have a wealth-loving wife, the plague is twice
as bad.  She keeps your luxury ablaze; she increases your love of
pleasure; she gives the goad to your superfluous appetites; her heart is
set on stones,—pearls, emeralds, and sapphires. <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633)   Gold she works and gold she
weaves, <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) and increases the
mischief with never-ending frivolities.  And her interest in all these
things is no mere by-play:  it is the care of night and day.  Then what
innumerable flatterers wait upon their idle wants!  They must have their
dyers of bright colours, their goldsmiths, their perfumes their weavers,
their embroiderers.  With all their behests they do not leave their
husbands breathing time.  No fortune is vast enough to satisfy a woman’s
wants,—no, not if it were to flow like a river!  They are as eager for
foreign perfumes as for oil from the market.  They must have the
treasures of the sea, shells and pinnas, <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) and more of them than wool from the
sheep’s back.  Gold encircling precious stones serves now for an
ornament for their foreheads, now for their necks.  There is more gold
in their girdles; more gold fastens hands and feet.  These gold-loving
ladies are delighted to be bound by golden fetters,—only let the chain
be gold!  When will the man have time to care for his soul, who has to
serve a woman’s fancies?”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p118"></span>Homily VIII., on the Famine and Drought,
belongs to the disastrous year 368.  The circumstances of its delivery
have already been referred to. <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636)  
The text is [Amos iii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p119.1"></span>, “The lion hath roared:  who will not
fear?”  National calamity is traced to national sin, specially to
neglect of the poor.  Children, it appears, <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) were allowed a holiday from school to
attend the public services held to deprecate the divine wrath.  Crowds
of men, to whose sins the distress was more due than to the innocent
children, wandered cheerfully about the town instead of coming to
church.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p121"></span>Homily X. is against the angry.  Section
2 contains a description of the outward appearance of the angry men. 
“About the heart of those who are eager to requite evil for evil, the
blood boils as though it were stirred and sputtering by the force of
fire.  On the surface it breaks out and shews the angry man in other
form, familiar and well known to all, as though it were changing a mask
upon the stage.  The proper and usual eyes of the angry man are
recognized no more; his gaze is unsteady, and fires up in a moment.  He
whets his teeth like boars joining battle.  His countenance is livid and
suffused with blood.  His body seems to swell.  His veins are ruptured,
as his breath struggles under the storm within.  His voice is rough and
strained.  His speech—broken and falling from him at random—proceeds
without distinction, without arrangement, and without meaning.  When he
is roused by those who are irritating him, like a flame with plenty of
fuel, to an inextinguishable pitch, then, ah! then indeed the spectacle
is indescribable and unendurable.  See the hands lifted against his
fellows, and attacking every part of their bodies; <span
id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxiv"></span>see
the feet jumping without restraint on dangerous parts.  See whatever
comes to hand turned into a weapon for his mad frenzy.  The record of
the progress from words to wounds recalls familiar lines which probably
Basil never read. <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638)   Rage rouses
strife; strife begets abuse; abuse, blows; blows, wounds; and from
wounds often comes death.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p125"></span>St. Basil, however, does not omit to
notice <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) that there is such a
thing as righteous indignation, and that we may “be angry and sin not.” 
“God forbid that we should turn into occasions for sin gifts given to us
by the Creator for our salvation!  Anger, stirred at the proper time and
in the proper manner, is an efficient cause of manliness, patience, and
endurance.…Anger is to be used as a weapon.  So Moses, meekest of men,
armed the hands of the Levites for the slaughter of their brethren, to
punish idolatry.  The wrath of Phinehas was justifiable.  So was the
wrath of Samuel against Agag.  Thus, anger very often is made the
minister of good deeds.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p127"></span>Homily XI., against Envy, adduces the
instances of Saul’s envy of David, and that of the patriarchs against
Joseph.  It is pointed out that envy grows out of familiarity and
proximity.  “A man is envied of his neighbour.” <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640)   The Scythian does not envy the
Egyptian.  Envy arises among fellow-countrymen.  The remedy for this
vice is to recognise the pettiness of the common objects of human
ambition, and to aspire to eternal joys.  If riches are a mere means to
unrighteousness, <span id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) wo be to the
rich man!  If they are a ministering to virtue, there is no room for
envy, since the common advantages proceeding from them are open to
all,—unless any one out of superfluity of wickedness envies himself his
own good things!

<span id="vi.ii.v-p130"></span>In Homily XIII., on Holy Baptism, St.
Basil combats an error which had naturally arisen out of the practice of
postponing baptism.  The delay was made an occasion of license and
indulgence.  St. Augustine <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) cites
the homily as St. Chrysostom’s, but the quotation has not weakened the
general acceptance of the composition as Basil’s, and as one of those
referred to by Amphilochius. <span id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643)  
Ceillier mentions its citation by the emperor Justinian. <span
id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644)   It was apparently delivered at
Easter.  Baptism is good at all times. <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645)   “Art thou a young man?  Secure thy
youth by the bridle of baptism.  Has thy prime passed by?  Do not be
deprived of thy viaticum.  Do not lose thy safeguard.  Do not think of
the eleventh hour as of the first.  It is fitting that even at the
beginning of life we should have the end in view.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p135"></span>“Imitate <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) the eunuch. <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647)   He found one to teach him.  He did
not despise instruction.  The rich man made the poor man mount into his
chariot.  The illustrious and the great welcomed the undistinguished and
the small.  When he had been taught the gospel of the kingdom, he
received the faith in his heart, and did not put off the seal of the
Spirit.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p138"></span>Homily XIV., against Drunkards, has the
special interest of being originated by a painful incident which it
narrates.  The circumstances may well be compared with those of the
scandal caused by the deacon Glycerius. <span
id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)   Easter day, remarks St. Basil, is a
day when decent women ought to have been sitting in their homes, piously
reflecting on future judgment.  Instead of this, certain wanton women,
forgetful of the fear of God, flung their coverings from their heads,
despising God, and in contempt of His angels, lost to all shame before
the gaze of men, shaking their hair, trailing their tunics, sporting
with their feet, with immodest glances and unrestrained laughter, went
off into a wild dance.  They invited all the riotous youth to follow
them, and kept up their dances in the Basilica of the Martyrs’ before
the walls of Cæsarea, turning hallowed places into the workshop of their
unseemliness.  They sang indecent songs, and befouled the ground with
their unhallowed tread.  They got a crowd of lads to stare at them, and
left no madness undone.  On this St. Basil builds a stirring temperance
sermon.  Section 6 contains a vivid picture of a drinking bout, and
Section 7 describes the sequel.  The details are evidently not
imaginary.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p140"></span>“Sorrowful sight for Christian eyes!  A
man in the prime of life, of powerful frame of high rank in the army, is
carried furtively home, because he cannot stand upright, and travel on
his own feet.  A man who ought to be a terror to our enemies is a
laughing stock to the lads in the streets.  He is smitten down by no
sword—slain by no foe.  A military man, in the bloom of manhood, the
prey of wine, and ready to suffer any fate his foes may choose! 
Drunkenness is the ruin of reason, the destruction of strength; it is
untimely old age; it is, for a short time, death.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p141"></span>“What are drunkards but the idols of the
heathen?  They have eyes and see not, ears and <span id="page_lxv">p.
lxv</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxv"></span>hear not. <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649)   Their hands are helpless; their feet
dead.”  The whole Homily is forcible.  It is quoted by Isidore of
Pelusium, <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) and St. Ambrose seems
to have been acquainted with it. <span id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p145"></span>Homily XX., on Humility, urges the folly
of Adam, in sacrificing eternal blessings to his ambition, and the
example of St. Paul in glorying only in the Lord. <span
id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p147"></span>Pharaoh, Goliath, and Abimelech are
instanced.  St. Peter is cited for lack of humility in being sure that
he of all men will be true to the death.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p148"></span>“No detail can be neglected <span
id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) as too insignificant to help us in
ridding ourselves of pride.  The soul grows like its practices, and is
formed and fashioned in accordance with its conduct.  Your appearance,
your dress, your gait, your chair, your style of meals, your bed and
bedding, your house and its contents, should be all arranged with a view
to cheapness.  Your talk, your songs, your mode of greeting your
neighbour, should look rather to moderation than to ostentation.  Give
me, I beg, no elaborate arguments in your talk, no surpassing sweetness
in your singing, no vaunting and wearisome discussions.  In all things
try to avoid bigness.  Be kind to your friend, gentle to your servant,
patient with the impudent, amiable to the lowly.  Console the afflicted,
visit the distressed, despise none.  Be agreeable in address, cheerful
in reply, ready, accessible to all.  Never sing your own praises, nor
get other people to sing them.  Never allowing any uncivil
communication, conceal as far as possible your own superiority.” <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p151"></span>Homily XXI., on disregard of the things
of this world, was preached out of St. Basil’s diocese, very probably at
Satala in 372. <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655)   The second
part <span id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) is in reference to a fire
which occurred in the near neighbourhood of the church on the previous
evening.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p154"></span>“Once more the fiend has shewn his fury
against us, has armed himself with flame of fire, and has attacked the
precincts of the church.  Once more our common mother has won the day,
and turned back his devices on himself.  He has done nothing but
advertise his hatred.…How do you not suppose the devil must be groaning
to-day at the failure of his projected attempt?  Our enemy lighted his
fire close to the church that he might wreck our prosperity.  The flames
raised on every side by his furious blasts were streaming over all they
could reach; they fed on the air round about; they were being driven to
touch the shrine, and to involve us in the common ruin; but our Saviour
turned them back on him who had kindled them, and ordered his madness to
fall on himself.  The congregation who have happily escaped are urged to
live worthily of their preservation, shining like pure gold out of the
furnace.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p155"></span>Homily XXII., which is of considerable
interest, on the study of pagan literature, is really not a homily at
all. <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657)   It is a short treatise
addressed to the young on their education.  It would seem to have been
written in the Archbishop’s later years, unless the experience of which
he speaks may refer rather to his earlier experience, alike as a student
and a teacher.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p157"></span>No source of instruction can be
overlooked in the preparation for the great battle of life, <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) and there is a certain advantage to be
derived from the right use of heathen writers.  The illustrious Moses is
described as training his intellect in the science of the Egyptians, and
so arriving at the contemplation of Him Who is. <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659)   So in later days Daniel at Babylon
was wise in the Chaldean philosophy, and ultimately apprehended the
divine instruction.  But granted that such heathen learning is not
useless, the question remains how you are to participate in it.  To
begin with the poets.  Their utterances are of very various kinds, and
it will not be well to give attention to all without exception.  When
they narrate to you the deeds and the words of good men, admire and copy
them, and strive diligently to be like them.  When they come to bad men,
shut your ears, and avoid imitating them, like Ulysses fleeing from the
sirens’ songs. <span id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660)   Familiarity
with evil words is a sure road to evil deeds, wherefore every possible
precaution must be taken to prevent our souls from unconsciously
imbibing evil influences through literary gratification, like men who
take poison in honey.  We shall not therefore praise the poets when they
revile and mock, or when they describe licentious, intoxicated
characters, when they define happiness as consisting in a laden table
and dissolute ditties.  Least of all shall we attend to the <span
id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxvi"></span>poets
when they are talking about the gods, specially when their talk is of
many gods, and those in mutual disagreement.  For among them brother is
at variance with brother, parent against children, and children wage a
truceless war against parents.  The gods’ adulteries and amours and
unabashed embraces, and specially those of Zeus, whom they describe as
the chief and highest of them all,—things which could not be told
without a blush of brutes,—all this let us leave to actors on the
stage. <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p162"></span>I must make the same remark about
historians, specially when they write merely to please.  And we
certainly shall not follow rhetoricians in the art of lying.…I have been
taught by one well able to understand a poet’s mind that with Homer all
his poetry is praise of virtue, and that in him all that is not mere
accessory tends to this end.  A marked instance of this is his
description of the prince of the Kephallenians saved naked from
shipwreck.  No sooner did he appear than the princess viewed him with
reverence; so far was she from feeling anything like shame at seeing him
naked and alone, since his virtue stood him in the stead of
clothes. <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662)   Afterwards he was of
so much estimation among the rest of the Phæacians that they abandoned
the pleasures amid which they lived, all looked up to him and imitated
him, and not a man of the Phæacians prayed for anything more eagerly
than that he might be Ulysses,—a mere waif saved from shipwreck.  Herein
my friend said that he was the interpreter of the poet’s mind; that
Homer all but said aloud, Virtue, O men, is what you have to care for. 
Virtue swims out with the shipwrecked sailor, and when he is cast naked
on the coast, virtue makes him more noble than the happy Phæacians.  And
truly this is so.  Other belongings are not more the property of their
possessors than of any one else.  They are like dice flung hither and
thither in a game.  Virtue is the one possession which cannot be taken
away, and remains with us alike alive and dead.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p164"></span>It is in this sense that I think Solon
said to the rich,

<span id="vi.ii.v-p165"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p165.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p165.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p165.3"></span>λλ᾽</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p165.4"></span>ἡμεῖς αὐτοῖς οὐ διαμειψόμεθα</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p166"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p166.1"></span>Τῇς ἀρετῆς τὸν πλοῦτον· ἐπεὶ τὸ μὲν ἔμπεδον
αἰεί</span><span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p166.2"></span>,</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p167"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p167.1"></span> Χρήματα δ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἄλλοτε ἄλλος ἔχει</span>
 <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p169"></span>Similar to these are the lines of
Theognis, <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) in which he says that
God (whatever he means by “God”) inclines the scale to men now one way
and now another, and so at one moment they are rich, and at another
penniless.  Somewhere too in his writings Prodicus, the Sophist of
Chios, has made similar reflexions on vice and virtue, to whom attention
may well be paid, for he is a man by no means to be despised.  So far as
I recollect his sentiments, they are something to this effect.  I do not
remember the exact words, but the sense, in plain prose, was as
follows: <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p175"></span>Once upon a time, when Hercules was quite
young, and of just about the same age as yourselves, he was debating
within himself which of the two ways he should choose, the one leading
through toil to virtue, the other which is the easiest of all.  There
approached him two women.  They were Virtue and Vice, and though they
said not a word they straightway shewed by their appearance what was the
difference between them.  One was tricked out to present a fair
appearance with every beautifying art.  Pleasure and delights were shed
around her and she led close after her innumerable enjoyments like a
swarm of bees.  She showed them to Hercules, and, promising him yet more
and more, endeavoured to attract him to her side.  The other, all
emaciated and squalid, looked earnestly at the lad, and spoke in quite
another tone.  She promised him no ease, no pleasure, but toils,
labours, and perils without number, in every land and sea.  She told him
that the reward of all this would be that he should become a god (so the
narrator tells it).  This latter Hercules followed even to the death. 
Perhaps all those who have written anything about wisdom, less or more,
each according to his ability, have praised Virtue in their writings. 
<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxvii"></span>These must be obeyed, and the effort made
to show forth their teaching in the conduct of life.  For he alone is
wise who confirms in act the philosophy which in the rest goes no
farther than words.  They do but flit like shadows. <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p179"></span>It is as though some painter had
represented a sitter as a marvel of manly beauty, and then he were to be
in reality what the artist had painted on the panel.  But to utter
glorious eulogies on virtue in public, and make long speeches about it,
while in private putting pleasure before continence and giving gain
higher honour than righteousness, is conduct which seems to me
illustrated by actors on the stage:  they enter as monarchs and
magnates, when they are neither monarchs nor magnates, and perhaps even
are only slaves.  A singer could never tolerate a lyre that did not
match his voice, nor a coryphæus a chorus that did not chant in tune. 
Yet every one will be inconsistent with himself, and will fail to make
his conduct agree with his words.  The tongue has sworn, but the heart
has never sworn, as Euripedes <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667)
has it; and a man will aim at seeming, rather than at being, good. 
Nevertheless, if we may believe Plato, the last extreme of iniquity is
for one to seem just without being just. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668)   This then is the way in which we are
to receive writings which contain suggestions of good deeds.  And since
the noble deeds of men of old are preserved for our benefit either by
tradition, or in the works of poets and historians, do not let us miss
the good we may get from them.  For instance:  a man in the street once
pursued Pericles with abuse, and persisted in it all day.  Pericles took
not the slightest notice.  Evening fell, and darkness came on, and even
then he could hardly be persuaded to give over.  Pericles lighted him
home, for fear this exercise in philosophy might be lost. <span
id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669)   Again:  once upon a time a fellow
who was angry with Euclid of Megara threatened him with death, and swore
at him.  Euclid swore back that he would appease him, and calm him in
spite of his rage. <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670)   A man once
attacked Socrates the son of Sophoniscus and struck him again and again
in the face.  Socrates made no resistance, but allowed the drunken
fellow to take his fill of frenzy, so that his face was all swollen and
bloody from the blows.  When the assault was done, Socrates, according
to the story, did nothing besides writing on his forehead, as a sculptor
might on a statue, “This is so and so’s doing.” <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p185"></span>This was his revenge.  Where conduct, as
in this case, is so much on a par with Christian conduct, <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) I maintain that it is well worth our
while to copy these great men.  The behaviour of Socrates on this
occasion is akin to the precept that we are by no means to take revenge,
but to turn the other cheek to the smiter.  So the conduct of Pericles
and Euclid matches the commands to put up with persecutors, and to bear
their wrath with meekness, and to invoke not cursing but blessing on our
enemies.  He who has been previously instructed in these examples will
no longer regard the precepts as impracticable.  I should like, too, to
instance the conduct of Alexander, when he had captured the daughters of
Darius. <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673)   Their beauty is
described as extraordinary, and Alexander would not so much as look at
them, for he thought it shameful that a conqueror of men should be
vanquished by women.  This is of a piece with the statement that he who
looks at a woman impurely, even though he do not actually commit the act
of adultery with her, is not free from guilt, because he has allowed
lust to enter his heart.  Then there is the case of Clinias, the
follower of Pythagoras: it is difficult to believe this is a case of
accidental, and not intentional, imitation of our principles. <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674)   What of him?  He might have escaped
a fine of three talents by taking an oath, but he preferred to pay
rather than swear, and this when he would have sworn truly.  He appears
to me to have heard of the precept which orders us to swear not at
all. <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675)   To return to the point
with which I began.  We must not take everything indiscriminately, but
only what is profitable.  It would be <span id="page_lxviii">p.
lxviii</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxviii"></span>shameful for us in
the case of food to reject the injurious, and at the same time, in the
case of lessons, to take no account of what keeps the soul alive, but,
like *mountain streams*, to sweep in everything that happens to be in
our way.  The sailor does not trust himself to the mercy of the winds,
but steers his boat to the port; the archer aims at his mark; the smith
and the carpenter keep the end of the crafts in view.  What sense is
there in our shewing ourselves inferior to these craftsmen, though we
are quite able to understand our own affairs?  In mere handicrafts is
there some object and end in labour, and is there no aim in the life of
man, to which any one ought to look who means to live a life better than
the brutes?  Were no intelligence to be sitting at the tiller of our
souls, we should be dashed up and down in the voyage of life like boats
that have no ballast.  It is just as with competitions in athletics, or,
if you like, in music.  In competitions mere crowns are offered for
prizes, there is always training, and no one in training for wrestling
or the pancration <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) practices the
harp or flute.  Certainly not Polydamas, who before his contests at the
Olympic games used to make chariots at full speed stand still, and so
kept up his strength. <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677)   Milo,
too, could not be pushed off his greased shield, but, pushed as he was,
held on as tightly as statues fastened by lead. <span
id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678)   In one word, training was the
preparation for these feats.  Suppose they had neglected the dust and
the gymnasia, and had given their minds to the strains of Marsyas or
Olympus, the Phrygians, <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) they
would never have won crowns or glory, nor escaped ridicule for their
bodily incapacity.  On the other hand Timotheus did not neglect harmony
and spend his time in the wrestling schools.  Had he done so it would
never have been his lot to surpass all the world in music, and to have
attained such extraordinary skill in his art as to be able to rouse the
soul by his sustained and serious melody, and then again relieve and
sooth it by his softer strains at his good pleasure.  By this skill,
when once he sang in Phrygian strains to Alexander, he is said to have
roused the king to arms in the middle of a banquet, and then by gentler
music to have restored him to his boon companions. <span
id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680)   So great is the importance, alike in
music and in athletics, in view of the object to be attained, of
training.…

<span id="vi.ii.v-p195"></span>.          .          .         
.          .          .          .          .          .         
.          .

<span id="vi.ii.v-p196"></span>To us are held out prizes whereof the
marvelous number and splendour are beyond the power of words to tell. 
Will it be possible for those who are fast asleep, and live a life of
indulgence, to seize them without an effort? <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681)   If so, sloth would have been of
great price, and Sardanapalus would have been esteemed especially happy,
or even Margites, if you like, who is said by Homer to have neither
ploughed nor dug, nor done any useful work,—if indeed Homer wrote this. 
Is there not rather truth in the saying of Pittacus, <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) who said that “It is hard to be good
?”…

<span id="vi.ii.v-p199"></span>.          .          .         
.          .          .          .          .          .
         .          .

<span id="vi.ii.v-p200"></span>We must not be the slaves of our bodies,
except where we are compelled.  Our best provision must be for the
soul.  We ought by means of philosophy to release her from fellowship
with all bodily appetites as we might from a dungeon, and at the same
time make our bodies superior to our appetites.  We should, for
instance, supply our bellies with necessaries, not with dainties like
men whose minds are set on cooks and table arrangers, and who search
through every land and sea, like the tributaries of some stern despot,
much to be pitied for their toil.  Such men are really suffering pains
as intolerable as the torments of hell, carding into a fire, <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) fetching water in a sieve, pouring
into a tub with holes in it, and getting nothing for their pains.  To
pay more than necessary attention to our hair and dress is, as Diogenes
phrases it, the part either of the unfortunate or of the wicked.  To be
finely dressed, and to have the reputation of being so, is to my mind
quite as disgraceful as to play the harlot or to plot against a
neighbour’s wedlock.  What does it matter to a man with any sense,
whether he wears a grand state robe, or a common cloak, <span
id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxix"></span>so
long as it serves to keep off heat and cold?  In other matters necessity
is to be the rule, and the body is only to be so far regarded as is good
for the soul.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p202"></span>.          .          .          .
         .          .          .          .          .         
.          .

<span id="vi.ii.v-p203"></span>Similar precepts are urged, with further
references and allusions to Pythagoras, the Corybantes, Solon, Diogenes,
Pythius, the rich man who feasted Xerxes on his way to Greece, Pheidias,
Bias, Polycletus, Archilochus, and Tithonus. <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p205"></span>It is suggestive to compare the wealth of
literary illustration in this little tract with the severe restrictions
which Basil imposes on himself in his homilies for delivery in church,
where nothing but Scripture is allowed to appear.  In studying the
sermons, it might be supposed that Basil read nothing but the Bible.  In
reading the treatise on heathen authors, but for an incidental allusion
to David and Methuselah, it might be supposed that he spent all his
spare time over his old school and college authors.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p206"></span>(iii)  The Panegyrical Homilies are five
in number.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p207"></span>Homily V. is on Julitta, a lady of
Cæsarea martyred in 306, and commemorated on July 30.  (In the Basilian
menology, July 31.)  Her property being seized by an iniquitous
magistrate, she was refused permission to proceed with a suit for
restitution unless she abjured Christianity.  On her refusal to do this
she was arraigned and burned.  She is described as having said that
women no less than men were made after the image of God; that women as
well as men were made by their Creator capable of manly virtue; that it
took bone as well as flesh to make the woman, and that constancy,
fortitude, and endurance are as womanly as they are manly.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p208"></span>The homily, which recommends patience and
cheerfulness in adversity, contains a passage of great beauty upon
prayer.  “Ought we to pray without ceasing?  Is it possible to obey such
a command?  These are questions which I see you are ready to ask.  I
will endeavour, to the best of my ability, to defend the charge.  Prayer
is a petition for good addressed by the pious to God.  But we do not
rigidly confine our petition to words.  Nor yet do we imagine that God
requires to be reminded by speech.  He knows our needs even though we
ask Him not.  What do I say then?  I say that we must not think to make
our prayer complete by syllables.  The strength of prayer lies rather in
the purpose of our soul and in deeds of virtue reaching every part and
moment of our life.  ‘Whether ye eat,’ it is said, ‘or drink, or
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.’ <span
id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685)   As thou takest thy seat at table,
pray.  As thou liftest the loaf, offer thanks to the Giver.  When thou
sustainest thy bodily weakness with wine, remember Him Who supplies thee
with this gift, to make thy heart glad and to comfort thy infirmity. 
Has thy need for taking food passed away?  Let not the thought of thy
Benefactor pass away too.  As thou art putting on thy tunic, thank the
Giver of it.  As thou wrappest thy cloak about thee, feel yet greater
love to God, Who alike in summer and in winter has given us coverings
convenient for us, at once to preserve our life, and to cover what is
unseemly.  Is the day done?  Give thanks to Him Who has given us the sun
for our daily work, and has provided for us a fire to light up the
night, and to serve the rest of the needs of life.  Let night give the
other occasions of prayer.  When thou lookest up to heaven and gazest at
the beauty of the stars, pray to the Lord of the visible world; pray to
God the Arch-artificer of the universe, Who in wisdom hath made them
all.  When thou seest all nature sunk in sleep, then again worship Him
Who gives us even against our wills release from the continuous strain
of toil, and by a short refreshment restores us once again to the vigour
of our strength.  Let not night herself be all, as it were, the special
and peculiar property of sleep.  Let not half thy life be useless
through the senselessness of slumber.  Divide the time of night between
sleep and prayer.  Nay, let thy slumbers be themselves experiences in
piety; for it is only natural that our sleeping dreams should be for the
most part echoes of the anxieties of the day.  As have been our conduct
and pursuits, so will inevitably be our dreams.  Thus wilt thought pray
without ceasing; if thought prayest not only in words, but unitest
thyself to God through all the course of life and so thy life be made
one ceaseless and uninterrupted prayer.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p210"></span>Barlaam, the subject of Homily
XVII., <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686) was martyred under
Diocletian, either at Antioch or at Cæsarea.  The ingenuity of his
tormentors conceived the idea of compelling him to fling the pinch of
incense to the gods by putting it, while burning, into his hand, and
forcing him to hold it over the altar.  The fire fought with the right
hand, and the fire proved the weaker.  The fire burned through the hand,
but the hand was firm.  The martyr might say, “Thou hast holden me by my
right hand.  Thou shalt guide me <span id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxx"></span>with thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory.” <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687)   The homily
concludes with an apostrophe to the painters of such scenes.  “Up, I
charge you, ye famous painters of the martyrs’ struggles!  Adorn by your
art the mutilated figure of this officer of our army!  I have made but a
sorry picture of the crowned hero.  Use all your skill and all your
colours in his honour.”

<span id="vi.ii.v-p213"></span>This was taken at the second Council of
Nicæa as proof of an actual painting. <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p215"></span>Homily XVIII. is on the martyr Gordius,
who was a native of Cæsarea, and was degraded from his rank of centurion
when Licinius removed Christians from the army.  Gordius retired into
the wilderness, and led the life of an anchorite.  One day there was a
great festival at Cæsarea in honour of Mars.  There were to be races in
the theatre, and thither the whole population trooped.  Not a Jew, not a
heathen, was wanting.  No small company of Christians had joined the
crowd, men of careless life, sitting in the assembly of folly, and not
shunning the counsel of the evil-doers, to see the speed of the horses
and the skill of the charioteers.  Masters had given their slaves a
holiday.  Even boys ran from their schools to the show.  There was a
multitude of common women of the lower ranks.  The stadium was packed,
and every one was gazing intently on the races.  Then that noble man,
great of heart and great of courage, came down from the uplands into the
theatre.  He took no thought of the mob.  He did not heed how many
hostile hands he met.…In a moment the whole theatre turned to stare at
the extraordinary sight.  The man looked wild and savage.  From his long
sojourn in the mountains his head was squalid, his beard long, his dress
filthy.  His body was like a skeleton.  He carried a stick and a
wallet.  Yet there was a certain grace about him, shining from the
unseen all around him.  He was recognised.  A great shout arose.  Those
who shared his faith clapped for joy, but the enemies of the truth urged
the magistrate to put in force the penalty he had incurred, and
condemned him beforehand to die.  Then an universal shouting arose all
round.  Nobody looked at the horses—nobody at the charioteers.  The
exhibition of the chariots was mere idle noise.  Not an eye but was
wholly occupied with looking at Gordius, not an ear wanted to hear
anything but his words.  Then a confused murmur, running like a wind
through all the theatre, sounded above the din of the course.  Heralds
were told to proclaim silence.  The pipes were hushed, and all the band
stopped in a moment.  Gordius was being listened to; Gordius was the
centre of all eyes, and in a moment he was dragged before the magistrate
who presided over the games.  With a mild and gentle voice the
magistrate asked him his name, and whence he came.  He told his country,
his family, the rank he had held, the reason for his flight, and his
return.  “Here I am,” he cried; “ready to testify by creed to the
contempt in which I hold your orders, and my faith in the God in whom I
have trusted.  For I have heard that you are inferior to few in
cruelty.  This is why I have chosen this time in order to carry out my
wishes.”  With these words he kindled the wrath of the governor like a
fire, and roused all his fury against himself.  The order was given,
“Call the lictors; where are the plates of lead?  Where are the
scourges?  Let him be stretched upon a wheel; let him be wrenched upon
the rack; let the instruments of torture be brought in; make ready the
beasts, the fire, the sword, the cross.  What a good thing for the
villain that he can die only once!” <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689)   “Nay,” replied Gordius.  “What a bad
thing for me that I cannot die for Christ again and again!”…

<span id="vi.ii.v-p217"></span>.          .          .         
.          .          .          .          .          .         
.          .

<span id="vi.ii.v-p218"></span>All the town crowded to the spot where
the martyrdom was to be consummated.  Gordius uttered his last words. 
Death is the common lot of man.  As we must all die, let us through
death win life.  Make the necessary voluntary.  Exchange the earthly for
the heavenly.  He then crossed himself, he stepped forward for the fatal
blow, without changing colour or losing his cheerful mien.  It seemed as
though he were not going to meet an executioner, but to yield himself
into the hands of angels. <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p220"></span>Homily XIX. is on the Forty Soldier
Martyrs of Sebaste, who were ordered by the officers of Licinius, <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.ii.v-p220.1"></span>a.d.</span> 320, to offer
sacrifice to the heathen idols, and, at their refusal, were plunged for
a whole night into a frozen pond in the city, in sight of a hot bath on
the brink.  One man’s faith and fortitude failed him.  He rushed to the
relief of the shore, <span id="page_lxxi">p. lxxi</span> <span
id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxxi"></span>plunged into the hot water, and died on
the spot.  One of the executioners had stood warming himself and
watching the strange scene.  He had seemed to see angels coming down
from heaven and distributing gifts to all the band but one.  When the
sacred number of forty was for the moment broken the officer flung off
his clothes, and sprang into the freezing pond with the cry, “I am a
Christian.”  Judas departed.  Matthias took his place.…

<span id="vi.ii.v-p221"></span>.          .          .         
.          .          .          .          .          .         
.          .

<span id="vi.ii.v-p222"></span>What trouble wouldst thou not have taken
to find one to pray for thee to the Lord!  Here are forty, praying with
one voice.  Where two or three are gathered together in the name of the
Lord, there is He in the midst.  Who doubts His presence in the midst of
forty?  The afflicted flees to the Forty; the joyous hurries to them;
the former, that he may find relief from his troubles; the latter, that
his blessings may be preserved.  Here a pious woman is found beseeching
for her children; she begs for the return of her absent husband, or for
his health if he be sick.  Let your supplications be made with the
martyrs.  Let young men imitate their fellows.  Let fathers pray to be
fathers of like sons.  Let mothers learn from a good mother.  The mother
of one of these saints saw the rest overcome by the cold, and her son,
from his strength or his constancy, yet alive.  The executioners had
left him, on the chance of his having changed his mind.  She herself
lifted him in her arms, and placed him on the car in which the rest were
being drawn to the pyre, a veritable martyr’s mother. <span
id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691)

<span id="vi.ii.v-p224"></span>The last of the Panegyrical Homilies
(XXIII.) is on Saint Mamas, commemorated on September 2 by the Greeks,
and on August 17 by the Latins.  He is said to have been a shepherd
martyred at Cæsarea in 274 in the persecution of Aurelian.  Sozomen (v.
2) relates that when the young princes Julian and Gallus were at the
castle of Macellum <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) they were
engaged in building a church in the martyr’s honour, and that Julian’s
share in the work never prospered. <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693)   The homily narrates no details
concerning the saint, and none seem to be known.  It does contain a more
direct mention of a practice of invocation.  There is a charge to all
who have enjoyed the martyr in dreams to remember him; to all who have
met with him in the church, and have found him a helper in their
prayers; to all those whom he has aided in their doings, *when called on
by name*. <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694)   The conclusion
contains a summary of the Catholic doctrine concerning the Son.  “You
have been told before, and now you are being told again, ‘In the
beginning was the Word,’ <span id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695) to
prevent your supposing that the Son was a being generated after the
manner of men, <span id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696) from His having
come forth out of the non-existent.  ‘Word’ is said to you, because of
His impassibility.  ‘Was’ is said because of His being beyond time.  He
says ‘beginning’ to conjoin the Begotten with His Father.  You have seen
how the obedient sheep hears a master’s voice.  ‘In the beginning,’ and
‘was,’ and ‘Word.’  Do not go on to say, <span id="page_lxxii">p.
lxxii</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_lxxii"></span>‘How was He?’ and ‘If
He was, He was not begotten;’ and ‘If He was begotten, He was not.’  It
is not a sheep who says these things.  The skin is a sheep’s; but the
speaker within is a wolf.  Let him be recognised as an enemy.  ‘My sheep
hear my voice.’ <span id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697)   You have heard
the Son.  Understand His likeness to His Father.  I say *likeness*
because of the weakness of the stronger bodies:  In truth, and I am not
afraid of approaching the truth, I am no ready deceiver:  I say
*identity*, always preserving the distinct existence of Son and Father. 
In the hypostasis of Son understand the Father’s Form, that you may hold
the exact doctrine of this Image,—that you may understand consistently
with true religion the words, ‘I am in the Father and the Father in
me.’ <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698)   Understand not confusion
of essences, but identity of characters.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_573"></span>[lv:574](2080022.htm#fr_573) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p29"></span> LXX, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p29.1"></span>πρόσεχε σεαυτῷ</span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[lvi:575](2080022.htm#fr_574) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p31.2"></span>κοίμητον</span>.  On the later existence of an
order of sleepless monks, known as the Acœmetæ.  *cf*. Theodoret, *Ep*.
cxli. p. 309, in this series, and note.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[lvi:576](2080022.htm#fr_575) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p32"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
9.13](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#013)<span id="vi.ii.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[lvi:577](2080022.htm#fr_576) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p33"></span> [Prov. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii.v-p33.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[lvi:578](2080022.htm#fr_577) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p34.1"></span>δορκάς</span>, from <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p34.2"></span>δέρκομαι</span>,=*seer*.  So Tabitha
(*Syr*.)=keen-sighted.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[lvi:579](2080022.htm#fr_578) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p37"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[lvi:580](2080022.htm#fr_579) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p40"></span> § 3.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[lvi:581](2080022.htm#fr_580) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p41"></span> [Hos. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[lvi:582](2080022.htm#fr_581) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p42"></span> [Prov. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[lvii:583](2080022.htm#fr_582) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p43"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.v-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[lvii:584](2080022.htm#fr_583) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p44"></span> [Prov. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)<span id="vi.ii.v-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[lvii:585](2080022.htm#fr_584) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p46"></span> § 8.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[lvii:586](2080022.htm#fr_585) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p47"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vi.ii.v-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[lvii:587](2080022.htm#fr_586) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p48"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="vi.ii.v-p48.1"></span>. 
With the variation of “outer darkness” for “everlasting fire” and the
omission of the clause about strangers.  In this passage, it is not a
robber who is accused; the condemnation falls upon him who has not
shared what he has.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[lvii:588](2080022.htm#fr_587) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p50"></span> § 4.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[lvii:589](2080022.htm#fr_588) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p51"></span> [Is. xiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii.v-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[lvii:590](2080022.htm#fr_589) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p52"></span> [Micah i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii.v-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[lvii:591](2080022.htm#fr_590) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p53"></span> [Amos iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.v-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[lvii:592](2080022.htm#fr_591) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p54"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="vi.ii.v-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[lviii:593](2080022.htm#fr_592) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p55"></span> [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii.v-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[lviii:594](2080022.htm#fr_593) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p56.1"></span>δημιούργησον</span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[lviii:595](2080022.htm#fr_594) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p57"></span> *cf*. [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii.v-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[lviii:596](2080022.htm#fr_595) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p58"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="vi.ii.v-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[lviii:597](2080022.htm#fr_596) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p59"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.v-p59.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[lviii:598](2080022.htm#fr_597) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p60"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii.v-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[lviii:599](2080022.htm#fr_598) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p61"></span> [Prov. xxiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii.v-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[lviii:600](2080022.htm#fr_599) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p62"></span> § 3.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[lviii:601](2080022.htm#fr_600) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p64"></span> [Prov.
i](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii.v-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[lviii:602](2080022.htm#fr_601) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p65.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p66.1"></span>παροιμία</span> is defined by Hesychius the
Alexandrian grammarian, who was nearly contemporary with Basil, as a
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p66.2"></span>βιωφελὴς λόγος, παρὰ
τὴν ὁδὸν λεγόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[lviii:603](2080022.htm#fr_602) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p66.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p67"></span> [John xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span id="vi.ii.v-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[lviii:604](2080022.htm#fr_603) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p68.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p69.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p69.2"></span>πιτετευγμένως θεολογεῖ</span>.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[lviii:605](2080022.htm#fr_604) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p71"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[lviii:606](2080022.htm#fr_605) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p72.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p72.2"></span>τῶν μαθημάτων ἀνάληψις ταιδεία λέγεται</span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[lviii:607](2080022.htm#fr_606) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p72.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p73.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p73.2"></span>παιδεύθη</span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[lviii:608](2080022.htm#fr_607) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p73.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p74"></span> [Acts vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii.v-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[lviii:609](2080022.htm#fr_608) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p75.1"></span>σωτηρία</span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[lix:610](2080022.htm#fr_609) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p76.1"></span>μετεωρολογία</span>.  The word had already
been used by Plato in a certain contemptuous sense.  *cf. Pal*. 299 B.: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p76.2"></span>μετεωρόλογον
ἀδολέσχην τινὰ σοφιστήν</span>.  But not always, *e.g. Crat*. 401, B.: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p76.3"></span>κωδυνεύουσι γοῦν οἱ
πρῶτοι τὰ ὀνόματα τιθέμενοι οὐ φαῦλοι εἶναι, ἀλλὰ μετεωρολόγοι τινὲς καὶ
ἀδολέσχαι</span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[lix:611](2080022.htm#fr_610) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p76.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p77"></span> Gregory of Nazianzus was publishing
verses which formed no unworthy early link in the *Catena Poetarum
Christianorum*, in our sense of the word poet.  Basil may have in his
mind the general idea that the Poetics of the heathen schools were all
concerned with mythical inventions.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[lix:612](2080022.htm#fr_611) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p80"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.v-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[lix:613](2080022.htm#fr_612) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p80.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p81"></span> *cf*. [Ps. cxxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.v-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[lix:614](2080022.htm#fr_613) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p81.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p82"></span> [Ps. cxix.
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span id="vi.ii.v-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[lix:615](2080022.htm#fr_614) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p85"></span> There are instances of high admiration of
the passage:  I have not found one of appropriation.  Augustine (*De
Civ. Dei* x. 29), says:  “*Quod initium Sancti Evangelii, cui nomen est
secundum Johannem, quidam Platonicus, sicut a sancto sene Simpliciano,
qui postea ecclesiæ Mediolanensi præsedit episcopus, solebamus audire,
aureis litteris conscribendum et per omnes ecclesias in locis
eminentissimis proponendum esse dicebat*.”  Eusebius (*Præp. Evang*. xi.
17 and 18) refers to the Statements of Plotinus and Numerius on the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p85.1"></span>δεύτερος
αἴτιος</span>, and (19) mentions Aurelius (on Aurelius *vide* Mosheim’s
note on Cudworth’s *Int. System*, vol. i. cap. iv. 17), as quoting the
passage in question.  *Vide* also Theodoret, *Græc. Aff*. 33, and
Bentley’s *Remarks on Freethinking*, § xlvi.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[lx:616](2080022.htm#fr_615) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p87"></span> [Prov. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii.v-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[lx:617](2080022.htm#fr_616) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p89.1"></span>πρὸς τὸν Θεόν</span>.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[lx:618](2080022.htm#fr_617) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p92"></span> *cf*. ccx. p. 249.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[lxi:619](2080022.htm#fr_618) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p93"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="vi.ii.v-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[lxi:620](2080022.htm#fr_619) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p94"></span> [Rom.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii.v-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[lxi:621](2080022.htm#fr_620) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p95"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="vi.ii.v-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[lxi:622](2080022.htm#fr_621) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p96.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p97"></span> August. in *Julian*. i. 18.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[lxi:623](2080022.htm#fr_622) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p97.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p98"></span> § 3.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[lxi:624](2080022.htm#fr_623) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p99"></span> [Gen. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)<span id="vi.ii.v-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[lxi:625](2080022.htm#fr_624) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p101"></span> § 10.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[lxi:626](2080022.htm#fr_625) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p101.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p102"></span> [Is. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.v-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[lxi:627](2080022.htm#fr_626) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p102.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p103"></span> [Is. lviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.v-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[lxi:628](2080022.htm#fr_627) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p104"></span> [Is. li.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021)<span id="vi.ii.v-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[lxi:629](2080022.htm#fr_628) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p104.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p105"></span> *cf*. [John xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span id="vi.ii.v-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[lxii:630](2080022.htm#fr_629) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p107"></span> The sermon seems to have been preached
at the beginning of Lent, when Cæsarea was still suffering from Carnival
indulgences.  Homily II. may be placed at a similar season in another
year.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[lxii:631](2080022.htm#fr_630) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p108.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p109"></span> § 4.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[lxiii:632](2080022.htm#fr_631) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p112.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p113"></span> A precious, red-streaked marble was
quarried in Phrygia.  The Spartan or Tænarian was the kind known as
*verde antico*.  *cf*. Bekker, *Gallus*. p. 16, n.  The taste for the
“Phrygian stone” was an old one.  *cf*. Hor., *Carm*. III. i. 41.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[lxiii:633](2080022.htm#fr_632) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p114"></span> The Cappadocian winters were severe. 
*cf*. *Ep*. cxxi., cxcviii., cccxlix.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[lxiii:634](2080022.htm#fr_633) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p114.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p115"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p115.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p115.2"></span>ακίνθους</span>.  See L. and S., *s.v*., and
King’s *Antique Gems*, 46.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[lxiii:635](2080022.htm#fr_634) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p115.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p116"></span> *i.e*. she must have ornaments of
wrought gold and stuff embroidered with gold.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[lxiii:636](2080022.htm#fr_635) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p117"></span> *cf. Hexaemeron*, p. 94.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[lxiii:637](2080022.htm#fr_636) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p119"></span> p. xxi.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[lxiii:638](2080022.htm#fr_637) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p120"></span> § 3.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[lxiv:639](2080022.htm#fr_638) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p121.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p122"></span> *Jurgia proludunt; sed mox et pocula
torques*

<span id="vi.ii.v-p123"></span>*Saucius, et rubra deterges vulnera
mappa*.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p124"></span>Juv., *Sat*. v. 26.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[lxiv:640](2080022.htm#fr_639) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p126"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[lxiv:641](2080022.htm#fr_640) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p127.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p128"></span> [Ecc. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.v-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[lxiv:642](2080022.htm#fr_641) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p129"></span> § 5.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[lxiv:643](2080022.htm#fr_642) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p130.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p131"></span> *In Julian*. vi.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[lxiv:644](2080022.htm#fr_643) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p131.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p132"></span> *Orat*. ii.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[lxiv:645](2080022.htm#fr_644) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p132.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p133"></span> *Conc*. v. p. 668.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[lxiv:646](2080022.htm#fr_645) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p133.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p134"></span> § 5.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[lxiv:647](2080022.htm#fr_646) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p135.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p136"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[lxiv:648](2080022.htm#fr_647) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p137"></span> [Acts viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027)<span id="vi.ii.v-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[lxiv:649](2080022.htm#fr_648) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p138.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p139"></span> *cf. Letter*clxix. and observations in
*Prolegomena*, p. xxix.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[lxv:650](2080022.htm#fr_649) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p141.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p142"></span> [Ps. cxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii.v-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[lxv:651](2080022.htm#fr_650) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p142.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p143"></span> 1 *Ep*. lxi.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[lxv:652](2080022.htm#fr_651) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p143.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p144"></span> *De Eb. et Jejunio*. c. 18.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[lxv:653](2080022.htm#fr_652) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p145.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p146"></span> [1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="vi.ii.v-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[lxv:654](2080022.htm#fr_653) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p148.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p149"></span> § 7.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[lxv:655](2080022.htm#fr_654) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p150"></span> Here several touches remind us of
Theophrastus.  *cf. Char*. xxiii. and xxiv.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[lxv:656](2080022.htm#fr_655) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p151.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p152"></span> Ceillier, VI. viii. 2.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[lxv:657](2080022.htm#fr_656) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p152.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p153"></span> § 9.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[lxv:658](2080022.htm#fr_657) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p155.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p156"></span> It has often been separately published. 
In 1600 it was included by Martin Haynoccius in an *Enchiridion
Ethicum*, containing also Plutarch’s two tracts on the education of boys
and the study of the poets, with which it is interesting to compare it. 
Grotius published it with Plutarch’s *De Legendis Poetis* at Paris in
1623.  They were also published together by Archbishop Potter at Oxford
in 1691.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[lxv:659](2080022.htm#fr_658) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p157.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p158"></span> § 2.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[lxv:660](2080022.htm#fr_659) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p158.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p159"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.1"></span>τοῦ ὄντος</span>.  The highest heathen
philosophy strove to reach the neuter <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.2"></span>τὸ ὄν</span>.  The revelation of Jehovah is
of the masculine <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.4"></span>ὤν</span>, who communicates with his
creatures, and says <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.6"></span>γὼ εἰμί</span>.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[lxv:661](2080022.htm#fr_660) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p159.7"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p160"></span> Hom., *Od*. xii. 158.  *cf. Letter* i.
p. 109.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[lxvi:662](2080022.htm#fr_661) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p160.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p161"></span> This shews that the shameless and cruel
exhibitions of earlier days had not died out even in the fourth
century.  *cf*. Suetonius, *Nero* xi., xii., Tertullian, *Apol*. 15.  On
the whole subject, see Bp. Lightfoot’s note on St. Clem. Rom., *Ep. ad
Cor*. vi., where <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p161.1"></span>Δαναΐδες καὶ Δίρκαι</span> is probably a
misreading for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p161.2"></span>νεάνιδες παιδισκαι</span>.  He refers for
illustrations to Friedländer, *Sittengeschichte Roms*, ii. 234.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[lxvi:663](2080022.htm#fr_662) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p162.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p163"></span> *Od*. vi. 135 <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p163.1"></span>κ.τ.λ.</span>

<span id="fn_663"></span>[lxvi:664](2080022.htm#fr_663) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p167.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p168"></span> These lines are attributed to Solon by
Plutarch, in the tract <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p168.1"></span>πῶς ἄν τις ὑπ᾽ ἐχθρῶν ὠφελοῖτο</span>, but
they occur among the elegiac “*gnomæ*” of Theognis, lines 316–318. 
Fronton du Duc in his notes on the *Homilies* points out that they are
also quoted in Plutarch’s life of Solon.  Basil was well acquainted with
Plutarch.  (*cf*. references in the notes to the *Hexaemeron*.)

<span id="fn_664"></span>[lxvi:665](2080022.htm#fr_664) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p169.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p170"></span> The lines are:

<span id="vi.ii.v-p171"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p171.1"></span>Ζεὺς γάρ τοι τὸ τάλαντον ἐπιρρέπει ἄλλοτε
ἄλλως</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p172"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p172.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p172.2"></span>Αλλοτε μὲν πλουτεῖν, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ οὐδὲν
ἔχεω.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p173"></span>Theog. 157.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[lxvi:666](2080022.htm#fr_665) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p173.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p174"></span> The story of *The Choice of Hercules*
used to be called, from Prodicus (of Ceos, not Chios) *Hercules
Prodicius*.  Suidas says that the title of the work quoted was <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p174.1"></span>Ω</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p174.2"></span>ραι</span>.  The allegory
is given at length in Xenophon’s *Memorabilia* (II. i. 21) in Dion
Chrysostom’s *Regnum*, and in Cicero (*De Officiis* i. 32), who refers
to Xenophon.  It is imitated in the *Somnium* of Lucian.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[lxvii:667](2080022.htm#fr_666) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p175.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p176"></span> *cf*. Hom., *Od*. x. 494, where it is
said of Teiresias:

<span id="vi.ii.v-p177"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p177.1"></span>Τῷ καὶ τεθνηῶτι νόον πόρε Περσεφόνεια,</span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p178"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p178.1"></span>Οἴ& 251· πεπνῦσθαι· τοὶ δὲ σκιαὶ ἀ&
188·σσουσι.</span>

<span id="fn_667"></span>[lxvii:668](2080022.htm#fr_667) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p179.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p180"></span> Eur. *Hippolytus*, 612:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p180.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p180.2"></span>γλῶσσ᾽ ὀμώμοχ᾽ ἡ δὲ φρὴν
ἀνώμοτος</span>, the famous line which Aristophanes made fun of in
*Thesmophoriazusæ*, 275.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[lxvii:669](2080022.htm#fr_668) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p180.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p181"></span> Fronton du Duc notes that Basil has
taken this allusion to Plato from Plutarch’s tract, *How to distinguish
between Flatterer and Friend*, p. 50:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p181.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p181.2"></span>ς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p181.3"></span>γὰρ ὁ Πλάτων φησὶν ἐσχάτης ἀδικίας εἶναι
δοκεῖν δίκαιον μὴ ὄντα</span>.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[lxvii:670](2080022.htm#fr_669) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p181.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p182"></span> Plut. *Pericles*.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[lxvii:671](2080022.htm#fr_670) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p182.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p183"></span> Plut., *De Ira Cohibenda*, where the
story is told of a brother.  The aggressor says <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p183.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.v-p183.2"></span>πολοίμην εἰ μή σε
τιμῶρησαίμην</span>.  The rejoinder is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p183.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p183.4"></span>γὼ δὲ ἀπολοίμην εἰ μή σε πείσαιμι</span>.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[lxvii:672](2080022.htm#fr_671) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p183.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p184"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p184.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p184.2"></span>ποίει</span> in Greek will of course stand
for “made it,” like our “*hoc fecit*,” or “did it.”  Du Duc gives
authority for the use of the Imp. from Politian.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[lxvii:673](2080022.htm#fr_672) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p185.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p186"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p186.1"></span>τοῖς ἡμετέροις</span>.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[lxvii:674](2080022.htm#fr_673) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p186.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p187"></span> *cf*. Plutarch, *Alex*. and Arrian. II.
xii.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[lxvii:675](2080022.htm#fr_674) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p187.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p188"></span> Clinias was a contemporary of Plato
(Diog. Laert. ix. 40).

<span id="fn_675"></span>[lxvii:676](2080022.htm#fr_675) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p188.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p189"></span> St. Basil can hardly imagine that
Clinias lived after Christ; yet Old Testament prohibitions are against
false swearing only.  Possibly the third commandment and such a passage
as [Lev. xix. 12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p189.1"></span>, may have been in his mind.  If Clinias had
lived some half a millennium later there seems no reason why he should
not have saved himself three talents by using the words of the Apostle
in [2 Cor. xi. 31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031)<span
id="vi.ii.v-p189.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[lxviii:677](2080022.htm#fr_676) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p189.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p190"></span> *i.e*. wrestling and boxing together.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[lxviii:678](2080022.htm#fr_677) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p190.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p191"></span> Paus. VI. v.  *cf*. Pers., *Sat*. i. 4.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[lxviii:679](2080022.htm#fr_678) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p191.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p192"></span> Paus. VI. xiv.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[lxviii:680](2080022.htm#fr_679) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p192.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p193"></span> Marsyas, the unhappy rival of Apollo,
was said to be a native of Celænæ in Phrygia.  Olympus was a pupil of
Marsyas (*Schol. in Aristoph*. *Eq*. 9).  By Plutarch (*Mus*. xi.) he is
called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p193.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p193.2"></span>ρχηγὸς τῆς ῾Ελληνικῆς καὶ καλῆς
μουσικῆς</span>.  *cf*. Arist., *Pol*. VIII. v. 16.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[lxviii:681](2080022.htm#fr_680) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p193.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p194"></span> *cf*. Cic., *Legg*. ii. 15, Plutarch,
*De Mus*.  There are two Timothei of musical fame, one anterior to
Alexander.  It will be remembered that in Dryden’s *Alexander’s Feast*
“the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy,” *after* the “Lydian
measure” had “*soothed his soul to pleasures*.”

<span id="fn_681"></span>[lxviii:682](2080022.htm#fr_681) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p196.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p197"></span> Lit., who sleep with both ears, to seize
with one hand (idiom for sleeping soundly.  *cf*. Aul. Gell. ii. 23, who
quotes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p197.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p197.2"></span>π᾽ ἄμφοτέραν καθεύδειν</span> from Menander).

<span id="fn_682"></span>[lxviii:683](2080022.htm#fr_682) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p197.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p198"></span> Of Mitylene, *cf*. Arist., *Pol*. III.
xiv. 9, and Diog. Laert. I. iv., who mentions Simonides’ quotation of
the maxim of the text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p198.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p198.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p198.3"></span>νδρα ἀγαθὸν ἀλαθέως γενέσθαι χαλεπὸν, τὸ
Πιττάκειον</span>.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[lxviii:684](2080022.htm#fr_683) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p200.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p201"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p201.1"></span>εἰς πῦρ ξαίνοντες</span>, *i.e*. labouring in
vain.  *cf*. Plat., *Legg*. 780 c.  The ordinary rendering to “flog
fire,” adopted by Erasmus (*Adag. Chil*. i., *Centur*. iv.), seems
wrong.  *cf*. Bekker on the phrase in Plato.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[lxix:685](2080022.htm#fr_684) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p203.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p204"></span> Herod. vii. 21.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[lxix:686](2080022.htm#fr_685) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p208.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p209"></span> [1 Cor. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span id="vi.ii.v-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[lxix:687](2080022.htm#fr_686) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p210.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p211"></span> Supposed by some to be not Basil’s, but
Chrysostom’s.  *cf*. Ceillier, iv. p. 53.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[lxx:688](2080022.htm#fr_687) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p211.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p212"></span> [Ps.
73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024)<span id="vi.ii.v-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[lxx:689](2080022.htm#fr_688) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p213.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p214"></span> Labbe vii. 272.  *cf*. Chrys. *Hom*.
lxxiii.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[lxx:690](2080022.htm#fr_689) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p215.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p216"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p216.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p216.2"></span>λλὰ γὰρ οἷα κερδαίνει, φησὶν, ἅπαξ μόνον
ἀποθνήσκων</span>.  Garnier seems to have completely missed the force of
this exclamation in the explanation in a note, “*Judex hoc dicere
volebat, quem fructum referet ex sua pertinacia, si semel mortuus
fuerit; neque enim in hanc vitam rursus redibit, ejus ut gaudiis
perfruatur, neque tamen ulla alia vita est*.”

<span id="fn_690"></span>[lxx:691](2080022.htm#fr_690) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p218.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p219"></span> For the tortures and modes of execution
enumerated, Du Duc compares Aristoph., *Pax*. 452, Chrysost., *De
Luciano Martyre*, and Nicephorus vi. 14.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[lxxi:692](2080022.htm#fr_691) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p222.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p223"></span> The name of this youngest of the Forty
is given as Melito (*D.C.B*. s.v.).  They are commemorated on March 9 in
the Roman Kalendar of Gregory XIII. and the Menology of Basil; on March
10 in the Roman Mart. of Bened. XIV.; on the 11th in the old Roman Kal.,
and on March 16 in the Armenian.  The legend of the discovery of some of
their relics is given in Sozomen ix. 2.  Others were obtained for the
church built in their honour at Annesi.  (*cf*. p. xiv.)  Two doctrinal
points come out in this homily, (a) The officer who took the place of
Melito is said to have been baptized, not in water but in his own blood
(§ 7).  Here is martyrdom represented as the equivalent of baptism.  (b)
The stage arrived at in the progress of Christian sentiment towards the
invocation of departed saints is indicated.  Garnier, the Jesuit, writes
in the margin of the passage quoted above, *Invocantur martyres*; and
Ceillier notes, *Il reconnait que les prieres des martyrs peuvent
beaucoup nous aider auprés de Dieu*.  But in this particular passage the
idea of “fleeing to the Forty” seems to be not fleeing to them to ask
for their prayers, but fleeing to the shrine to pray in company with
them.  It is rather the fellowship than the intercession of the saints
which is sought.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p223.1"></span>μετὰ μαρτύρων γιγνέσθω τὰ αἰτήματα
ὑμῶν</span>.  Let your requests be made not *to* but *with* the
martyrs.  In the Homily on St. Mamas, the next in order, the expressions
are less equivocal.  At the same time it must be remarked that with St.
Basil the invocation and the intercession are *local*.  In the *De Sp.
Scto*. (chap. xxiii. p. 34) a significant contrast is drawn between the
ubiquity of the Holy Ghost and the limited and local action of angels. 
And if of angels, so of saints.  The saints who have departed this life
are thought of as accessible at the shrines where their relics rest,
but, if we apply the analogy of the *De Sp. Scto*., not everywhere.  It
has been said that this is the period when requests for the prayers of
the holy dead begin to appear, and Archbishop Ussher (*Address to a
Jesuit*, chap. ix.) cites Gregory of Nazianzus for the earliest instance
within his knowledge of a plain invocation of the departed.  But, as
bishop Harold Browne points out, his invocation is rather rhetorical
than supplicatory.  Gregory “had even a pious persuasion that they still
continued as much as ever to aid with their prayers those for whom they
had been wont to pray on earth (*Orat*. xxiv. p. 425).  And he ventures
to think if it be not too bold to say so (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p223.2"></span>εἰ μὴ τολυηρὸν τοῦτο εἰπεῖν</span>), that the
saints, being nearer to God and having put off the fetters of the flesh,
have more avail with Him than when on earth (*Orat*. xix. p. 228).  In
all these he does not appear to have gone further than some who preceded
him, nor is there anything in such speculations beyond what might be
consistent with the most Protestant abhorrence of saint worship and
Mariolatry” (Bp. Harold Browne in Art. xxii.).  Romish authorities in
support of a yet earlier development, point to Irenæus (*Adv. Hær*. v.
19), wherein a highly rhetorical passage the Virgin Mary is said to have
become the “advocate” of the Virgin Eve, and to Origen, who “invoked”
his guardian angel (*Hom. i. in Ezek*. 7).  The later mediæval
invocation Bp. Jeremy Taylor (vol. vi. Eden’s ed. p. 489) ingeniously
shews to be of a piece rather with early heresy than with early
Catholicity:  “It pretends to know their present state, which is hid
from our eyes; and it proceeds upon the very reason upon which the
Gnostics and Valentinians went; that is, that it is fit to have
mediators between God and us; that we may present our prayers to them,
and they to God.  To which add that the Church of Rome presenting
candles and other donaries to the Virgin Mary as to the Queen of heaven,
do that which the Collyridians did (Epiphan. *Hær*. lxxix. vol. i. p.
1057).  The gift is only differing, as candle and cake, gold and
garments, this vow or that vow.”

<span id="fn_692"></span>[lxxi:693](2080022.htm#fr_692) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p224.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p225"></span> *cf*. p. xv., n.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[lxxi:694](2080022.htm#fr_693) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p225.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p226"></span> *cf*. Greg. Naz., *Or*. iv. § 25.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[lxxi:695](2080022.htm#fr_694) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p226.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p227"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p227.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p227.2"></span>σοις, ὀνόματι, κληθεὶς, ἐπι τῶν ἔργων
παρέστη</span>.  On the reverence for relics *cf*. *Letters* cxcvii.,
cclii., and cclvii.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[lxxi:696](2080022.htm#fr_695) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p227.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p228"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.v-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[lxxi:697](2080022.htm#fr_696) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p228.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p229"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.v-p229.1"></span>γέννημα ἀνθρώπινον</span>.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[lxxii:698](2080022.htm#fr_697) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p229.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p230"></span> *cf*. [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii.v-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[lxxii:699](2080022.htm#fr_698) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p230.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p231"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii.v-p231.1"></span>. 
*cf. De Sp. Scto*. § 45, p. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letters.](2080023)
