[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080138)  [Next](2080140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Letter LXVI. <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) </span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p3"></span>*To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria*.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p4.1"></span>No</span> one, I feel sure, is more distressed
at the present condition, or, rather to speak more truly, ill condition
of the Churches than your excellency; for you compare the present with
the past, and take into account how great a change has come about.  You
are well aware that if no check is put to the swift deterioration which
we are witnessing, there will soon be nothing to prevent the complete
transformation of the Churches.  And if the decay of the Churches seems
so pitiful to me, what must—so I have often in my lonely musings
reflected—be the feelings of one who has known, by experience, the old
tranquillity of the Churches of the Lord, and their one mind about the
faith?  But as your excellency feels most deeply this distress, it seems
to me only becoming that your wisdom should be more strongly moved to
interest itself in the Church’s behalf.  I for my part have long been
aware, so far as my moderate intelligence has been able to judge of
current events, that the one way of safety for the Churches of the East
lies in their having the sympathy of the bishops of the West.  For if
only those bishops liked to show the same energy on behalf of the
Christians sojourning in our part of the world <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) which they have shewn in the case
of one or two of the men convicted of breaches of orthodoxy in the West,
our common interests would probably reap no small benefit, our
sovereigns treating the authority of the people with respect, and the
laity in all quarters unhesitatingly following them. <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238)   But, to carry out these objects,
who has more capacity than yourself, with your intelligence and
prudence?  Who is keener to see the needful course to be taken?  Who has
more practical experience in working a profitable policy?  Who feels
more deeply the troubles of the brethren?  What through all the West is
more honoured than your venerable gray hairs? <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239)   O most honoured father, leave
behind you some memorial worthy of your life and character.  By this one
act crown your innumerable efforts on behalf of true religion.  Despatch
from the holy Church placed under your care men of ability in sound
doctrine to the bishops in the West.  Recount to them the troubles
whereby we are beset.  Suggest some mode of relief.  Be a Samuel to the
Churches.  Share the grief of the beleaguered people.  Offer prayers for
peace.  Ask favour from <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="ix.lxvii-Page_164"></span>the Lord, that He will send some memorial
of peace to the Churches.  I know how weak letters are to move men in
matters of such importance; but you yourself no more need exhortation
from others than the noblest athletes need the children’s cheers.  It is
not as though I were instructing one in ignorance; I am only giving a
new impulse to one whose energies are already roused.  For the rest of
the affairs of the East perhaps you may need the aid of more, and we
must wait for the Westerns.  But plainly the discipline of the Church of
Antioch depends upon your reverence’s being able to control some, to
reduce others to silence, and to restore strength to the Church by
concord. <span id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240)   No one knows
better than you do, that, like all wise physicians, you ought to begin
your treatment in the most vital parts, and what part is more vital to
the Churches throughout the world than Antioch?  Only let Antioch be
restored to harmony, and nothing will stand in the way of her supplying,
as a healthy head, soundness to all the body.  Truly the diseases of
that city, which has not only been cut asunder by heretics, but is torn
in pieces by men who say that they are of one mind with one another,
stand in need of your wisdom and evangelic sympathy.  To unite the
sundered parts again, and bring about the harmony of one body, belongs
to Him alone Who by His ineffable power grants even to the dry bones to
come back again to sinews and flesh.  But the Lord always works His
mighty works by means of them that are worthy of Him.  Once again, in
this case too, we trust that the ministry of matters so important may
beseem your excellency, with the result that you will lay the tempest of
the people, do away with the party superiorities, and subject all to one
another in love, and give back to the Church her ancient strength.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[163:2237](2080139.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p2"></span> Placed in 371.  *cf. Letter* lxii.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[163:2238](2080139.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p5.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p5.2"></span>πὲρ τῆς παροικίας τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς μερῶν</span>. 
On the use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p5.3"></span>παροικία</span> in this sense, *cf*. Bp.
Lightfoot, *Ap. Fathers* I. ii. 5.  So Apollon. in *Eus., H.E.* v. 18.
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.lxvii-p5.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.lxvii-p5.5"></span>ἱδία παροικία</span>, of
the Christian society.  Thus the meaning passes to parochia and parish.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[163:2239](2080139.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p6"></span> “Them” is referred by the Ben. Ed. not to
the sovereigns (<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.lxvii-p6.1"></span>τῶν
κρατούντων</span> they understand to mean Valens) but to the Western
bishops.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[163:2240](2080139.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p7"></span> A various reading (“*Tres <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.lxvii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> et secunda manu
Medicœus*,” Ben. Ed.) for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p7.2"></span>πολιᾶς</span> reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p7.3"></span>πολιτείας</span> “the life and conversation of
your Holiness.”—Athanasius was now about 75.  His death is placed in
373.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[164:2241](2080139.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p8"></span> To end the schism caused by the refusal
of the Eustathian or old Catholic party to recognise Meletius as bishop
of the whole orthodox body.  The churches of the West and Egypt, on the
whole, supported Paulinus, who had been ordained by Lucifer of Cagliari,
bishop of the old Catholics.  The Ben. Ed. supposes the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.lxvii-p8.1"></span>οἰκονομῆσαι</span>, which
I have rendered “control,” to refer to Paulinus.  The East supported
Meletius, and if the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.lxvii-p8.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span> in Basil’s mind does refer to
Paulinus, the “management” meant may be management to get rid of him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.](2080140)
