[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080284)  [Next](2080286) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span
id="ix.ccxiii-Page_252"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXII. <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p3"></span>*To Hilarius*. <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800)

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxiii-p5.1"></span>You</span> can imagine what I felt, and in
what state of mind I was, when I came to Dazimon and found that you had
left a few days before my arrival.  From my boyhood I have held you in
admiration, and, therefore, ever since our old school days, have placed
a high value on intercourse with you.  But another reason for my doing
so is that nothing is so precious now as a soul that loves the truth,
and is gifted with a sound judgment in practical affairs.  This, I
think, is to be found in you.  I see most men, as in the hippodrome,
divided into factions, some for one side and some for another, and
shouting with their parties.  But you are above fear, flattery, and
every ignoble sentiment, and so naturally look at truth with an
unprejudiced eye.  And I see that you are deeply interested in the
affairs of the Churches, about which you have sent me a letter, as you
have said in your last.  I should like to know who took charge of the
conveyance of this earlier epistle, that I may know who has wronged me
by its loss.  No letter from you on this subject has yet reached me.

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p6"></span>2.  How much, then, would I not have
given to meet you, that I might tell you all my troubles?  When one is
in pain it is, as you know, some alleviation, even to describe it.  How
gladly would I have answered your questions, not trusting to lifeless
letters, but in my own person, narrating each particular.  The
persuasive force of living words is more efficient and they are not so
susceptible as letters to attack and to misrepresentation.  For now no
one has left anything untried, and the very men in whom I put the
greatest confidence, men, who when I saw them among others, I used to
think something more than human, have received documents written by some
one, and have sent them on, whatever they are, as mine, and on their
account are calumniating me to the brethren as though there is nothing
now that pious and faithful men ought to hold in greater abhorrence than
my name.  From the beginning it has been my object to live unknown, to a
degree not reached by anyone who has considered human infirmity; but
now, just as though on the other hand it had been my purpose to make
myself notorious to the world, I have been talked about all over the
earth, and I may add all over the sea too.  For men, who go to the last
limit of impiety, and are introducing into the Churches the godless
opinion of Unlikeness, <span id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801) are
waging war against me.  Those too who hold the via media, <span
id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802) as they think, and, though they
start from the same principles, do not follow out their logical
consequences, because they are so opposed to the view of the majority,
are equally hostile to me, overwhelming me to the utmost of their
ability with their reproaches, and abstaining from no insidious attacks
against me.  But the Lord has made their endeavours vain.

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p9"></span>Is not this a grievous state of things? 
Must it not make my life painful?  I have at all events one consolation
in my troubles, my bodily infirmity.  This I am sure will not suffer me
to remain much longer in this miserable life.  No more on this point. 
You too I exhort, in your bodily infirmity, to bear yourself bravely and
worthy of the God Who has called us.  If He sees us accepting our
present circumstances with thanksgiving, He will either put away our
troubles as He did Job’s, or will requite us with the glorious crowns of
patience in the life to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[252:2800](2080285.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="ix.ccxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[252:2801](2080285.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="ix.ccxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p4"></span> An old schoolfellow of Basil’s, of whom
nothing seems to be known but what is gathered from this letter.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[252:2802](2080285.htm#fr_2801) <span
id="ix.ccxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p7"></span> *i.e.*the Anomœans.  On the use of the
word dogma for an heretical tenet, *cf*. note on p. 41.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[252:2803](2080285.htm#fr_2802) <span
id="ix.ccxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxiii-p8"></span> The Ben. note remarks that at first
sight Eustathius of Sebasteia seems to be pointed at, for in *Letter*
cxxviii. Basil speaks of him as occupying a contemptible half-and-half
position.  But, continues the note:  *Si res attentius consideretur, non
Eustathium proprie hoc loco, sed generatim eosdem hæreticos, quos contra
liber De Spiritu Sancto scriptus est, perspicuum erit notari.  Nam
medius ille Eustathii status in eo positus erat, quod nec catholicus
potentioribus Arianis catholicis videri vellet.  Nondum aperti cum
Arianis conjunctus, nec probare quæ ipsi a Basilio proponebantur.  At
quos hic commemorat Basilius, hi catholicæ doctrinæ bellum apertum in
dixerant, et quamvis dissimilitudinis impietatem fugere viderentur,
iisdem tamen, ac Anomœi, principiis stabant.  Hoc eis exprobat Basilius
in libro De Spiritu Sancto, cap. 2, ubi impias eorum de Filio ac Spiritu
sancto nugas ex principiis Aetii deductas esse demonstrat, idem hæretici
non desierunt nefaria Basillii expellendi consilia inire.  Eorum
convicia in Basilium, insidias et nefarias molitiones, furorem ac bellum
inexpiabile, vide in libro De Spiritu Sancto, num. 13, 25, 34, 52, 60,
69, 75.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Without address.](2080286)
