[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080411)  [Next](2080413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cccxl"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxl-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cccxl-p1.1"></span>Letter CCCXLV.</span>

<span id="ix.cccxl-p2"></span>Libanius to Basil.

<span id="ix.cccxl-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cccxl-p3.1"></span>It</span> is, I think, more needful for me to
defend myself for not having begun to write to you long ago, than to
offer any excuse for beginning now.  I am that same man who always used
to run up whenever you put in an appearance, and who listened with the
greatest delight to the stream of your eloquence; rejoicing to hear you;
with difficulty tearing myself away; saying to my friends, This man is
thus far superior to the daughters of Achelous, in that, like them, he
soothes, but he does not hurt as they do.  Truly it is no great thing
not to hurt; but this man’s songs are a positive gain to the hearer. 
That I should be in this state of mind, should think that I am regarded
with affection, and should seem able to speak, and yet should not
venture to write, is the mark of a man guilty of extreme idleness, and,
at the same time, inflicting punishment on himself.  For it is clear
that you will requite my poor little letter with a fine large one, and
will take care not to wrong me again.  At this word, I fancy, many will
cry out, and will crowd round with the shout, What! has Basil done any
wrong—even a small wrong?  Then so have Œacus, and Minos and his
brother. <span id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277)   In other points I
admit that you have won.  Who ever saw you that does not envy you?  But
in one thing you have sinned against me; and, if I remind you of it,
induce those who are indignant thereat not to make a public outcry.  No
one has ever come to you and asked a favour which it was easy to give,
and gone away unsuccessful.  But I am one of those who have craved a
boon without receiving it.  What then did I ask?  Often when I was with
you in camp, I was desirous of entering, with the aid of your wisdom,
into the depth of Homer’s frenzy.  If the whole is impossible, I said,
do you bring me to a portion of what I <span id="page_324">p. 324</span>
<span id="ix.cccxl-Page_324"></span>want.  I was anxious for a part,
wherein, when things have gone ill with the Greeks, Agamemnon courts
with gifts the man whom he has insulted.  When I so spoke, you laughed,
because you could not deny that you could if you liked, but were
unwilling to give.  Do I really seem to be wronged to you and to your
friends, who were indignant at my saying that you were doing a wrong?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[323:3278](2080412.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="ix.cccxl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxl-p4"></span> Rhadamanthus and Minos were both said to
be sons of Zeus and Europa.  *cf*. Verg., *Æn*. vi. 566 and Pind., *Ol*.
ii. 75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Libanius to Basil.](2080413)
