[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080031)  [Next](2080033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>The origin of the heretics’ close
observation of syllables.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>4.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.iii-p3.1"></span>The</span> petty exactitude of these men about
syllables and words is not, as might be supposed, simple and
straightforward; nor is the mischief to which it tends a small one. 
There is involved a deep and covert design against true religion.  Their
pertinacious contention is to show that the mention of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost is unlike, as though they will thence find it easy to
demonstrate that there is a variation in nature.  They have an old
sophism, invented by Aetius, the champion of this heresy, in one of
whose Letters there is a passage to the effect that things naturally
unlike are expressed in unlike terms, and, conversely, that things
expressed in unlike terms are naturally unlike.  In proof of this
statement he drags in the words of the Apostle, “One God and Father of
whom are all things,…and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all
things.” <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712)   “Whatever, then,” he
goes on, “is the relation of these terms to one another, such will be
the relation of the natures indicated by them; and as the term ‘of whom’
is unlike the term ‘by whom,’ so is the Father unlike the Son.” <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713)   On this heresy depends the idle
subtilty of these men about the phrases in question.  They accordingly
assign to God the Father, as though it were His distinctive portion and
lot, the phrase “of Whom;” to God the Son they confine the phrase “by
Whom;” to the Holy Spirit that of “in Whom,” and say that this use of
the syllables is never in<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="vii.iii-Page_4"></span>terchanged, in order that, as I have already
said, the variation of language may indicate the variation of
nature. <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714)   Verily it is
sufficiently obvious that in their quibbling about the words they are
endeavouring to maintain the force of their impious argument.

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>By the term “*of* whom” they wish to
indicate the Creator; by the term “*through* whom,” the subordinate
agent <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) or instrument; <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) by the term “*in* whom,” or “*in*
which,” they mean to shew the time or place.  The object of all this is
that the Creator of the universe <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717)
may be regarded as of no higher dignity than an instrument, and that the
Holy Spirit may appear to be adding to existing things nothing more than
the contribution derived from place or time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_712"></span>[3:713](2080032.htm#fr_712) <span
id="vii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[3:714](2080032.htm#fr_713) <span
id="vii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span> The story as told by Theodoret (Ecc. Hist.
ii. 23) is as follows:  “Constantius, on his return from the west,
passed some time at Constantinople” (*i.e.* in 360, when the synod at
Constantinople was held, shortly after that of the Isaurian Seleucia,
“substance” and “hypostasis” being declared inadmissible terms, and the
Son pronounced like the Father according to the Scriptures).  The
Emperor was urged that “Eudoxius should be convicted of blasphemy and
lawlessness.  Constantius however…replied that a decision must first be
come to on matters concerning the faith, and that afterwards the case of
Eudoxius should be enquired into.  Basilius (of Ancyra), relying on his
former intimacy, ventured boldly to object to the Emperor that he was
attacking the apostolic decrees; but Constantius took this ill, and told
Basilius to hold his tongue, for to you, said he, the disturbance of the
churches is due.  When Basilius was silenced, Eustathius (of Sebasteia)
intervened and said, Since, sir, you wish a decision to be come to on
what concerns the faith, consider the blasphemies uttered against the
Only Begotten by Eudoxius; and, as he spoke, he produced the exposition
of faith, wherein, besides many other impieties, were found the
following expressions:  Things that are spoken of in unlike terms are
unlike in substance; there is one God the Father of Whom are all things,
and one Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are all things.  Now the term ‘of
Whom’ is unlike the term ‘by Whom;’ so the Son is unlike God the
Father.  Constantius ordered this exposition of the faith to be read,
and was displeased with the blasphemy which it involved.  He therefore
asked Eudoxius if he had drawn it up.  Eudoxius instantly repudiated the
authorship, and said that it was written by Aetius.  Now Aetius…at the
present time was associated with Eunomius and Eudoxius, and, as he found
Eudoxius to be, like himself, a sybarite in luxury as well as a heretic
in faith, he chose Antioch as the most congenial place of abode, and
both he and Eunomius were fast fixtures at the couches of Eudoxius.…The
Emperor had been told all this, and now ordered Aetius to be brought
before him.  On his appearance, Constantius shewed him the document in
question, and proceeded to enquire if he was the author of its
language.  Aetius, totally ignorant of what had taken place, and unaware
of the drift of the enquiry, expected that he should win praise by
confession, and owned that he was the author of the phrases in
question.  Then the Emperor perceived the greatness of his iniquity, and
forthwith condemned him to exile and to be deported to a place in
Phrygia.”  St. Basil accompanied Eustathius and his namesake to
Constantinople on this occasion, being then only in deacon’s orders. 
(Philost. iv. 12.)  Basil of Ancyra and Eustathius in their turn
suffered banishment.  Basil, the deacon, returned to the Cappadocian
Cæsarea.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[4:715](2080032.htm#fr_714) <span
id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span> *cf*. the form of the Arian Creed as given
by Eunomius in his <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p6.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p6.2"></span>Απολογία</span> (Migne, xxx. 840.  “We believe
in one God, Father Almighty, of whom are all things; and in one only
begotten Son of God, God the word, our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom
are all things; and in one Holy Ghost, the Comforter, in whom
distribution of all grace in proportion as may be most expedient is made
to each of the Saints.”

<span id="fn_715"></span>[4:716](2080032.htm#fr_715) <span
id="vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span> *cf*. Eunomius, Liber. Apol. § 27, where
of the Son he says <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p8.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p8.2"></span>πουργός</span>.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[4:717](2080032.htm#fr_716) <span
id="vii.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span> On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p9.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p9.2"></span>ργανον</span>, a tool, as used of the Word of
God, *cf*. Nestorius in Marius Merc. Migne, p. 761 & Cyr. Alex. [Ep.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000)<span id="vii.iii-p9.3"></span>. 
Migne, x. 37.  “The creature did not give birth to the uncreated, but
gave birth to man, organ of Godhead.”  *cf*. Thomasius, Christ. Dog. i.
336.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>Mr. Johnston quotes Philo (de Cher. § 35;
i. 162. n.) as speaking of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p10.2"></span>ργανον δὲ λόγον Θεοῦ δι᾽ οὗ
κατεσκευάσθη</span> (*sc.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p10.3"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.iii-p10.4"></span>κόσμος</span>).

<span id="fn_717"></span>[4:718](2080032.htm#fr_717) <span
id="vii.iii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span> Here of course the Son is meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The systematic discussion of syllables is derived from heathen
philosophy.](2080033)
