[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080232)  [Next](2080234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.clxi"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.clxi-p1.1"></span>Letter CLX. <span
id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525) </span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p3"></span>*To Diodorus*. <span
id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526)

<span id="ix.clxi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.clxi-p5.1"></span>I have</span> received the letter which has
reached me under the name of Diodorus, but in what it contains
creditable to any one rather than to Diodorus.  Some ingenious person
seems to have assumed your name, with the intention of getting credit
with his hearers.  It appears that he was asked by some one if it was
lawful to contract marriage with his deceased wife’s sister; and,
instead of shuddering at such a question, he heard it unmoved, and quite
boldly and bravely supported the unseemly desire.  Had I his letter by
me I would have sent it you, and you would have been able to defend both
yourself and the truth.  But the person who showed it me took it away
<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="ix.clxi-Page_213"></span>again, and carried it about as a kind of
trophy of triumph against me who had forbidden it from the beginning,
declaring that he had permission in writing.  Now I have written to you
that I may attack that spurious document with double strength, and leave
it no force whereby it may injure its readers.

<span id="ix.clxi-p6"></span>2.  First of all I have to urge, what is of
most importance in such matters, our own custom, which has the force of
law, because the rules have been handed down to us by holy men.  It is
as follows:  if any one, overcome by impurity, falls into unlawful
intercourse with two sisters, this is not to be looked upon as marriage,
nor are they to be admitted at all into the Church until they have
separated from one another.  Wherefore, although it were possible to say
nothing further, the custom would be quite enough to safeguard what is
right.  But, since the writer of the letter has endeavoured to introduce
this mischief into our practice by a false argument, I am under the
necessity of not omitting the aid of reasoning; although in matters
which are perfectly plain every man’s instinctive sentiment is stronger
than argument.

<span id="ix.clxi-p7"></span>3.  It is written, he says, in Leviticus
“Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover
her nakedness, beside the other *in her life time*.” <span
id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527)   From this it is plain, he argues,
that it is lawful to take her when the wife is dead.  To this my first
answer shall be, that whatever the law says, it says to those who are
under the law; otherwise we shall be subject to circumcision, the
sabbath, abstinence from meats.  For we certainly must not, when we find
anything which falls in with our pleasures, subject ourselves to the
yoke of slavery to the law; and then, if anything in the law seems hard,
have recourse to the freedom which is in Christ.  We have been asked if
it is written that one may be taken to wife after her sister.  Let us
say what is safe and true, that it is not written.  But to deduce by
sequence of argument what is passed over in silence is the part of a
legislator, not of one who quotes the articles of the law.  Indeed, on
these terms, any one who likes will be at liberty to take the sister,
even in the lifetime of the wife.  The same sophism fits in this case
also.  It is written, he says, “Thou shalt not take a wife to vex her:” 
so that, apart from vexation, there is no prohibition to take her.  The
man who wants to indulge his desire will maintain that the relationship
of sisters is such that they cannot vex one another.  Take away the
reason given for the prohibition to live with both, and what is there to
prevent a man’s taking both sisters?  This is not written, we shall
say.  Neither is the former distinctly stated.  The deduction from the
argument allows liberty in both cases.  But a solution of the difficulty
might be found by going a little back to what is behind the enactment. 
It appears that the legislator does not include every kind of sin, but
particularly prohibits those of the Egyptians, from among whom Israel
had gone forth, and of the Canaanites among whom they were going.  The
words are as follows, “After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye
dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the doings of the land of Canaan,
whither I bring you, shall ye not do:  neither shall ye walk in their
ordinances.” <span id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528)   It is probable
that this kind of sin was not practised at that time among the
Gentiles.  Under these circumstances the lawgiver was, it may be
supposed, under no necessity of guarding against it; the unwritten
custom sufficed to condemn the crime.  How then is it that while
forbidding the greater he was silent about the less?  Because the
example of the patriarch seemed injurious to many who indulged their
flesh so far as to live with sisters in their life time.  What ought to
be my course?  To quote the Scriptures, or to work out what they leave
unsaid?  In these laws it is not written that a father and son ought not
to have the same concubine, but, in the prophet, it is thought deserving
of the most extreme condemnation, “A man and his father” it is said
“will go in unto the same maid.” <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529)   And how many other forms of
unclean lust have been found out in the devils’ school, while divine
scripture is silent about them, not choosing to befoul its dignity with
the names of filthy things and condemning their uncleanness in general
terms!  As the apostle Paul says, “Fornication and all uncleanness…let
it not be once named among you as becometh saints,” <span
id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530) thus including the unspeakable
doings of both males and females under the name of uncleanness.  It
follows that silence certainly does not give license to voluptuaries.

<span id="ix.clxi-p12"></span>4.  I, however, maintain that this point
has not been left in silence, but that the lawgiver has made a distinct
prohibition.  The words “None of you shall approach to any one that is
near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness,” <span
id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531) embraces also this form <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="ix.clxi-Page_214"></span>of
kinsmanship, for what could be more akin to a man than his own wife, or
rather than his own flesh?  “For they are no more twain but one
flesh.” <span id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532)   So, through the
wife, the sister is made akin to the husband.  For as he shall not take
his wife’s mother, nor yet his wife’s daughter, because he may not take
his own mother nor his own daughter, so he may not take his wife’s
sister, because he may not take his own sister.  And, on the other hand,
it will not be lawful for the wife to be joined with the husband’s kin,
for the rights of relationship hold good on both sides.  But, for my
part, to every one who is thinking about marriage I testify that, “the
fashion of this world passeth away,” <span
id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533) and the time is short:  “it
remaineth that both they that have wives be as though they had
none.” <span id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534)   If he improperly
quotes the charge “Increase and multiply,” <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535) I laugh at him, for not discerning
the signs of the times.  Second marriage is a remedy against
fornication, not a means of lasciviousness.  “If they cannot contain,”
it is said “let them marry;” <span id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536)
but if they marry they must not break the law.

<span id="ix.clxi-p19"></span>5.  But they whose souls are blinded by
dishonourable lust do not regard even nature, which from old time
distinguished the names of the family.  For under what relationship will
those who contract these unions name their sons?  Will they call them
brothers or cousins of one another?  For, on account of the confusion,
both names will apply.  O man, do not make the aunt the little one’s
stepmother; do not arm with implacable jealousy her who ought to cherish
them with a mother’s love.  It is only stepmothers who extend their
hatred even beyond death; other enemies make a truce with the dead;
stepmothers begin their hatred after death. <span
id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537)   The sum of what I say is this. 
If any one wants to contract a lawful marriage, the whole world is open
to him:  if he is only impelled by lust, let him be the more restricted,
“that he may know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and
honour, not in the lust of concupiscence.” <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538)   I should like to say more, but
the limits of my letter leave me no further room.  I pray that my
exhortation may prove stronger than lust, or at least that this
pollution may not be found in my own province.  Where it has been
ventured on there let it abide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[212:2526](2080233.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="ix.clxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p2"></span> Placed in 373 or 374.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[212:2527](2080233.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="ix.clxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p4"></span> On the marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister.  *cf. Letter* cxxxv.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[213:2528](2080233.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="ix.clxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p8"></span> [Lev. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018)<span id="ix.clxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[213:2529](2080233.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="ix.clxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p9"></span> [Lev. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#003)<span id="ix.clxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[213:2530](2080233.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="ix.clxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p10"></span> [Amos ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007)<span id="ix.clxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[213:2531](2080233.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="ix.clxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p11"></span> [Eph. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003)<span id="ix.clxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[213:2532](2080233.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="ix.clxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p13"></span> [Lev. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006)<span id="ix.clxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[214:2533](2080233.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="ix.clxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p14"></span> St. [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="ix.clxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[214:2534](2080233.htm#fr_2533) <span
id="ix.clxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p15"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="ix.clxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[214:2535](2080233.htm#fr_2534) <span
id="ix.clxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p16"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span id="ix.clxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[214:2536](2080233.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="ix.clxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p17"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="ix.clxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[214:2537](2080233.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="ix.clxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p18"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span id="ix.clxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[214:2538](2080233.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="ix.clxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p20"></span> On the ancient dislike of stepmothers,
*cf*. Herod. iv. 154, and Eurip., *Alcestis* 309, where they are said to
be as dangerous to the children as vipers.  Menander writes <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.clxi-p20.1"></span>δεινότερον οὐδὲν ἄλλο
μητρυιᾶς κακόν</span>.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[214:2539](2080233.htm#fr_2538) <span
id="ix.clxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.clxi-p21"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004)<span id="ix.clxi-p21.1"></span>.  So
A.V., apparently taking <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.clxi-p21.2"></span>σκεῦος</span> for *body* with Chrys.,
Theodoret, and others.  The Greek is, most simply, not “possess,” but
*get*, and is in favour of the interpretation of Theod. of Mops.,
Augustine, and others, “get his *wife*.”  See Ellicott, *Thess*. p. 53.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius on his consecration as Bishop.](2080234)
