[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080104)  [Next](2080106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXII. <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007) </span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p3"></span>*To Sophronius the Master*. <span
id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008)

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>Our</span> God—beloved brother, Gregory <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="ix.xxxiii-Page_135"></span>the
bishop, <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) shares the troubles
of the times, for he too, like everybody else, is distressed at
successive outrages, and resembles a man buffeted by unexpected blows. 
For men who have no fear of God, possibly forced by the greatness of
their troubles, are reviling him, on the ground that they have lent
Cæsarius <span id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) money.  It is not
indeed the question of any loss which is serious, for he has long learnt
to despise riches.  The matter rather is that those who have so freely
distributed all the effects of Cæsarius that were worth anything, after
really getting very little, because his property was in the hands of
slaves, and of men of no better character than slaves, did not leave
much for the executors. <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011)  
This little they supposed to be pledged to no one, and straightway spent
it on the poor, not only from their own preference, but because of the
injunctions of the dead.  For on his death bed Cæsarius is declared to
have said “I wish my goods to belong to the poor.”  In obedience then to
the wishes of Cæsarius they made a proper distribution of them.  Now,
with the poverty of a Christian, Gregory is immersed in the bustle of a
chafferer.  So I bethought me of reporting the matter to your
excellency, in order that you may state what you think proper about
Gregory to the Comes Thesaurorum, and so may honour a man whom you have
known for many years, glorify the Lord who takes as done to Himself what
is done to His servants, and honour me who am specially bound to you. 
You will, I hope, of your great sagacity devise a means of relief from
these outrageous people and intolerable annoyances.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p9"></span>2.  No one is so ignorant of Gregory as
to have any unworthy suspicion of his giving an inexact account of the
circumstances because he is fond of money.  We have not to go far to
find a proof of his liberality.  What is left of the property of
Cæsarius he gladly abandons to the Treasury, so that the property may be
kept there, and the Treasurer may give answer to those who attack it and
demand their proofs; for we are not adapted for such business.  Your
excellency may be informed that, so long as it was possible, no one went
away without getting what he wanted, and each one carried off what he
demanded without any difficulty.  The consequence indeed was that a good
many were sorry that they had not asked for more at first; and this made
still more objectors, for with the example of the earlier successful
applicants before them, one false claimant starts up after another.  I
do then entreat your excellency to make a stand against all this and to
come in, like some intervening stream, and solve the continuity of these
troubles.  You know how best you will help matters, and need not wait to
be instructed by me.  I am inexperienced in the affairs of this life,
and cannot see my way out of our difficulties.  Of your great wisdom
discover some means of help.  Be our counsellor.  Be our champion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[134:2008](2080105.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p2"></span> Placed in 369.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[134:2009](2080105.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p4"></span> *i.e.* *Magister officiorum*. 
Sophronius was a fellow student with Basil at Athens, and a friend of
Gregory of Nazianzus.  He secured the favour of Valens, who was staying
at Cæsarea in 365, by conveying him intelligence of the usurpation of
Procopius at Constantinople.  (Amm. Marc. xxv. 9.)  On the circumstance
which gave rise to this letter, *cf*. Greg. Naz., *Ep*. xviii. 
*Letters* lxxvi., xcvi., clxxvii., clxxx., cxcii., and cclxxii. are
addressed to the same correspondent, the last, as it will be seen,
indicating a breach in their long friendship.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[135:2010](2080105.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p6"></span> The word Episcopus in this and in the
following letter is supposed by Maran to have crept into the text from
the margin.  Gregory of Nazianzus is referred to, who was not then a
bishop.  Gregory the Elder, bishop of Nazianzus, was in good
circumstances, and had not adopted the monastic life.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[135:2011](2080105.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p7"></span> *cf. Letter* xxvi.  Cæsarius died in
368, leaving his brother Gregory as executor.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[135:2012](2080105.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>τούτοις</span>.  So the <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.xxxiii-p8.2"></span>mss.</span>, but the
editors here substituted <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xxxiii-p8.3"></span>τούτῳ</span>, *i.e.* Gregory, and similarly
the singular in the following words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Aburgius.](2080106)
