[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080118)  [Next](2080120.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Letter XLVI. <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107.md) </span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p3"></span>*To a fallen virgin*.

<span id="ix.xlvii-p4"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.xlvii-p4.1"></span>Now</span> is the time to quote the words of
the prophet and to say, “Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people.” <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108.md)  
Though they are wrapped in profound silence and lie stunned by their
misfortune, robbed of all sense of feeling by the fatal blow, I at all
events must not let such a fall go unlamented.  If, to Jeremiah, it
seemed that those whose bodies had been wounded in war, were worthy of
innumerable lamentations, what shall be said of such a disaster of
souls?  “My slain men,” it is said, “are not slain with the sword, nor
dead in battle.” <span id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109.md)   But I am
bewailing the sting of the real death, the grievousness of sin and the
fiery darts of the wicked one, which have savagely set on fire souls as
well as bodies.  Truly God’s laws would groan aloud on seeing so great a
pollution on the earth.  They have pronounced their prohibition of old
“Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife”; <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110.md) and through the holy gospels they
say that “Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed
adultery already with her in his heart.” <span
id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111.md)   Now they see the bride of the
Lord herself, whose head is Christ, boldly committing adultery. <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112.md)   So too would groan the
companies <span id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113.md) of the Saints. 
Phinehas, the zealous, because he can now no more take his spear into
his hands and avenge the outrage on the bodies; and John the Baptist,
because he cannot quit the realms above, as in his life he left the
wilderness, to hasten to convict iniquity, and if he must suffer for the
deed, rather lose his head than his freedom to speak.  But,
peradventure, like the blessed Abel, he too though dead yet speaks to
us, <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114.md) and now exclaims, more
loudly than John of old concerning Herodias, “It is not lawful for thee
to have her.” <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115.md)   For even if
the body of John in obedience to the law of nature has received the
sentence of God, and his tongue is silent, yet “the word of God is not
bound.” <span id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116.md)   John, when he saw
the wedlock of a fellow servant set at nought, was bold to rebuke even
to the death:  how would he feel on seeing such an outrage wreaked on
the marriage chamber of the Lord?

<span id="ix.xlvii-p14"></span>2.  You have flung away the yoke of that
divine union; you have fled from the undefiled chamber of the true King;
you have shamefully fallen into this disgraceful and impious corruption;
and now that you cannot avoid this painful charge, and have no means or
device to conceal your trouble, you rush into insolence.  The wicked man
after falling into a pit of iniquity always begins to despise, and you
are denying your actual covenant with the true bridegroom; you say that
you are not a virgin, and made no promise, although you have undertaken
and publicly professed many pledges of virginity.  Remember the good
profession which you witnessed <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117.md) before God, angels, and men. 
Remember the hallowed intercourse, the sacred company of virgins, the
assembly of the Lord, the Church of the holy.  Remember your
grandmother, grown old in Christ, still youthful and vigorous in virtue;
and your mother vying with her in the Lord, and striving to break with
ordinary life in strange and unwonted toils; remember your sister, who
copies their doings, nay, endeavours to surpass them, and goes beyond
the good deeds of her fathers in her virgin graces, and earnestly
challenges by word and deed you her sister, as she thinks, to like
efforts, while she earnestly prays that your virginity be
preserved. <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118.md)   All these call
to mind, and your holy service of God with them, your life spiritual,
though in the flesh; your conversation heavenly, though on earth. 
Remember days of calm, nights lighted up, spiritual songs, sweet music
of psalms, saintly prayers, a bed pure and undefiled, procession of
virgins, and moderate fare. <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119.md)  
What has become of your grave appearance, your gracious demeanour, your
plain dress, meet for a virgin, the beautiful blush of modesty, the
comely and bright pallor due to temperance and vigils, shining fairer
than any brilliance of complexion?  How often have you not prayed,
perhaps with tears, <span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="ix.xlvii-Page_150"></span>that you might preserve your virginity
without spot!  How often have you not written to the holy men, imploring
them to offer up prayers in your behalf, not that it should be your lot
to marry, still less to be involved in this shameful corruption, but
that you should not fall away from the Lord Jesus?  How often have you
received gifts from the Bridegroom?  Why enumerate the honours given you
for His sake by them that are His?  Why tell of your fellowship with
virgins, your progress with them, your being greeted by them with
praises on account of virginity, eulogies of virgins, letters written as
to a virgin?  Now, nevertheless, at a little blast from the spirit of
the air, “that now worketh in the children of disobedience,” <span
id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120.md) you have abjured all these; you
have changed the honourable treasure, worth fighting for at all costs,
for short-lived indulgence which does for the moment gratify the
appetite; one day you will find it more bitter than gall.

<span id="ix.xlvii-p19"></span>3.  Who would not grieve over such things
and say, “How is the faithful city become an harlot?” <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121.md)   How would not the Lord Himself
say to some of those who are now walking in the spirit of Jeremiah,
“Hast thou seen what the virgin of Israel has done to me?” <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122.md)   I betrothed her to me in trust,
in purity, in righteousness, in judgment, in pity, and in mercy; <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123.md) as I promised her through Hosea the
prophet.  But she loved strangers, and while I, her husband, was yet
alive, she is called adulteress, and is not afraid to belong to another
husband.  What then says the conductor of the bride, <span
id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124.md) the divine and blessed Paul, both
that one of old, and the later one of to-day under whose mediation and
instruction you left your father’s house and were united to the Lord? 
Might not either, in sorrow for such a trouble, say, “The thing which I
greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come
unto me.” <span id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125.md)   “I have espoused
you to one husband that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ.” <span id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126.md)   I was indeed ever
afraid “lest by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your mind should be corrupted;” <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127.md) wherefore by countless
counter-charms I strove to control the agitation of your senses, and by
countless safeguards to preserve the bride of the Lord.  So I
continually set forth the life of the unmarried maid, and described how
“the unmarried” alone “careth for the things of the Lord, that she may
be holy both in body and spirit.” <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128.md)   I used to describe the high
dignity of virginity, and, addressing you as a temple of God, used as it
were to give wings to your zeal as I strove to lift you to Jesus.  Yet
through fear of evil I helped you not to fall by the words “if any man
defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy.” <span
id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129.md)   So by my prayers I tried to make
you more secure, if by any means “your body, soul, and spirit might be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130.md)   Yet all my toil on your behalf
has been in vain.  Bitter to me has been the end of those sweet
labours.  Now I needs must groan again at that over which I ought to
have rejoiced.  You have been deceived by the serpent more bitterly than
Eve; and not only your mind but also your body has been defiled.  Even
that last horror has come to pass which I shrink from saying, and yet
cannot leave unsaid, for it is as a burning and blazing fire in my
bones, and I am undone and cannot endure.  You have taken the members of
Christ and made them the members of a harlot. <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131.md)   This is an evil with which no
other can be matched.  This outrage in life is new.  “For pass over the
Isles of Chittim and see; and send unto Chedar and consider diligently,
and see if there be such a thing.  Hath a nation changed their gods
which are yet no gods.” <span id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132.md)   But
the virgin has changed her glory, and her glory is in her shame.  The
heavens are astonished at this, and the earth is horribly afraid, saith
the Lord, for the virgin has committed two evils; she has forsaken <span
id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133.md) Me, the true and holy Bridegroom of
holy souls, and has betaken herself to an impious and lawless destroyer
of body and soul alike.  She has revolted from God, her Saviour, and
yielded her members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity. <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134.md)   She forgot me and went after her
lover <span id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135.md) from whom she will get
no good.

<span id="ix.xlvii-p35"></span>4.  It were better for him that a
mill-stone had been hanged about his neck, and that he had been cast
into the sea, than that he should have offended the virgin of the
Lord. <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136.md)   What slave ever
reached such a pitch of mad audacity as to fling himself upon his
master’s bed?  What robber ever attained such a height of folly as to
lay hands upon the very offerings of God, not <span id="page_151">p.
151</span> <span id="ix.xlvii-Page_151"></span>dead vessels, but bodies
living and enshrining a soul made after the image of God? <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137.md)

<span id="ix.xlvii-p38"></span>Who was ever known to have the hardihood,
in the heart of a city and at high noon, to mark figures of filthy swine
upon a royal statue?  He who has set at naught a marriage of man, with
no mercy shewn him, in the presence of two or three witnesses,
dies. <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138.md)   Of how much sorer
punishment, suppose you, shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden
under foot the Son of God, and defiled His pledged bride and done
despite unto the spirit of virginity? <span
id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139.md)   But the woman, he urges,
consented, and I did no violence to her against her will.  So, that
unchaste lady of Egypt raged with love for comely Joseph, but the chaste
youth’s virtue was not overcome by the frenzy of the wicked woman, and,
even when she laid her hand upon him, he was not forced into iniquity. 
But still, he urges, this was no new thing in her case; she was no
longer a maid; if I had been unwilling, she would have been corrupted by
some one else.  Yes; and it is written, the Son of Man was ordained to
be betrayed, but woe unto that man by whom He was betrayed. <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140.md)   It must needs be that offences
come, but woe to that man by whom they come. <span
id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141.md)

<span id="ix.xlvii-p43"></span>5.  In such a state of things as this,
“Shall they fall and not arise?  Shall he turn away and not
return?” <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142.md)   Why did the virgin
turn shamefully away, though she had heard Christ her bridegroom saying
through the mouth of Jeremiah, “And I said, after she had done all these
things (committed all these fornications, LXX.), turn thou unto me, but
she returned not?” <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143.md)   “Is
there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there?  Why then is not
the health of the daughter of my people recovered?” <span
id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144.md)   You might indeed find many
remedies for evil in Scripture, many medicines to save from destruction
and lead to health; the mysteries of death and resurrection, the
sentences of terrible judgment and everlasting punishment; the doctrines
of repentance and of remission of sins; all the countless illustrations
of conversion, the piece of money, the sheep, the son who wasted his
substance with harlots, who was lost and was found, who was dead and
alive again.  Let us not use these remedies for ill; by these means let
us heal our soul.  Bethink you of your last day, for you will surely
not, unlike all other women, live for ever.  The distress, the gasping
for breath, the hour of death, the imminent sentence of God, the angels
hastening on their way, the soul fearfully dismayed, and lashed to agony
by the consciousness of sin, turning itself piteously to things of this
life and to the inevitable necessity of that long life to be lived
elsewhere.  Picture to me, as it rises in your imagination, the
conclusion of all human life, when the Son of God shall come in His
glory with His angels, “For he shall come and shall not keep
silence;” <span id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145.md) when He shall come
to judge the quick and dead, to render to every one according to his
work; when that terrible trumpet with its mighty voice shall wake those
that have slept through the ages, and they that have done good shall
come forth unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation. <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146.md)   Remember the vision of Daniel,
and how he brings the judgment before us:  “I beheld till the thrones
were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white
as snow, and the hair of His head like the pure wool;…and His wheels as
burning fire.  A fiery stream issued and came forth before Him; thousand
thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before Him:  the judgment was set, and the books were opened,” <span
id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147.md) clearly disclosing in the hearing
of all, angels and men, things good and evil, things done openly and in
secret, deeds, words, and thoughts all at once.  What then must those
men be who have lived wicked lives?  Where then shall that soul hide
which in the sight of all these spectators shall suddenly be revealed in
its fulness of shame?  With what kind of body shall it sustain those
endless and unbearable pangs in the place of fire unquenched, and of the
worm that perishes and never dies, and of depth of Hades, dark and
horrible; bitter wailings, loud lamenting, weeping and gnashing of teeth
and anguish without end?  From all these woes there is no release after
death; no device, no means of coming forth from the chastisement of
pain.

<span id="ix.xlvii-p50"></span>6.  We can escape now.  While we can, let
us lift ourselves from the fall:  let us never despair of ourselves, if
only we depart from evil.  Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners.  “O come, let us worship and fall down; let us weep before
Him.” <span id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148.md)   The Word <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="ix.xlvii-Page_152"></span>Who
invited us to repentance calls aloud, “Come unto me all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” <span
id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149.md)   There is, then, a way of
salvation, if we will.  “Death in his might has swallowed up, but again
the Lord hath wiped away tears from off all faces” <span
id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150.md) of them that repent.  The Lord is
faithful in all His words. <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151.md)  
He does not lie when He says, “Though your sins be scarlet they shall be
as white as snow.  Though they be red like crimson they shall be as
wool.” <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152.md)   The great Physician
of souls, Who is the ready liberator, not of you alone, but of all who
are enslaved by sin, is ready to heal your sickness.  From Him come the
words, it was His sweet and saving lips that said, “They that be whole
need not a physician but they that are sick.…I am not come to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance.” <span
id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153.md)   What excuse have you, what excuse
has any one, when He speaks thus?  The Lord wishes to cleanse you from
the trouble of your sickness and to show you light after darkness.  The
good Shepherd, Who left them that had not wandered away, is seeking
after you.  If you give yourself to Him He will not hold back.  He, in
His love, will not disdain even to carry you on His own shoulders,
rejoicing that He has found His sheep which was lost.  The Father stands
and awaits your return from your wandering.  Only come back, and while
you are yet afar off, He will run and fall upon your neck, and, now that
you are cleansed by repentance, will enwrap you in embraces of love.  He
will clothe with the chief robe the soul that has put off the old man
with all his works; He will put a ring on hands that have washed off the
blood of death, and will put shoes on feet that have turned from the
evil way to the path of the Gospel of peace.  He will announce the day
of joy and gladness to them that are His own, both angels and men, and
will celebrate your salvation far and wide.  For “verily I say unto
you,” says He, “there is joy in heaven before God over one sinner that
repenteth.” <span id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154.md)   If any of those
who think they stand find fault because of your quick reception, the
good Father will Himself make answer for you in the words, “It was meet
that we should make merry and be glad for this” my daughter “was dead
and is alive again, was lost and is found.” <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[149:2108](2080119.htm#fr_2107.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p2"></span> Placed with the preceding.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[149:2109](2080119.htm#fr_2108.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p5"></span> [Jer. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[149:2110](2080119.htm#fr_2109.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p6"></span> [Is. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[149:2111](2080119.htm#fr_2110.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p7"></span> [Deut. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[149:2112](2080119.htm#fr_2111.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[149:2113](2080119.htm#fr_2112.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p9"></span> *cf. Letter* ccxvii. § 60.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[149:2114](2080119.htm#fr_2113.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xlvii-p10.1"></span>Τάγματα</span>, with two <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.xlvii-p10.2"></span>mss.</span>  The
alternative reading is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xlvii-p10.3"></span>πνεύματα</span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[149:2115](2080119.htm#fr_2114.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p11"></span> *cf*. [Heb. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[149:2116](2080119.htm#fr_2115.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p12"></span> [Matt. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[149:2117](2080119.htm#fr_2116.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p13"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[149:2118](2080119.htm#fr_2117.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p15"></span> *cf*. [1 Tim. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[149:2119](2080119.htm#fr_2118.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p16"></span> These words occur in the <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.xlvii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> after “moderate
fare,” below, where they make no sense.  The Ben. Ed. conjectures that
they may belong here.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[149:2120](2080119.htm#fr_2119.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p17"></span> *Vide* note above.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[150:2121](2080119.htm#fr_2120.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p18"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[150:2122](2080119.htm#fr_2121.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p20"></span> [Is. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[150:2123](2080119.htm#fr_2122.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p21"></span> *cf.* [Jer. xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[150:2124](2080119.htm#fr_2123.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p22"></span> *cf*. [Hosea ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[150:2125](2080119.htm#fr_2124.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p23"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.xlvii-p23.1"></span>νυμφαγωγός</span> was the friend who
conducted the bride from her parents’ or her own house to the
bridegroom’s.  *cf*. Luc., *Dial Deor*. 20, 16.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[150:2126](2080119.htm#fr_2125.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p24"></span> [Job iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#025.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[150:2127](2080119.htm#fr_2126.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p25"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[150:2128](2080119.htm#fr_2127.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p26"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[150:2129](2080119.htm#fr_2128.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p27"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[150:2130](2080119.htm#fr_2129.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[150:2131](2080119.htm#fr_2130.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p29"></span> [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[150:2132](2080119.htm#fr_2131.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p30"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[150:2133](2080119.htm#fr_2132.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p31"></span> [Jer.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[150:2134](2080119.htm#fr_2133.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p32"></span> *cf*. [Jer.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p32.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[150:2135](2080119.htm#fr_2134.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p33"></span> *cf*. [Rom. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[150:2136](2080119.htm#fr_2135.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p34"></span> *cf*. [Hosea ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[150:2137](2080119.htm#fr_2136.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p36"></span> *cf*. [Luke xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[151:2138](2080119.htm#fr_2137.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p37"></span> St. Basil has no idea of the image and
likeness of God being a bodily likeness, as in the lines of Xenophanes.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[151:2139](2080119.htm#fr_2138.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p39"></span> *i.e.* by the old Jewish law.  [Deut.
xvii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.xlvii-p39.1"></span>.  Adultery was not capital under the Lex
Julia, but was made so by Constantine.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[151:2140](2080119.htm#fr_2139.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p40"></span> *cf*. [Heb. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[151:2141](2080119.htm#fr_2140.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p41"></span> *cf*. [Mark xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#021.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[151:2142](2080119.htm#fr_2141.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p42"></span> *cf*. [Matt. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[151:2143](2080119.htm#fr_2142.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p44"></span> [Jer. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[151:2144](2080119.htm#fr_2143.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p45"></span> [Jer. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[151:2145](2080119.htm#fr_2144.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p46"></span> [Jer. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[151:2146](2080119.htm#fr_2145.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p47"></span> [Ps. l.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[151:2147](2080119.htm#fr_2146.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p48"></span> *cf*. [John v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[151:2148](2080119.htm#fr_2147.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p49"></span> [Dan.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[151:2149](2080119.htm#fr_2148.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p51"></span> [Ps. xcv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p51.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[152:2150](2080119.htm#fr_2149.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p52"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[152:2151](2080119.htm#fr_2150.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p53"></span> [Is. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p53.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[152:2152](2080119.htm#fr_2151.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p54"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p54.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[152:2153](2080119.htm#fr_2152.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p55"></span> [Is. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[152:2154](2080119.htm#fr_2153.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p56"></span> [Matt.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[152:2155](2080119.htm#fr_2154.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p57"></span> *cf*. [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[152:2156](2080119.htm#fr_2155.md) <span
id="ix.xlvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvii-p58"></span> [Luke xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#032.md)<span id="ix.xlvii-p58.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Gregory.](2080120.md)
