[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080029)  [Next](2080031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="vii.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>ΤΟΥ ΑΓΙΟΥ ΒΑΧΙΛΕΙΟΥ ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΠΝΕΥΜΑΤΟΧ
ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>THE BOOK OF SAINT BASIL ON THE SPIRIT.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="vii.i-p3.1"></span>DE SPIRITU SANCTO.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>The</span> heresy of Arius lowered the dignity of
the Holy Ghost as well as that of the Son.  He taught that the Three
Persons of the Holy Trinity are wholly unlike one another both in
essence and in glory.  “There is a triad, not in equal glories;” “one
more glorious than the other in their glories to an infinite degree.” 
So says the *Thalia*, quoted in Ath. de Syn. § 15.  But the Nicene
definition, while it was precise in regard to the Son, left the doctrine
of the Holy Ghost comparatively open, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p7.2"></span>Πιστεύομεν εἰς τὸ ῞Αγιον Πνεῦμα,</span>) not from
hesitation or doubt, but because this side of Arian speculation was not
prominent.  (*Cf*. Basil, Letters cxxv. and ccxxvi. and Dr. Swete in
D.C.B. iii. 121.)  It was the expulsion of Macedonius from the see of
Constantinople in 360 which brought “Macedonianism” to a head.  He was
put there by Arians as an Arian.  Theodoret (Ecc. Hist. ii. 5) explains
how disagreement arose.  He was an upholder, if not the author, of the
watchword <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p7.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p7.4"></span>μοιούσιον</span> (Soc. ii.
45) (but many supporters of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p7.5"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p7.6"></span>μοιούσιον</span> (*e.g*., Eustathius of
Sebasteia) shrank from calling the Holy Ghost a creature.  So the
Pneumatomachi began to be clearly marked off.  The various creeds of the
Arians and semi-Arians did not directly attack the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost, though they did not accept the doctrine of the essential unity of
the Three Persons.  (*Cf*. Hahn, *Bibliothek der Symbole*, pp. 148–174,
quoted by Swete.)  But their individual teaching went far beyond their
confessions.  The Catholic theologians were roused to the danger, and on
the return of Athanasius from his third exile, a council was held at
Alexandria which resulted in the first formal ecclesiastical
condemnation of the depravers of the Holy Ghost, in the *Tomus ad
Antiochenos* (*q.v*. with the preface on p. 481 of Ath. in the edition
of this series.  *Cf*. also Ath. ad Serap. i. 2, 10).  In the next ten
years the Pneumatomachi, Macedonians, or Marathonians, so called from
Marathonius, bishop of Nicomedia, whose support to the party was perhaps
rather pecuniary than intellectual (Nicephorus H.E. ix. 47), made head,
and were largely identified with the Homoiousians.  In 374 was published
the *Ancoratus* of St. Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis in Cyprus, written
in 373, and containing two creeds (*vide* Heurtley de F. et Symb. pp.
14–18), the former of which is nearly identical with the Confession of
Constantinople.  It expresses belief in <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p7.7"></span>τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ ῞Αγιον, Κύριον, καὶ Ζωοποιὸν, τὸ ἐκ
τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, τὸ σὺν Πατρὶ καὶ Υἱ& 254· συμπροσκυνοί μενον
καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον, τὸ λαλῆσαν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν</span>.  It is in this
same year, 374, that Amphilochius, the first cousin of Gregory of
Nazianzus and friend and spiritual son of Basil, paid the first of his
annual autumn visits to Cæsarea (Bishop Lightfoot, D.C.B. i. 105) and
there urged St. Basil to clear up all doubt as to the true doctrine of
the Holy Spirit by writing a treatise on the subject.  St. Basil
complied, and, on the completion of the work, had it engrossed on
parchment (Letter ccxxxi.) and sent it to Amphilochius, to whom he
dedicated it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2080031)
