[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080156)  [Next](2080158.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.lxxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXIV. <span
id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288.md) </span>

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p3"></span>*To the President*. <span
id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289.md)

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.lxxxv-p5.1"></span>You</span> will hardly believe what I am about
to write, but it must be written for truth’s sake.  I have been very
anxious to communicate as often as possible with your excellency, but
when I got this opportunity of writing a letter I did not at once seize
the lucky chance.  I hesitated and hung back.  What is astonishing is,
that when I got what I had been praying for, I did not take it.  The
reason of this is that I am really ashamed to write to you every time,
not out of pure friendship, but with the object of getting something. 
But then I bethought me (and when you consider it, I do hope you will
not think that I communicate with you more for the sake of a bargain
than of friendship) that there must be a difference between the way in
which one approaches a magistrate and a private man.  We do not accost a
physician as we do any mere nobody; nor a magistrate as we do a private
individual.  We try to get some advantage from the skill of the one and
the position of the other.  <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="ix.lxxxv-Page_174"></span>Walk in the sun, and your shadow will
follow you, whether you will or not.  Just so intercourse with the great
is followed by an inevitable gain, the succour of the distressed.  The
first object of my letter is fulfilled in my being able to greet your
excellency.  Really, if I had no other cause for writing at all, this
must be regarded as an excellent topic.  Be greeted then, my dear Sir;
may you be preserved by all the world while you fill office after
office, and succour now some now others by your authority.  Such
greeting I am wont to make; such greeting is only due to you from all
who have had the least experience of your goodness in your
administration.

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p6"></span>2.  Now, after this prayer, hear my
supplication on behalf of the poor old man whom the imperial order had
exempted from serving in any public capacity; though really I might say
that old age anticipated the Emperor in giving him his discharge.  You
have yourself satisfied the boon conferred on him by the higher
authority, at once from respect to natural infirmity, and, I think, from
regard to the public interest, lest any harm should come to the state
from a man growing imbecile through age.  But how, my dear Sir, have you
unwittingly dragged him into public life, by ordering his grandson, a
child not yet four years old, to be on the roll of the senate?  You have
done the very same thing as to drag the old man, through his descendant,
again into public business.  But now, I do implore you, have mercy on
both ages, and free both on the ground of what in each case is
pitiable.  The one never saw father or mother, never knew them, but from
his very cradle was deprived of both, and has entered into life by the
help of strangers:  the other has been preserved so long as to have
suffered every kind of calamity.  He saw a son’s untimely death; he saw
a house without successors; now, unless you devise some remedy
commensurate with your kindness, he will see the very consolation of his
bereavement made an occasion of innumerable troubles, for, I suppose,
the little lad will never act as senator, collect tribute, or pay
troops; but once again the old man’s white hairs must be shamed. 
Concede a favour in accordance with the law and agreeable to nature;
order the boy to be allowed to wait till he come to man’s estate, and
the old man to await death quietly on his bed.  Let others, if they
will, urge the pretext of press of business and inevitable necessity. 
But, even if you are under a press of business, it would not be like you
to despise the distressed, to slight the law, or to refuse to yield to
the prayers of your friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[173:2289](2080157.htm#fr_2288.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p2"></span> Placed in the year 372.

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[173:2290](2080157.htm#fr_2289.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxv-p4"></span> Probably Elias.  *cf. Letters* xciv. and
xcvi.  The orphan grandson of the aged man in whose behalf Basil writes
had been placed on the Senatorial roll, and the old man in consequence
was compelled to serve again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the oath ought not to be taken.](2080158.md)
