[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080402)  [Next](2080404.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cccxxxi"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cccxxxi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCCXXXVI.</span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p2"></span>Libanius to Basilius.

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p3"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cccxxxi-p3.1"></span>After</span> some little time a young
Cappadocian has reached me.  One gain to me is that he is a
Cappadocian.  But this Cappadocian is one of the first rank.  This is
another gain.  Further, he brings me a letter from the admirable Basil. 
This is the greatest gain of all.  You think that I have forgotten you. 
I had great respect for you in your youth.  I saw you vying with old men
in self-restraint, and this in a city teeming with pleasures.  I saw you
already in possession of considerable learning.  Then you thought that
you ought also to see Athens, and you persuaded Celsus to accompany
you.  Happy Celsus, to be dear to you!  Then you returned, and lived at
home, and I said to myself, What, I wonder, is Basil about now?  To what
occupation has he betaken himself?  Is he following the ancient orators,
and practising in the courts?  Or is he turning the sons of fortunate
fathers into orators?  Then there came <span id="page_321">p. 321</span>
<span id="ix.cccxxxi-Page_321"></span>those who reported to me that you
were adopting a course of life better than any of these, and were,
rather, bethinking you how you might win the friendship of God than
heaps of gold, I blessed both you and the Cappadocians; you, for making
this your aim; them, for being able to point to so noble a
fellow-countryman.

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p4"></span>2.  I am aware that the Firmus, whom you
mention, has continually won everywhere; <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267.md) hence his great power as a
speaker.  But with all the eulogies that have been bestowed on him, I am
not aware that he has ever received such praise as I have heard of in
your letter.  For what a credit it is to him, that it should be you who
declare that his reputation is inferior to none!

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p6"></span>Apparently, you have despatched this
young man to me before seeing Firminus; had you done so, your letters
would not have failed to mention him.  What is Firminus now doing or
intending to do?  Is he still anxious to be married?  Or is all that
over now?  Are the claims of the senate heavy on him?  Is he obliged to
stay where he is?  Is there any hope of his taking to study again ?  Let
him send me an answer, and I trust it may be satisfactory.  If it be a
distressing one, at least it will relieve him from seeing me at his
door.  And if Firminus had been now at Athens, what would your senators
have done?  Would they have sent the Salaminia <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268.md) after him?  You see that it is only
by your fellow-countrymen that I am wronged.  Yet I shall never cease to
love and praise the Cappadocians.  I should like them to be better
disposed to me, but, if they continue to act as they do, I shall bear
it.  Firminus was four months with me, and was not a day idle.  You will
know how much he has acquired, and perhaps will not complain.  As to his
being able to come here again, what ally can I call in?  If your
senators are right-minded, as men of education ought to be, they will
honour me in the second case, since they grieved me in the first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[321:3268](2080403.htm#fr_3267.md) <span
id="ix.cccxxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.cccxxxi-p5.1"></span>πανταχοῦ διετέλεσε κρατῶν</span>.  “*Ubique
constantem perdurasse*.”  Ben. Ed.  “*Ubique firma memoria fuerit*.” 
Combefis.  Firmus may possibly be the father of the young student.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[321:3269](2080403.htm#fr_3268.md) <span
id="ix.cccxxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cccxxxi-p7"></span> The allusion is to the “Salaminia,” one
of the two sacred or state vessels of the Athenian government.  The
“Paralus” and the “Salaminia” were both Triremes, the latter being
called also “Delia” and “Theoris,” because it was used to convey the
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.cccxxxi-p7.1"></span>θεωροὶ</span> to
Delos.  State criminals were conveyed by them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Basil to Libanius.](2080404.md)
