[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080049)  [Next](2080051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.</span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p2"></span>Against those who maintain that the Spirit
is in the rank neither of a servant nor of a master, but in that of the
free.

<span id="vii.xxi-p3"></span>51.  <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>He</span> is not a slave, it is said; not a
master, but free.  Oh the terrible insensibility, the pitiable audacity,
of them that maintain this!  Shall I rather lament in them their
ignorance or their blasphemy?  They try to insult the doctrines that
concern the divine nature <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) by
comparing them with the human, and endeavour to apply to the ineffable
nature of God that common custom of human life whereby the difference of
degrees is variable, not perceiving that among men no one is a slave by
nature.  For men are either brought under a yoke of slavery by conquest,
as when prisoners are taken in war; or they are enslaved on account of
poverty, as the Egyptians were oppressed by Pharaoh; or, by a wise and
mysterious dispensation, the worst children are by their fathers’ order
condemned to serve the wiser and the better; <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) and this any righteous enquirer
into the circumstances would declare to be not a sentence of
condemnation but a benefit.  For it is more profitable that the man who,
through lack of intelligence, has no natural principle of rule within
himself, should become the chattel of another, to the end that, being
guided by the reason of his master, he may be like a chariot with a
charioteer, or a boat with a steersman seated at the tiller.  For this
reason Jacob by his father’s blessing became lord of Esau, <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) in order that the foolish son, who
had not intelligence, his proper guardian, might, even though he wished
it not, be benefited by his prudent brother.  So Canaan shall be “a
servant unto his brethren” <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152)
because, since his father Ham was unwise, he was uninstructed in
virtue.  In this world, then, it is thus that men are made slaves, but
they who have escaped poverty or war, or do not require the tutelage of
others, are free.  It follows that even though one man be called master
and another servant, nevertheless, both in view of our mutual equality
of rank and as chattels of our Creator, we are all fellow slaves.  But
in that other world what can you bring out of bondage?  For no sooner
were they created than bondage was commenced.  The heavenly bodies
exercise no rule over one another, for they are unmoved by ambition, but
all bow down to God, and render to Him alike the awe which is due to Him
as Master and the glory which falls to Him as Creator.  For “a son
honoureth his father and a servant his master,” <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) and from all God asks one of these
two things; for “if I then be a Father where is my honour? and if I be a
Master where is my fear?” <span id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154)  
Otherwise the life of all men, if it were not under the oversight of a
master, would be most pitiable; as is the condition of the apostate
powers who, because they stiffen their neck against God Almighty, fling
off the reins of their bondage,—not that their natural constitution is
different; but the cause is in their disobedient disposition to their
Creator.  Whom then do you call free?  Him who has no King?  Him who has
neither power to rule another nor willingness to be ruled?  Among all
existent beings no such nature is to be found.  To entertain such a
conception of the Spirit is obvious blasphemy.  If He is a creature of
course He serves with all the rest, for “all things,” it is said “are
thy servants,” <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) but if He is
above Creation, then He shares in royalty. <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[32:1150](2080050.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="vii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>τὰ τῆς θεολογίας δόγματα</span>.  *cf*. note on
§ 66.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[32:1151](2080050.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="vii.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p5"></span> *cf*. [Gen. ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[32:1152](2080050.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="vii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p6"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029)<span id="vii.xxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[32:1153](2080050.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="vii.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p7"></span> [Gen. ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[32:1154](2080050.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="vii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p8"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[32:1155](2080050.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="vii.xxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p9"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="vii.xxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[32:1156](2080050.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="vii.xxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p10"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span id="vii.xxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[32:1157](2080050.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="vii.xxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p11"></span> St. Basil’s view of slavery is that (a)
as regards our relation to God, all created beings are naturally in a
condition of subservience to the Creator; (b) as regards our
relationship to one another, slavery is not of nature, but of convention
and circumstance.  How far he is here at variance with the well known
account of slavery given by Aristotle in the first book of the
*Politics* will depend upon the interpretation we put upon the word
“nature.”  “Is there,” asks Aristotle, “any one intended by nature to be
a slave, and for whom such a condition is expedient and right, or rather
is not all slavery a violation of nature?  There is no difficulty in
answering this question, on grounds both of reason and fact.  For that
some should rule, and others be ruled, is a thing not only necessary,
but expedient; from the hour of their birth some are marked out for
subjection, others for rule.…Where, then, there is such a difference as
that between soul and body, or between men and animals (as in the case
of those whose business it is to use their body, and who can do nothing
better), the lower sort are by nature slaves, and it is better for them,
as for all inferiors, that they should be under the rule of a master.…It
is clear, then, that some men are by nature free and others slaves, and
that for these latter slavery is both expedient and right.”  *Politics*,
Bk. 1, Sec. 5.  Here by *Nature* seems to be meant something like
Basil’s “lack of intelligence,” and of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxi-p11.1"></span>τὸ κατὰ φύσιν ἄρχον</span>, which makes it
“profitable” for one man to be the chattel of another (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxi-p11.2"></span>κτῆμα</span> is livestock,
especially *mancipium*.  *cf*. Shakespeare’s K. and Pet., “She is my
goods, my chattels.”  “Chattel” is a doublet of “cattle”).  St. Basil
and Aristotle are at one as to the advantage to the weak slave of his
having a powerful protector; and this, no doubt, is the point of view
from which slavery can be best apologized for.

<span id="vii.xxi-p12"></span>Christianity did indeed do much to better
the condition of the slave by asserting his spiritual freedom, but at
first it did little more than emphasize the latter philosophy of
heathendom, <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxi-p12.1"></span>εἰ σῶμα
δοῦλον, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ νοῦς ἐλεύθερος</span> (Soph., *frag. incert*. xxii.), and
gave the highest meaning to such thoughts as those expressed in the late
*Epigram* of Damascius (c. 530) on a dead slave:

<span id="vii.xxi-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxi-p13.1"></span>Ζωσίμη ἡ πρὶν ἐοῦσα μόνῳ τῷ σώματι
δούλη,</span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p14"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxi-p14.1"></span>Καὶ τῷ σώματι νῦν εὗρεν ἐλευθερίην.</span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p15"></span>It is thought less of a slave’s servitude
to fellow man than of the slavery of bond and free alike to evil.  *cf*.
Aug., *De Civit. Dei*. iv. cap. iii.  “*Bonus etiamsi serviat liber
est:  malus autem si regnat servus est:  nec est unius hominis, sed quod
gravius est tot dominorum quot vitiorum.*”  Chrysostom even explains St.
Paul’s non-condemnation of slavery on the ground that its existence,
with that of Christian liberty, was a greater moral triumph than its
abolition.  (*In Genes. Serm*. v. 1.)  Even so late as the sixth century
the legislation of Justinian, though protective, supposed no natural
liberty.  “*Expedit enim respublicæ ne quis re suâ utatur male*.” 
*Instit*. i. viii. quoted by Milman, *Lat. Christ*. ii. 14.  We must not
therefore be surprised at not finding in a Father of the fourth century
an anticipation of a later development of Christian sentiment.  At the
same time it was in the age of St. Basil that “the language of the
Fathers assumes a bolder tone” (*cf. Dict. Christ. Ant*. ii. 1905),and
“in the correspondence of Gregory Nazianzen we find him referring to a
case where a slave had been made bishop over a small community in the
desert.  The Christian lady to whom he belonged endeavoured to assert
her right of ownership, for which she was severely rebuked by St. Basil
(*cf. Letter* CXV.)  After St. Basil’s death she again claimed the
slave, whereupon Gregory addressed her a letter of grave remonstrance at
her unchristian desire to recall his brother bishop from his sphere of
duty.  *Ep*. 79,” *id*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proof from Scripture that the Spirit is called Lord.](2080051)
