[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080367)  [Next](2080369.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxcvi"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxcvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXCV.</span>

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p2"></span>To monks.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxcvi-p3.1"></span>I do</span> not think that I need further
commend you to God’s grace, after the words that I addressed to you in
person.  I then bade you adopt the life in common, after the manner of
living of the Apostles.  This you accepted as wholesome instruction, and
gave God thanks for it.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p4"></span>Thus your conduct was due, not so much to
the words I spoke, as to my instructions to put them into practice,
conducive at once to your advantage who accepted, to my comfort who gave
you the advice, and to the glory and praise of Christ, by Whose name we
are called.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p5"></span>For this reason I have sent to you our
well-beloved brother, that he may learn of your zeal, may quicken your
sloth, may report to me of opposition.  For great is my desire to see
you all united in one body, and to hear that you are not content to live
a life without witness; but have undertaken to be both watchful of each
other’s diligence, and witnesses of each other’s success.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p6"></span>Thus will each of you receive a reward in
full, not only on his own behalf, but also for his brother’s progress. 
And, as is fitting, you will be a source of mutual profit, both by your
words and deeds, as a result of constant intercourse and exhortation. 
But above all I exhort you to be mindful of the faith of the Fathers,
and not to be shaken by those who in your retirement would try to wrest
you from it.  For you know that unless illumined by faith in God,
strictness of life availeth nothing; nor will a right confession of
faith, if void of good works, be able to present you before the Lord.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p7"></span>Faith and works must be joined:  so shall
the man of God be perfect, and his life not halt through any
imperfection.

<span id="ix.ccxcvi-p8"></span>For the faith which saves us, as saith
the Apostle, is that which worketh by love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To a widow.](2080369.md)
