[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080289)  [Next](2080291) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXVII.</span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p2"></span>*To Amphilochius, the Canons*. <span
id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p4.1"></span>On</span> my return from a long journey (for
I have been into Pontus on ecclesiastical business, and to visit my
relations) with my body weak and ill, and my spirits considerably
broken, I took your reverence’s letter into my hand.  No sooner did I
receive the tokens of that voice which to me is of all voices the
sweetest, and of that hand that I love so well, than I forgot all my
troubles.  And if I was made so much more cheerful by the receipt of
your letter, you ought to be able to conjecture at what value I price
your actual presence.  May this be granted me by the Holy One, whenever
it may be convenient to you and you yourself send me an invitation.  And
if you were to come to the house at Euphemias it would indeed be
pleasant for me to meet you, escaping from my vexations here, and
hastening to your unfeigned affection.  Possibly also for other reasons
I may be compelled to go as far as Nazianzus by the sudden departure of
the very God-beloved bishop Gregory.  How or why this has come to pass,
so far I have no information. <span id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826)
  The man about whom I had spoken to your excellency, and whom you
expected to be ready by this time, has, you must know, fallen ill of a
lingering disease, and is moreover now suffering from an affection of
the eyes, arising from his old complaint and from the illness which has
now befallen him, and he is quite unfit to do any work.  I have no one
else with me.  It is consequently better, although the matter was left
by them to me, for some one to be put forward by them.  And indeed one
cannot but think that the expressions were used merely as a necessary
form, and that what they really wished was what they originally
requested, that the person selected for the leadership should be one of
themselves.  If there is any one of the lately baptized, <span
id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827) whether Macedonius approve or not,
let him be appointed.  You will instruct him in his duties, the Lord,
<span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="ix.ccxviii-Page_256"></span>Who in all things cooperates with you,
granting you His grace for this work also.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p7"></span>LI.  As to the clergy, the Canons have
enjoined without making any distinction that one penalty is assigned for
the lapsed,—ejection from the ministry, whether they be in orders <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828) or remain in the ministry which is
conferred without imposition of hands.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p9"></span>LII.  The woman who has given birth to a
child and abandoned it in the road, if she was able to save it and
neglected it, or thought by this means to hide her sin, or was moved by
some brutal and inhuman motive, is to be judged as in a case of murder. 
If, on the other hand, she was unable to provide for it. and the child
perish from exposure and want of the necessities of life, the mother is
to be pardoned.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p10"></span>LIII.  The widowed slave is not guilty
of a serious fall if she adopts a second marriage under colour of rape. 
She is not on this ground open to accusation.  It is rather the object
than the pretext which must be taken into account, but it is clear that
she is exposed to the punishment of digamy. <span
id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p12"></span>LIV.  I know that I have already
written to your reverence, so far as I can, on the distinctions to be
observed in cases of involuntary homicide, <span
id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) and on this point I can say no
more.  It rests with your intelligence to increase or lessen the
severity of the punishment as each individual case may require.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p14"></span>LV.  Assailants of robbers, if they are
outside, are prohibited from the communion of the good thing. <span
id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831)   If they are clerics they are
degraded from their orders.  For, it is said, “All they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword.” <span
id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p17"></span>LVI.  The intentional homicide, who has
afterwards repented, will be excommunicated from the sacrament <span
id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833) for twenty years.  The twenty years
will be appointed for him as follows:  for four he ought to weep,
standing outside the door of the house of prayer, beseeching the
faithful as they enter in to offer prayer in his behalf, and confessing
his own sin.  After four years he will be admitted among the hearers,
and during five years will go out with them.  During seven years he will
go out with the kneelers, <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834)
praying.  During four years he will only stand with the faithful, and
will not take part in the oblation.  On the completion of this period he
will be admitted to participation of the sacrament.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p20"></span>LVII.  The unintentional homicide will
be excluded for ten years from the sacrament.  The ten years will be
arranged as follows:  For two years he will weep, for three years he
will continue among the hearers; for four he will be a kneeler; and for
one he will only stand.  Then he will be admitted to the holy rites.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p21"></span>LVIII.  The adulterer will be excluded
from the sacrament for fifteen years.  During four he will be a weeper,
and during five a hearer, during four a kneeler, and for two a slander
without communion.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p22"></span>LIX.  The fornicator will not be
admitted to participation in the sacrament for seven years; <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835) weeping two, hearing two, kneeling
two, and standing one:  in the eighth he will be received into
communion.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p24"></span>LX.  The woman who has professed
virginity and broken her promise will complete the time appointed in the
case of <span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="ix.ccxviii-Page_257"></span>adultery in her continence. <span
id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836)   The same rule will be observed in
the case of men who have professed a solitary life and who lapse.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p26"></span>LXI.  The thief, if he have repented of
his own accord and charged himself, shall only be prohibited from
partaking of the sacrament for a year; if he be convicted, for two
years.  The period shall be divided between kneeling and standing.  Then
let him be held worthy of communion.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p27"></span>LXII.  He who is guilty of unseemliness
with males will be under discipline for the same time as adulterers.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p28"></span>LXIII.  He who confesses his iniquity
in the case of brutes shall observe the same time in penance.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p29"></span>LXIV.  Perjurers shall be
excommunicated for ten years; weeping for two, hearing for three,
kneeling for four, and standing only during one year; then they shall be
held worthy of communion.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p30"></span>LXV.  He who confesses magic or sorcery
shall do penance for the time of murder, and shall be treated in the
same manner as he who convicts himself of this sin.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p31"></span>LXVI.  The tomb breaker shall be
excommunicated for ten years, weeping for two, hearing for three,
kneeling for four, standing for one, then he shall be admitted.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p32"></span>LXVII.  Incest with a sister shall
incur penance for the same time as murder.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p33"></span>LXVIII.  The union of kindred within
the prohibited degrees of marriage, if detected as having taken place in
acts of sin, shall receive the punishment of adultery. <span
id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p35"></span>LXIX.  The Reader who has intercourse
with his betrothed before marriage, shall be allowed to read after a
year’s suspension, remaining without advancement.  If he has had secret
intercourse without betrothal, he shall be deposed from his ministry. 
So too the minister. <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p37"></span>LXX.  The deacon who has been polluted
in lips, and has confessed his commission of this sin, shall be removed
from his ministry.  But he shall be permitted to partake of the
sacrament together with the deacons.  The same holds good in the case of
a priest.  If any one be detected in a more serious sin, whatever be his
degree, he shall be deposed. <span id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p40"></span>LXXI.  Whoever is aware of the
commission of any one of the aforementioned sins, and is convicted
without having confessed, shall be under punishment for the same space
of time as the actual perpetrator.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p41"></span>LXXII.  He who has entrusted
himself <span id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840) to soothsayers, or
any such persons, shall be under discipline for the same time as the
homicide.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p43"></span>LXXIII.  He who has denied Christ, and
sinned against the mystery of salvation, ought to weep all his life
long, and is bound to remain in penitence, being deemed worthy of the
sacrament in the hour of death, through faith in the mercy of God.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p44"></span>LXXIV.  If, however, each man who has
committed the former sins is made good, through penitence, <span
id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841) he to whom is com<span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span id="ix.ccxviii-Page_258"></span>mitted
by the loving-kindness of God the power of loosing and binding <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842) will not be deserving of
condemnation, if he become less severe, as he beholds the exceeding
greatness of the penitence of the sinner, so as to lessen the period of
punishment, for the history in the Scriptures informs us that all who
exercise penitence <span id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) with
greater zeal quickly receive the loving-kindness of God. <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p49"></span>LXXV.  The man who has been polluted
with his own sister, either on the father’s or the mother’s side, must
not be allowed to enter the house of prayer, until he has given up his
iniquitous and unlawful conduct.  And, after he has come to a sense of
that fearful sin, let him weep for three years standing at the door of
the house of prayer, and entreating the people as they go in to prayer
that each and all will mercifully offer on his behalf their prayers with
earnestness to the Lord.  After this let him be received for another
period of three years to hearing alone, and while hearing the Scriptures
and the instruction, let him be expelled and not be admitted to prayer. 
Afterwards, if he has asked it with tears and has fallen before the Lord
with contrition of heart and great humiliation, let kneeling be accorded
to him during other three years.  Thus, when he shall have worthily
shown the fruits of repentance, let him be received in the tenth year to
the prayer of the faithful without oblation; and after standing with the
faithful in prayer for two years, then, and not till then, let him be
held worthy of the communion of the good thing.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p50"></span>LXXVI.  The same rule applies to those
who take their own daughters in law.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p51"></span>LXXVII.  He who abandons the wife,
lawfully united to him, is subject by the sentence of the Lord to the
penalty of adultery.  But it has been laid down as a canon by our
Fathers that such sinners should weep for a year, be hearers for two
years, in kneeling for three years, stand with the faithful in the
seventh; and thus be deemed worthy of the oblation, if they have
repented with tears. <span id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p53"></span>LXXVIII.  Let the same rule hold good
in the case of those who marry two sisters, although at different
times. <span id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p55"></span>LXXIX.  Men who rage after their
stepmothers are subject to the same canon as those who rage after their
sisters. <span id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p57"></span>LXXX.  On polygamy the Fathers are
silent, as being brutish and altogether inhuman.  The sin seems to me
worse than fornication.  It is therefore reasonable that such sinners
should be subject to the canons; namely a year’s weeping, three years
kneeling and then reception. <span id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848)

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p59"></span>LXXXI.  During the invasion of the
barbarians many men have sworn heathen oaths, tasted things unlawfully
offered them in magic temples and so have broken their faith in God. 
Let regulations be made in the case of these men in accordance with the
canons laid down by our Fathers. <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849)   Those <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="ix.ccxviii-Page_259"></span>who have endured
grievous tortures and have been forced to denial, through inability to
sustain the anguish, may be excluded for three years, hearers for two,
kneelers for three, and so be received into communion.  Those who have
abandoned their faith in God, laying hands on the tables of the demons
and swearing heathen oaths, without under going great violence, should
be excluded for three years, hearers for two.  When they have prayed for
three years as kneelers, and have stood other three with the faithful in
supplication, then let them be received into the communion of the good
thing.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p61"></span>LXXXII.  As to perjurers, if they have
broken their oaths under violent compulsion, they are under lighter
penalties and may therefore be received after six years.  If they break
their faith without compulsion, let them be weepers for two years,
hearers for three, pray as kneelers for five, during two be received
into the communion of prayer, without oblation, and so at last, after
giving proof of due repentance, they shall be restored to the communion
of the body of Christ.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p62"></span>LXXXIII.  Consulters of soothsayers and
they who follow heathen customs, or bring persons into their houses to
discover remedies and to effect purification, should fall under the
canon of six years.  After weeping a year, hearing a year, kneeling for
three years and standing with the faithful for a year so let them be
received.

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p63"></span>LXXXIV.  I write all this with a view
to testing the fruits of repentance. <span
id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850)   I do not decide such matters
absolutely by time, but I give heed to the manner of penance.  If men
are in a state in which they find it hard to be weaned from their own
ways and choose rather to serve the pleasures of the flesh than to serve
the Lord, and refuse to accept the Gospel life, there is no common
ground between me and them.  In the midst of a disobedient and
gainsaying people I have been taught to hear the words “Save thy own
soul.” <span id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851)   Do not then let us
consent to perish together with such sinners.  Let us fear the awful
judgment.  Let us keep before our eyes the terrible day of the
retribution of the Lord.  Let us not consent to perish in other men’s
sins, for if the terrors of the Lord have not taught us, if so great
calamities have not brought us to feel that it is because of our
iniquity that the Lord has abandoned us, and given us into the hands of
barbarians, that the people have been led captive before our foes and
given over to dispersion, because the bearers of Christ’s name have
dared such deeds; if they have not known nor understood that it is for
these reasons that the wrath of God has come upon us, what common ground
of argument have I with them?

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p66"></span>But we ought to testify to them day and
night, alike in public and in private.  Let us not consent to be drawn
away with them in their wickedness.  Let us above all pray that we may
do them good, and rescue them from the snare of the evil one.  If we
cannot do this, let us at all events do our best to save our own souls
from everlasting damnation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[255:2826](2080290.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p3"></span> The third canonical letter, written on
Basil’s return from Pontus, in 375.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[255:2827](2080290.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p5"></span> This is the sudden disappearance of
Gregory from Nazianzus at the end of 375, which was due at once to his
craving for retirement and his anxiety not to complicate the appointment
of a successor to his father (who died early in 374) in the see of
Nazianzus.  He found a refuge in the monastery of Thecla at the Isaurian
Seleucia.  (*Carm*. xi. 549.)

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[255:2828](2080290.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p6"></span> The Ben. note appositely points out
that any astonishment, such as expressed by Tillemont, at the
consecration of a neophyte, is quite out of place, in view of the
exigencies of the times and the practice of postponing baptism.  St.
Ambrose at Milan and Nectarius at Constantinople were not even
“neophytes,” but were actually unbaptized at the time of their
appointment to their respective sees.  “If there is any one among the
lately baptized,” argues the Ben. note, is tantamount to saying “If
there is any one fit to be bishop.”

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[256:2829](2080290.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p8.2"></span>ί</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p8.3"></span>τε ἐν βαθυῷ</span>.  This is understood by
Balsamon and Zonaras to include Presbyters, Deacons, and sub-deacons;
while the ministry conferred without imposition of hands refers to
Readers, Singers, Sacristans, and the like.  Alexius Aristenus ranks
Singers and Readers with the higher orders, and understands by the
lower, keepers of the sacred vessels, candle-lighters, and chancel door
keepers.  The Ben. note inclines to the latter view on the ground that
the word “remain” indicates a category where there was no advance to a
higher grade, as was the case with Readers and Singers.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[256:2830](2080290.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p11"></span> *cf*. Can. xxx. p. 239.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[256:2831](2080290.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p13"></span> *i.e.* in Canon viii. p. 226 and Canon
xi. p. 228.

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[256:2832](2080290.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p15"></span> Here reading, punctuation, and sense
are obscure.  The Ben. Ed. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p15.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p15.2"></span>ξω μὲν ὄντες, τῆς κοινωνίας
εἴργονται</span>, and render “*Si sint quidem laici, a boni communione
arcentur*.”  But <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p15.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p15.4"></span>ξω ὄντες</span>, standing alone, more
naturally means non-Christians.  Balsamon and Zonaras in Pandects have
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p15.5"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p15.6"></span>ξω μὲν ὄντες τῆς
᾽Εκκλησιας εἰργονται τῆς κοινωνίας τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[256:2833](2080290.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p15.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p16"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span id="ix.ccxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[256:2834](2080290.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p18.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p18.2"></span>γιάσμασι</span>.  The Ben. Ed. render
*Sacramento*.  In the Sept. (*e.g.* [Amos vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013)<span id="ix.ccxviii-p18.3"></span>)
the word=sanctuary.  In patristic usage both S. and P. are found for the
Lord’s Supper, or the consecrated elements; *e.g.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p18.4"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p18.5"></span>γίασμα</span> in Greg.
Nyss., *Ep. Canon. Can*. v.  The plural as in this place
“*frequentius*.”  (Suicer *s.v.*)

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[256:2835](2080290.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p18.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.1"></span>μετὰ τῶν ἐν ὑποπτώσει</span>.  The <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.3"></span>ποπίπτοντες</span> or
*substrati* constituted the third and chief station in the oriental
system of penance, the first and second being the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.4"></span>προσκλαίοντες</span>,
*flentes* or *weepers*, and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.6"></span>κροώμενος</span>, *audientes*, or
*hearers*.  In the Western Church it is the substrati who are commonly
referred to as being in penitence, and the Latin versions of the Canons
of Ancyra by Dionysius Exiguus and Martin of Braga render <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.7"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.8"></span>ποπίπτοντες</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.9"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.10"></span>ποπτῶσις</span> by
*pœnitentis* and *pœnitentia*.  In Basil’s Canon xxii. p. 238, this
station is specially styled <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.11"></span>μετάνοια</span>.  *cf*. *D.C.A.* ii.
1593.  “<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.12"></span>Μετάνοια</span> *notat pœnitentiam eorum
qui ob delicta sua in ecclesia* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.13"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.14"></span>πιτιμίοις ἐσωφρονίζοντο</span> (Zonaras,
*Ad. Can.* v. *Conc. Antioch*, p. 327), *quique dicebantur* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p19.15"></span>οἰ ἐν μετανοιᾳ
ὄντες</span>.  Chrysostom, *Hom*. iii. *in Epist.* *ad Eph. in S. Cœnæ*
*communione clamabat* <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p19.16"></span>κήρυξ, ὅσοι ἐν μετανοί& 139· ἀπέλθετε
πάντες</span>.”  Suicer *s.v.*

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[256:2836](2080290.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p23"></span> *cf*. Can. xxii. p. 228.  The Ben.
note is “*Laborant Balsamon et Zonaras in hoc canone conciliando cum
vicesimo secundo, atque id causæ afferunt, cur in vicesimo secundo
quatuor anni, septem in altero decernantur, quod Basilius in vicesimo
secundo antiqua Patrum placita sequatur, suam in altero propriam
sententiam exponat.  Eundem hunc canonem Alexius Aristenus, ut clarum et
perspicuum, negat explicatione indigere.  Videbat nimirum doctissimus
scriptor duplicem a Basilio distingui fornicationem, leviorem alteram,
alteram graviorem levior dicitur, quæ inter personas matrimonio solutas
committitur:  gravior, cum conjugati hominis libido in mulierem solutam
erumpit.  Priori anni quatuor, septem alteri imponuntur.  Manifesta res
est ex canone* 21*, ubi conjugati peccatum cum soluta fornicationem
appellat Basilius, ac longioribus pœnis coerceri, non tamen instar
adulterii, testatur.  In canone autem 77 eum qui legitiman uxorem
dimittit, et aliam ducit, adulterum quidem esse ex Domini sententia
testatur, sed tamen ex canonibus Patrum annos septem decernit, non
quindecim, ut in adulterio cum aliena uxore commisso.  Secum ergo non
pugnat cum fornicationi nunc annos quatuor, nunc septem, adulterio nunc
septem, nunc quindecim indicit.  Eamdem in sententiam videtur
accipiendus canon quartus epistolæ Sancti Gregorii Nysseni ad Letoium. 
Nam cum fornicationi novem annos, adulterio decem et octo imponit,
gravior illa intelligenda fornicatio, quam conjugatur cum soluta
committit.  Hinc ilium adulterium videri fatetur his qui accuratius
examinant.*

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[257:2837](2080290.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p25"></span> *cf*. Can. xviii.  Augustine (*De Bono
Viduitatis*, n. 14) represents breaches of the vows of chastity as
graver offenses than breaches of the vows of wedlock.  The rendering of
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p25.1"></span>τῆ ὀικονομί& 139·
τῆς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ζωῆς</span> by *continency* is illustrated in the Ben.
note by Hermas ii. 4 as well as by Basil, Canon xiv and xliv.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[257:2838](2080290.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p34"></span> This Canon is thus interpreted by
Aristenus, *Matrimonium cum propinqua legibus prohibitum eadem ac
adulterium pœna castigatur:  et cum diversæ sint adulterorum pœnœ sic
etiam pro ratione propinquitatis tota res temperabitur.  Hinc duas
sorores ducenti vii. anni pœnitentiœ irrogantur, ut in adulterio cum
muliere libera commisso. non xv. ut in graviore adulterio*, or does it
mean that incestuous fornication shall be treated as adultery?

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[257:2839](2080290.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p36"></span> By minister Balsamon and Zonaras
understand the subdeacon.  Aristenus understands all the clergy
appointed without imposition of hands.  The Ben. ed. approve the
latter.  *cf*. n. on Canon li. p. 256, and *Letter* liv. p. 157.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[257:2840](2080290.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p38"></span> On the earlier part of the canon the
Ben. note says:  “*Balsamon, Zonaras, et Aristenus varia commentantur in
hunc canonem, sed a mente Basilii multum abludentia.  Liquet enim hoc
labiorum peccatum, cui remissior pœna infligitur ipsa actione, quam
Basilius minime ignoscendam esse judicat, levius existimari debere. 
Simili ratione sanctus Pater in cap.* vi*. Isaiæ* n. 185, p. 516,
*labiorum peccata actionibus, ut leviora, opponit, ac prophetæ delecta
non ad actionem et operationem erupisse, sed labiis tenus constitisse
observat.  In eodem commentario* n. 170, p. 501, *impuritatis peccatum
variis gradibus constare demonstrat, inter quos enumerat* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p38.1"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p38.2"></span>ή</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p38.3"></span>ματα φθοροποιά</span>,
verba ad corruptelam apta, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p38.4"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p38.5"></span>μιλίας μαχράς</span>, longas
confabulationes, *quibus ad stuprum pervenitur.  Ex his perspici
arbitror peccatum aliquod in hoc canone designari, quod ipsa actione
levius sit:  nedum ea suspicari liceat, quæ Basilii interpretibus in
mentem venerunt.  Sed tamen cum dico Basilium in puniendis labiorum
peccatis leniorem esse, non quodlibet turpium sermonum genus, non
immunda colloquia (quomodo enim presbyteris hoc vitio pollutis honorem
cathedræ reliquisset?), sed ejusmodi intelligenda est peccandi voluntas,
quæ foras quidem aliquo sermone prodit, sed tamen quominus in actum
erumpat, subeunte meliori cogitatione, reprimitur.  Quemadmodum enim
peccata, quæ sola cogitatione committuntur, idcirca leviora esse
pronuntiat Basilius, comment. in Isaiam* n. 115, p. 459, *et* n. 243, p.
564, *qui repressa est actionis turpitudo; ita hoc loco non quælibet
labiorum peccata; non calumnias, non blasphemias, sed ea tantum lenius
tractat, quæ adeo gravia non erant, vel etiam ob declinatam actionis
turpitudinem, ut patet ex his verbis,* seque eo usque peccasse confessus
est, *aliquid indulgentiæ merere videbantur*.”

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p39"></span>On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p39.1"></span>καθαιρεθήσεται</span> it is remarked:  “*In
his canonibus quos de clericorum peccatis edidit Basilius, duo videntur
silentio prætermissa.  Quæri enim possit 1o cur suspensionis pœnam soli
lectori ac ministro, sive subdiacono, imponat, diaconis autem et
presbyteris depositionem absque ulla prorsus exceptione infligat, nisi
quod eis communionem cum diaconis et presbyteris relinquit, si peccatum
non ita grave fuerit.  Erat tamen suspensionis pœna in ipsos presbyteros
non inusitata, ut patet ex plurimis apostolicis canonibus, in quibus
presbyteri ac etiam ipsi episcopi segregantur, ac postea, si sese non
emendaverint, deponuntur.  Forte hæc reliquit Basilius episcopo
dijudicanda quemadmodum ejusdem arbitrio permittet in canonibus* 74 *et*
84, *ut pœnitentiæ tempus imminuat, si bonus evasint is qui peccavit.* 
2o *Hæc etiam possit institui quæstio, utrumne in gravissimis quidem
criminibus pœnitentiam publicam depositioni adjercerit.  Adhibita ratio
in Canone 3, cur aliquid discriminis clericos inter et laicos ponendum
sit, non solum ad gravia peccata, sed etiam ad gravissima pertinet.  Ait
enim æquum esse ut, cum laici post pœnitentiam in eumdem locum
restituantur, clerici vero non restituantur, liberalius et mitius cum
clericis agatur.  Nolebat ergo clericos lapsos quadruplicem pœnitentiæ
gradum percurrere.  Sed quemadmodum lapso in fornicationem diacono non
statim communionem reddit, sed ejus conversionem et morum emendationem
probandam esse censit, ut ad eumdem canonem tertium observavimus, ita
dubium esse non potest quin ad criminis magnitudinem probandi modum et
tempus accommodaverit.*

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[257:2841](2080290.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p42"></span> The Ben. ed. suppose for the purpose
of learning sorcery.  *cf*. Can. lxxxiii., where a lighter punishment is
assigned to consulters of wizards.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[257:2842](2080290.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.2"></span>ξομολογούμενος</span>.  “The verb in St.
[Matt. xi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.3"></span> expresses thanksgiving and praise, and in
this sense was used by many Christian writers (Suicer, *s.v.*).  But
more generally in the early Fathers it signifies the whole course of
penitential discipline, the outward act and performance of penance. 
From this it came to mean that public acknowledgment of sin which formed
so important a part of penitence.  Irenæus (*c. Hær.* i. 13, § 5) speaks
of an adulterer who, having been converted, passed her whole life in a
state of penitence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.5"></span>ξομολογουμένη</span>, in exomologesi); and
(*ib*. iii. 4) of Cerdon often coming into the church and confessing his
errors (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.7"></span>ξομολογούμενος</span>).”  *D.C.A.* i. 644.

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[258:2843](2080290.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p45.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p46"></span> Here we see “binding and loosing”
passing from the Scriptural sense of declaring what acts are forbidden
and committed ([Matt. 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019), [Matt.
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)<span
id="ix.ccxviii-p46.1"></span>.  See note of Rev. A. Carr in *Cambridge
Bible for Schools*) into the later ecclesiastical sense of imposing and
remitting penalties for sin.  The first regards rather moral obligation,
and, as is implied in the force of the tenses alike in the passages of
St. Matthew cited and in St. [John xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span id="ix.ccxviii-p46.2"></span>,
the recognition and announcement of the divine judgment already passed
on sins and sinners; the later regards the imposition of disciplinary
penalties.

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[258:2844](2080290.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p47.1"></span>τοὺς ἐξομολογμουμένους</span>.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[258:2845](2080290.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p48"></span> *e.g.* according to the Ben. note,
Manasseh and Hezekiah.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[258:2846](2080290.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p52"></span> The Ben. note points out the St. Basil
refers to the repudiation of a lawful wife from some other cause than
adultery.  It remarks that though Basil does not order it to be punished
as severely as adultery there is no doubt that he would not allow
communion before the dismissal of the unlawful wife.  It proceeds
“*illud autem difficilius est statuere, quid de matrimonio post ejectam
uxorem adulteram contracto senserit.  Ratum a Basilio habitum fuisse
ejusmodi matrimonium pronuntiat Aristentus.  Atque id quidem Basilius,
conceptis verbis non declarat; sed tamen videtur hac in re a saniori ac
meliori sententia discessisse.  Nam 1o maritum injuste dimissum ab alio
matrimonio non excludit, ut vidimus in canonibus* 9 *et* 35.  *Porro non
videtur jure dimittenti denegasse, quod injuste dimisso concedebat.  2o 
Cum jubeat uxorem adulteram ejici, vix dubium est quin matrimonium
adulterio uxoris fuisset mariti, ac multo durior, quam uxoris conditio,
si nec adulteram retinere, necaliam ducere integrum fuisset.*

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[258:2847](2080290.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p54"></span> *cf. Letter* clx. p. 212.

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[258:2848](2080290.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p56"></span> The Ben. note is *Prima specie non
omnino perspicuum est utrum sorores ex utroque parente intelligat, an
tantum ex alterutro.  Nam cum in canone* 79 *eos qui suas nurus
accipiunt non severius puniat, quam cui cum sorore ex matre vel ex patre
rem habent, forte videri posset idem statuere de iis qui in novercas
insaniunt.  Sed tamen multo probabilius est eamdem illis pœnam imponi,
ac iis qui cum sorore ex utroque parente contaminantur.  Non enim
distinctione utitur Basilius ut in canone* 75; *nec mirum si peccatum
cum noverca gravius quam cum nuru, ob factam patri injuriam, judicavit*.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[258:2849](2080290.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p58"></span> *i.e.*probably only into the place of
standers.  Zonaras and Balsamon understand by polygamy a fourth
marriage; trigamy being permitted (*cf*. Canon l. p. 240) though
discouraged.  The Ben. annotator dissents, pointing out that in Canon
iv. Basil calls trigamy, polygamy, and quoting Gregory of Nazianzus
(*Orat*. 31) as calling a third marriage <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p58.1"></span>παρανομία</span> .  Maran confirms this
opinion by the comparison of the imposition on polygamy of the same
number of years of penance as are assigned to trigamy in Canon iv. 
“Theodore of Canterbury <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p58.2"></span>a.d.</span> 687 imposes a penance of seven
years on trigamists but pronounces the marriages valid (*Penitential,
lib*. 1. c. xiv. § 3).  Nicephorus of Constantinople, <span
class="c14"><span id="ix.ccxviii-p58.3"></span>a.d.</span> 814, suspends
trigamists for five years.  (*Hard. Concil. tom*. iv. p. 1052.)  Herard
of Tours, <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p58.4"></span>a.d.</span> 858 declares any greater number
of wives than two to be unlawful (*Cap* cxi. *ibid. tom.*v. p. 557). 
Leo the Wise, Emperor of Constantinople, was allowed to marry three
wives without public remonstrance, but was suspended from communion by
the patriarch Nicholas when he married a fourth.  This led to a council
being held at Constantinople, <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p58.5"></span>a.d.</span> 920, which finally settled the
Greek discipline on the subject of third and fourth marriages.  It ruled
that the penalty for a fourth marriage was to be excommunication and
exclusion from the church; for a third marriage, if a man were forty
years old, suspension for five years, and admission to communion
thereafter only on Easter day.  If he were thirty years old, suspension
for four years, and admission to communion thereafter only three times a
year.”  *Dict. Christ. Ant.* ii. p. 1104.

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[258:2850](2080290.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p60"></span> The Ben. n. thinks that the Fathers of
Ancyra are meant, whose authority seems to have been great in Cappadocia
and the adjacent provinces.

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[259:2851](2080290.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccxviii-p64.1"></span>μετανοίας</span>.  *cf*. note on p. 256;
here the word seems to include both repentance and penance.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[259:2852](2080290.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="ix.ccxviii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxviii-p65"></span> [Gen. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#017)<span id="ix.ccxviii-p65.1"></span>,
lxx.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium.](2080291)
