[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080207)  [Next](2080209.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxxvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXV. <span
id="fr_2442"></span>[2443](#fn_2442.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p3"></span>*To Diodorus, presbyter of
Antioch*. <span id="fr_2443"></span>[2444](#fn_2443.md)

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxxvi-p5.1"></span>I have</span> read the books sent me by your
excellency.  With the second I was delighted, not only with its brevity,
as was likely to be the case with a reader out of health and inclined to
indolence, but, because it is at once full of thought, and so arranged
that the objections of opponents, and the answers to them, stand out
distinctly.  Its simple and natural style seems to me to befit the
profession of a Christian who writes less for self-advertisement than
for the general good.  The former work, which has practically the same
force, but is much more elaborately adorned with rich diction, many
figures, and niceties of dialogue, seems to me to require considerable
time to read, and much mental labour, both to gather its meaning and
retain it in the memory.  The abuse of our opponents and the support of
our own side, which are thrown in, although they may seem to add some
charms of dialectic to the treatise, do yet break the continuity of the
thought and weaken the strength of the argument, by causing interruption
and delay.  I know that your intelligence is perfectly well aware that
the heathen philosophers who wrote dialogues, Aristotle and
Theophrastus, went straight to the point, because they were aware of
their not being gifted with the graces of Plato.  Plato, on the other
hand, with his great power of writing, at the same time attacks opinions
and incidentally makes fun of his characters, assailing now the rashness
and recklessness of a Thrasymachus, the levity and frivolity of a
Hippias, and the arrogance and pomposity of a Protagoras.  When,
however, he introduces unmarked characters into his dialogues, he uses
the interlocutors for making the point clear, but does not admit
anything more belonging to the characters into his argument.  An
instance of this is in the Laws.

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p6"></span><span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="ix.cxxxvi-Page_201"></span>2.  It is well for us too, who betake
ourselves to writing, not from any vain ambition, but from the design of
bequeathing counsels of sound doctrine to the brethren, if we introduce
some character well known to all the world for presumption of manners,
to interweave into the argument some points in accordance with the
quality of the character, unless indeed we have no right at all to leave
our work and to accuse men.  But if the subject of the dialogue be wide
and general, digressions against persons interrupt its continuity and
tend to no good end.  So much I have written to prove that you did not
send your work to a flatterer, but have shared your toil with a real
brother.  And I have spoken not for the correction of what is finished,
but as a precaution for the future; for assuredly one who is so
accustomed to write, and so diligent in writing, will not hesitate to do
so; and the more so that there is no falling off in the number of those
who give him subjects.  Enough for me to read your books.  I am as far
from being able to write anything as, I had very nearly said, I am from
being well, or from having the least leisure from my work.  I have
however now sent back the larger and earlier of the two volumes, after
perusing it as far as I have been able.  The second I have retained,
with the wish to transcribe it, but, hitherto, without finding any quick
writer.  To such a pitch of poverty has come the enviable condition of
the Cappadocians!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2442"></span>[200:2443](2080208.htm#fr_2442.md) <span
id="ix.cxxxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2443"></span>[200:2444](2080208.htm#fr_2443.md) <span
id="ix.cxxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxxvi-p4"></span> *cf. Letter* clx.  Theodoret, *Hist.
Ecc*. iv. 24.  He was a pupil of Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus.  *Letter*
ccxliv.  Theodoret, *Ep*. xvi., refers to his obligations to him as a
teacher.  In 378 he became bishop of Tarsus.  Only some fragments of his
works remain, the bulk having been destroyed, it is said, by the Arians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, bishop of Samosata.](2080209.md)
