[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080297)  [Next](2080299) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXV. <span
id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) </span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p3"></span>*To Demosthenes,* <span
id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) *as from the synod of bishops.*

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p5"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p5.1"></span>I am</span> always very thankful to God and
to the emperor, under whose rule we live, when I see the government of
my country put into the hands of one who is not only a Christian, but is
moreover correct in life and a careful guardian of the laws according to
which our life in this world is ordered.  I have had special reason for
offering this gratitude to God and to our God-beloved emperor on the
occasion of your coming among us.  I have been aware that some of the
enemies of peace have been about to stir your august tribunal against
me, and have been waiting to be summoned by your excellency that you
might learn the truth from me; if indeed your high wisdom condescends to
consider the examination of ecclesiastical matters to be within your
province. <span id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911)   The tribunal
overlooked me, but your excellency, moved by the reproaches of
Philochares, ordered my brother and fellow-minister Gregory to be haled
before your judgment seat.  He obeyed your summons; how could he do
otherwise?  But he was attacked by pain in the side, and at the same
time, in consequence of a chill, was attacked by his old kidney
complaint.  He has therefore been compelled, forcibly detained by your
soldiers as he was, to be conveyed to some quiet spot, where he could
have his maladies attended to, and get some comfort in his intolerable
agony.  Under these circumstances we have combined to approach your
lordship with the entreaty that you will feel no anger at the
postponement of the trial.  The public interests have not in any way
suffered through our delay, nor have those of the Church been injured. 
If there is any question of the wasteful expenditure of money, the
treasurers of the Church funds are there, ready to give an account to
any one who likes, and to exhibit the injustice of the charges advanced
by men who have braved the careful hearing of the case before you.  For
they can have no difficulty in making the truth clear to any one who
seeks it from the actual writings of the blessed bishop himself.  If
there is any other point of canonical order which requires
investigation, and your excellency deigns to undertake to hear and to
judge it, it will be necessary for us all to be present, because, if
there has been a failure in any point of canonical order, the
responsibility lies with the consecrators and not with him who is
forcibly compelled to undertake the ministry.  We therefore petition you
to reserve the hearing of the case for us in our own country, and not to
compel us to travel beyond its borders, nor force us to a meeting with
bishops with whom we have not yet come to agreement on ecclesiastical
questions. <span id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912)   I beg you also
to be merciful to my own old age and ill health.  You will learn by
actual investigation, if it please God, that no canonical rule be it
small or great was omitted in the appointment of the bishop.  I pray
that under your administration unity and peace may be brought about with
my brethren; but so long as this does not exist it is difficult for us
even to meet, because many of our simpler brethren suffer from our
mutual disputes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[267:2910](2080298.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[267:2911](2080298.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p4"></span> Vicar of Pontus.  It is doubtful whether
he is the same Demosthenes who was at Cæsarea with Valens in 371, of
whom the amusing story is told in Theodoret *Hist. Ecc*. iv. 16, on
which see note.  If he is, it is not difficult to understand his looking
with no friendly eye on Basil and his brother Gregory.  He summoned a
synod to Ancyra in the close of 375 to examine into alleged
irregularities in Gregory’s consecration and accusations of
embezzlement.  The above letter is to apologize for Gregory’s failing to
put in an appearance at Ancyra, and to rebut the charges made against
him.  Tillemont would refer *Letter* xxxiii. to this period.  Maran
*Vit. Bas*. xii. 5 connects it with the troubles following on the death
of Cæsarius in 369.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[267:2912](2080298.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p6"></span> *Sæpe vicario Basilius in hac epistola
leniter insinuat, res ecclesiasticas illius judicii non esse*.”  Ben.
Note.

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[267:2913](2080298.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="ix.ccxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxxvi-p7"></span> From *Letter* ccxxxvii. it would appear
that Demosthenes was now in Galatia, where he had summoned a heretical
synod.  The Ben. note quotes a law of Valens of the year 373 (*Cod.
Theod*. ix. *tit.* i. 10):* * *Ultra provinciæ terminos accusandi
licentia non progrediatur.  Opertet enim illic criminum judicia agitari
ubi facinus dicatur admissum.  Peregrina autem judicia præsentibus
legibus coercemus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the ascetics under him.](2080299)
