[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080365)  [Next](2080367.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccxciv"></span>

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccxciv-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXCIII.</span>

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p2"></span>To Julianus.

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p3"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccxciv-p3.1"></span>How</span> fare you this long while?  Have
you altogether recovered the use of your hand?  And how do other things
prosper?  According to your wishes and my prayers?  In accordance with
your purposes?

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p4"></span>Where men are readily disposed to change,
it is only natural that their lives are not well ordered:  but where
their minds are fixed, steadfast and unalterable, it follows that their
lives should be conformable to their purposes.

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p5"></span>True, it is not in the helmsman’s power
to make a calm when he wishes; but with us, it is quite easy to render
our lives tranquil by stilling the storms of passion that surge within,
by rising superior to those that assail us from without.  The upright
man is touched by neither loss, nor sickness, nor the other ills of
life; for he walks in heart with God, keeps his gaze fixed upon the
future, and easily and lightly weathers the storms that rise from earth.

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p6"></span>Be not troubled with the cares of earth. 
Such men are like fat birds, in vain endowed with flight, that creep
like beasts upon the ground.  But you—for I have witnessed you in
difficulties—are like swimmers racing out at sea.

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p7"></span>A single claw reveals the whole lion:  so
from a slight acquaintance I think I know you fully.  And I count it a
great thing, that you set some store by me, that I am not absent from
your thoughts, but constantly in your recollection.

<span id="ix.ccxciv-p8"></span>Now writing is a proof of recollection;
and the oftener you write, the better pleased I am.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Festus and Magnus.](2080367.md)
