[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080201)  [Next](2080203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.cxxx"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxx-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.cxxx-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXIX. <span
id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426.md) </span>

<span id="ix.cxxx-p3"></span>*To Meletius Bishop of Antioch*. <span
id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427.md)

<span id="ix.cxxx-p5"></span>1.  I <span class="c14"><span
id="ix.cxxx-p5.1"></span>knew</span> that the charge which had lately
sprung up against the loquacious Apollinarius would sound strange in the
ears of your excellency.  I did not know myself, till now, that he was
accused; at the present time, however, the Sebastenes, after search in
some quarter or another, have brought these things forward, and they are
carrying about a document for which they are specially trying to condemn
me on the ground that I hold the same sentiments.  It contains the
following phrases.  “Wherefore it is everywhere necessary to understand
the first identity in conjunction with, or rather in union with, the
second, and to say that the second and the third are the same.  For what
the Father is firstly, the Son is secondly, and the Spirit thirdly. 
And, again, what the Spirit is firstly, the Son is secondly, in so far
as the Spirit is the Lord; and the Father thirdly, in so far as the
Spirit is God.  And, to express the ineffable with greatest force, the
Father is Son in a paternal sense, and the Son Father in a filial sense,
and so in the case of the Spirit, in so far as the Trinity is one God.” 
This is what is being bruited about.  I never can believe it to have
been invented by those through whom it has been published, although,
after their slanders against me, I can regard nothing as beyond their
audacity.  For writing to some of their party, they advanced their false
accusation against me, and then added the words I have quoted,
describing them as the work of heretics, but saying nothing as to the
author of the document, in order that it might vulgarly be supposed to
have come from my pen.  Nevertheless, in my opinion, their intelligence
would not have gone far enough in putting the phrases together.  On this
account, in order to repudiate the growing <span id="page_198">p.
198</span> <span id="ix.cxxx-Page_198"></span>blasphemy against myself,
and shew to all the world that I have nothing in common with those who
make such statements, I have been compelled to mention Apollinarius as
approximating to the impiety of Sabellius.  Of this subject I will say
no more.

<span id="ix.cxxx-p6"></span>2.  I have received a message from the
court that, after the first impulse of the Emperor, to which he was
impelled by my calumniators, a second decree has been passed, that I am
not to be delivered to my accusers, nor given over to their will, as was
ordered at the beginning; but that there has been in the meanwhile some
delay.  If then this obtains, or any gentler measure is determined on, I
will let you know.  If the former prevails, it shall not be so, without
your knowledge.

<span id="ix.cxxx-p7"></span>3.  Our brother Sanctissimus has certainly
been with you a long time, and you have learnt the objects he has in
view.  If, then, the letter to the Westerns seems to you to contain at
all what is requisite, be so good as to have it written out and conveyed
to me, that I may get it signed by those who think with us, and may keep
the subscription ready, and written out on a separate paper, which we
can fasten on to the letter which is being carried about by our brother
and fellow presbyter.  As I did not find in the minute anything
conclusive, I was in a difficulty on what point to write to the
Westerns.  Necessary points are anticipated, and it is useless to write
what is superfluous, and on such points would it not be ridiculous to
show feeling?  One subject, however, did appear to me to be hitherto
untouched, and to suggest a reason for writing, and that was an
exhortation to them not indiscriminately to accept the communion of men
coming from the East; but, after once choosing one side, to receive the
rest on the testimony of their fellows, and not to assent to every one
writing a form of creed on the pretext of orthodoxy.  If they do so,
they will be found in communion with men at war with one another, who
often put forward the same formulæ, and yet battle vehemently against
one another, as those who are most widely separated.  To the end, then,
that the heresy may not be the more widely kindled, while those who are
at variance with one another mutually object to their own formulæ, they
ought to be exhorted to make a distinction between the acts of communion
which are brought them by chance comers, and those which are duly drawn
up according to the rule of the Church. <span
id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[197:2427](2080202.htm#fr_2426.md) <span
id="ix.cxxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxx-p2"></span> Placed in 373.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[197:2428](2080202.htm#fr_2427.md) <span
id="ix.cxxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxx-p4"></span> A refutation of a charge that he was the
author of an Apollinarian document.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[198:2429](2080202.htm#fr_2428.md) <span
id="ix.cxxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.cxxx-p8"></span> The Ben. note adduces this letter and
*Letter* ccxxiv. as shewing two kinds of communion, (1) Personal in the
Eucharist and prayer, and (2) by letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodotus bishop of Nicopolis.](2080203.md)
