[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080131)  [Next](2080133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lx"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.lx-p1.1"></span>Letter LIX. <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) </span>

<span id="ix.lx-p3"></span>*To Gregory, his uncle*. <span
id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216)

<span id="ix.lx-p5"></span>1.  “<span class="c14"><span
id="ix.lx-p5.1"></span>I have</span> long time holden my peace.  Am I to
hold my peace for ever? <span id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217)  
Shall I still further endure to enforce against myself the hardest
punishment of silence, by neither writing myself, nor receiving any
statement from another?  By holding fast to this stern determination up
to the present time I am able to apply to myself the prophet’s words, “I
endure patiently like travailing woman.” <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218)   Yet I am ever longing for
communication either in person or by letter, and ever, for my own sins’
sake, missing it.  For I cannot imagine any reason for what is
happening, other than what I am convinced is the true one, that by being
cut off from your love I am expiating old sins; if indeed I am not wrong
in using such a phrase as “cut off” in your case, from any one, much
less from me, to whom you have always been as a father.  Now my sin,
like some dense cloud overshadowing me, has made me forget all this. 
When I reflect that the only result to me of what is going on is sorrow,
how can I attribute it to anything but to my own wickedness?  But if
events are to be traced to sins, be this the end of my troubles; if
there was any intended discipline in it, then your object has been very
completely attained, for the punishment has been going on for a long
time; so I groan no longer, but am the first to break silence, and
beseech you to remember both me and yourself who, to a greater degree
than our relationship might have demanded, have shewn me strong
affection all my life.  Now, I implore you, show kindness to the city
for my sake.  Do not on my account alienate yourself from it.

<span id="ix.lx-p8"></span>2.  If, then, there is any consolation in
Christ, any fellowship of the Spirit, any mercy and pity, fulfil my
prayer.  Put a stop to my depression.  Let there be a beginning of
brighter things for the future.  Be yourself a leader to others in the
road to all that is best, and follow no one else in the way to what is
wrong.  Never was any feature so characteristic of any one’s body as
gentleness and peace are of your soul.  It were well becoming such a one
as you are to draw all others to yourself, and to cause all who come
near you to be permeated with the goodness of your nature, as with the
fragrance of myrrh.  For though there be a certain amount of opposition
now, nevertheless ere long there will be a recognition of the blessings
of peace.  So long, however, as room is found for the calumnies that are
bred of dissension, suspicion is sure to grow from worse to worse.  It
is most certainly unbecoming for the rest to take no notice of me, but
it is especially unbecoming in your excellency.  If I am wrong I shall
be all the better for being rebuked.  This is impossible if we never
meet.  But, if I am doing no wrong, for what am I disliked?  So much I
offer in my own defence.

<span id="ix.lx-p9"></span>3.  As to what the Churches might say in
their own behalf, perhaps it is better for me to be silent:  they reap
the result of our disagreement, and it is not to their gain.  I am not
speaking to indulge my grief but to put a stop to it.  And your
intelligence, I am sure, has suffered nothing to escape you.  You will
yourself be better able to discern and to tell to others points of far
greater importance than I can conceive.  You saw the mischief done to
the Churches before I did; and you are grieving more than I am, for you
<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="ix.lx-Page_161"></span>have
long learnt from the Lord not to despise even the least. <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219)   And now the mischief is not
confined to one or two, but whole cities and peoples are sharers in my
calamities.  What need to tell what kind of report will spread about me
even beyond our borders?  It were well for you, large hearted as you
are, to leave the love of strife to others; nay rather, if it be
possible, to root it from their hearts, while you yourself vanquish what
is grievous by endurance.  Any angry man can defend himself, but to rise
above the actual anger belongs only to you, and any one as good as you,
if such there be.  One thing I will not say, that he who has a grudge
against me is letting his anger fall on the innocent.  Do then comfort
my soul by coming to me, or by a letter, or by inviting me to come to
you, or by some means or other.  My prayer is that your piety may be
seen in the Church and that you may heal at once me and the people, both
by the sight of you and by the words of your good grace.  If this be
possible it is best; if you determine on any other course I shall
willingly accept it.  Only accede to my entreaty that you will give me
distinct information as to what your wisdom decides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[160:2216](2080132.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="ix.lx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p2"></span> Placed in 361, at about the same time as the
preceding.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[160:2217](2080132.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="ix.lx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p4"></span> *Vide* n. on preceding page.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[160:2218](2080132.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="ix.lx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p6"></span> [Isa. xlii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)<span id="ix.lx-p6.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[160:2219](2080132.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="ix.lx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p7"></span> [Isa. xlii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)<span id="ix.lx-p7.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[161:2220](2080132.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="ix.lx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lx-p10"></span> *cf*. [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="ix.lx-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Gregory his uncle.](2080133)
