[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2080279)  [Next](2080281.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ccviii"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p1"></span> <span class="c18"><span
id="ix.ccviii-p1.1"></span>Letter CCVII. <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753.md) </span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p3"></span>*To the clergy of Neocæsarea*.

<span id="ix.ccviii-p4"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ix.ccviii-p4.1"></span>You</span> all concur in hating me.  To a man
you have followed the leader of the war against me. <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754.md)   I was therefore minded to say not
a word to any one.  I determined that I would write no friendly letter;
that I would start no communication, but keep my sorrow in silence to
myself.  Yet it is wrong to keep silence in the face of calumny; not
that by contradiction we may vindicate ourselves, but that we may not
allow a lie to travel further and its victims to be harmed.  I have
therefore thought it necessary to put this matter also before you all,
and to write a letter to you, although, when I recently wrote to all the
presbyterate in common, you did not do me the honour to send me a
reply.  Do not, my brethren, gratify the vanity of those who are filling
your minds with pernicious opinions.  Do not consent to look lightly on,
when, to your knowledge, God’s people are being subverted by impious
teaching.  None but Sabellius the Libyan <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755.md) and Marcellus the Galatian <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756.md) have dared to teach and write what
the leaders of your people are attempting to bring forward among you
<span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="ix.ccviii-Page_247"></span>as their own private discovery.  They are
making a great talk about it, but they are perfectly powerless to give
their sophisms and fallacies even any colour of truth.  In their
harangues against me they shrink from no wickedness, and persistently
refuse to meet me.  Why?  Is it not because they are afraid of being
convicted for their own wicked opinions?  Yes; and in their attacks upon
me they have become so lost to all sense of shame as to invent certain
dreams to my discredit while they falsely accuse my teaching of being
pernicious.  Let them take upon their own heads all the visions of the
autumn months; they can fix no blasphemy on me, for in every Church
there are many to testify to the truth.

<span id="ix.ccviii-p8"></span>2.  When they are asked the reason for
this furious and truceless war, they allege psalms and a kind of music
varying from the custom which has obtained among you, and similar
pretexts of which they ought to be ashamed.  We are, moreover, accused
because we maintain men in the practice of true religion who have
renounced the world and all those cares of this life, which the Lord
likens to thorns that do not allow the word to bring forth fruit.  Men
of this kind carry about in the body the deadness of Jesus; they have
taken up their own cross, and are followers of God.  I would gladly give
my life if these really were my faults, and if I had men with me owning
me as teacher who had chosen this ascetic life.  I hear that virtue of
this kind is to be found now in Egypt, and there are, peradventure, some
men in Palestine whose conversation follows the precepts of the Gospel. 
I am told too that some perfect and blessed men are to be found in
Mesopotamia.  We, in comparison with the perfect, are children.  But if
women also have chosen to live the Gospel life, preferring virginity to
wedlock, leading captive the lust of the flesh, and living in the
mourning which is called blessed, they are blessed in their profession
wherever they are to be found.  We, however, have few instances of this
to show, for with us people are still in an elementary stage and are
being gradually brought. to piety.  If any charges of disorder are
brought against the life of our women I do not undertake to defend
them.  One thing, however, I do say and that is, that these bold hearts,
these unbridled mouths are ever fearlessly uttering what Satan, the
father of lies, has hitherto been unable to say.  I wish you to know
that we rejoice to have assemblies of both men and women, whose
conversation is in heaven and who have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof; they take no thought for food and raiment,
but remain undisturbed beside their Lord, continuing night and day in
prayer.  Their lips speak not of the deeds of men:  they sing hymns to
God continually, working with their own hands that they may have to
distribute to them that need.

<span id="ix.ccviii-p9"></span>3.  Now as to the charge relating to the
singing of psalms, whereby my calumniators specially scare the simpler
folk, my reply is this.  The customs which now obtain are agreeable to
those of all the Churches of God.  Among us the people go at night to
the house of prayer, and, in distress, affliction, and continual tears,
making confession to God, at last rise from their prayers and begin to
sing psalms.  And now, divided into two parts, they sing antiphonally
with one another, thus at once confirming their study of the
Gospels, <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757.md) and at the same time
producing for themselves a heedful temper and a heart free from
distraction.  Afterwards they again commit the prelude of the strain to
one, and the rest take it up; and so after passing the night in various
psalmody, praying at intervals as the day begins to dawn, all together,
as with one voice and one heart, raise the psalm of confession to the
Lord, each forming for himself his own expressions of penitence.  If it
is for these reasons that you renounce me, you will renounce the
Egyptians; you will renounce both Libyans, Thebans, Palestinians,
Arabians, Phœnicians, Syrians, the dwellers by the Euphrates; in a word
all those among whom vigils, prayers, and common psalmody have been held
in honour.

<span id="ix.ccviii-p11"></span>4.  But, it is alleged, these practices
were not observed in the time of the great Gregory.  My rejoinder is
that even the Litanies <span id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758.md) which
you now use were not used in his time.  I do not say this to find fault
with you; for my prayer would be that every one of you should live in
tears and continual penitence.  We, for our part, are always offering
supplication for our sins, but we propitiate our God not as you do, in
the words of mere man, but in the oracles of the Spirit.  And what
evidence have you that this custom was not followed in the time of the
great Gregory?  You have kept none of his customs up to the present
time. <span id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759.md)   Gregory did not cover
his head at prayer.  How could <span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="ix.ccviii-Page_248"></span>he?  He was a true disciple of the
Apostle who says, “Every man praying or prophesying, having his head
covered, dishonoureth his head.” <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760.md)   And “a man indeed ought not to
cover his head forasmuch as he is the image of God.” <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761.md)   Oaths were shunned by Gregory,
that pure soul, worthy of the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, content with
yea and nay, in accordance with the commandment of the Lord Who said, “I
say unto you swear not at all.” <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762.md)   Gregory could not bear to call
his brother a fool, <span id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763.md) for he
stood in awe of the threat of the Lord.  Passion, wrath, and bitterness
never proceeded out of his mouth.  Railing he hated, because it leads
not to the kingdom of heaven.  Envy and arrogance had been shut out of
that guiltless soul.  He would never have stood at the altar before
being reconciled to his brother.  A lie, or any word designed to slander
any one, he abominated, as one who knew that lies come from the devil,
and that the Lord will destroy all that utter a lie. <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764.md)   If you have none of these things,
and are clear of all, then are you verily disciples of the disciple of
the Lord; if not, beware lest, in your disputes about the mode of
singing psalms, you are straining at the gnat and setting at naught the
greatest of the commandments.

<span id="ix.ccviii-p19"></span>I have been driven to use these
expressions by the urgency of my defence, that you may be taught to cast
the beam out of your own eyes before you try to remove other men’s
motes.  Nevertheless, I am conceding all, although there is nothing that
is not searched into before God.  Only let great matters prevail, and do
not allow innovations in the faith to make themselves heard.  Do not
disregard the hypostases.  Do not deny the name of Christ.  Do not put a
wrong meaning on the words of Gregory.  If you do so, as long as I
breathe and have the power of utterance, I cannot keep silence, when I
see souls being thus destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[246:2754](2080280.htm#fr_2753.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p2"></span> Placed in 375.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[246:2755](2080280.htm#fr_2754.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p5"></span> *i.e.* Atarbius of Neocæsarea.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[246:2756](2080280.htm#fr_2755.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p6"></span> Basil is described as the earliest
authority for making Sabellius an African by birth.  (*D.C.B.* iv. 569) 
There is no contemporary authority for the statement.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[246:2757](2080280.htm#fr_2756.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p7"></span> *i.e.* of Ancyra.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[247:2758](2080280.htm#fr_2757.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ccviii-p10.1"></span>τῶν λογίων</span>.  *cf*. note on Theodoret,
p. 155.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[247:2759](2080280.htm#fr_2758.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p12"></span> The Ben. note observes that in this
passage Litanies do not mean processions or supplications, but
penitential prayers.  The intercessory prayers which occur in the
liturgy of St. Basil, as in the introductory part of other Greek
liturgies, are not confined to quotations from Scripture.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[247:2760](2080280.htm#fr_2759.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p13"></span> This reproach appears to be in
contradiction with the statement in *De Spiritu Sancto*, § 74 (page 47),
that the Church of Neocæsarea had rigidly preserved the traditions of
Gregory.  The Ben. note would remove the discrepancy by confining the
rigid conservatism to matters of importance.  In these the Neocæsareans
would tolerate no change, and allowed no monasteries and no enrichment
of their liturgies with new rites.  “Litanies,” however, are regarded as
comparatively unimportant innovations.  The note concludes:  *Neque enim
secum ipse pugnat Basilius, cum Neocæsarienses laudat in libro De
Spiritu Sancto, quod Gregorii instituta arctissime teneant. hic autem
vituperat quod ea omnino reliquerint.  Illic enim respicit ad exteriora
instituta, hic autem ad virtutum exemplar, convicii et iracundiæ fugam,
odium juris jurandi et mendacii.*

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[248:2761](2080280.htm#fr_2760.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ccviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[248:2762](2080280.htm#fr_2761.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.ccviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[248:2763](2080280.htm#fr_2762.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p16"></span> [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.ccviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[248:2764](2080280.htm#fr_2763.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p17"></span> *cf*. [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.ccviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[248:2765](2080280.htm#fr_2764.md) <span
id="ix.ccviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ccviii-p18"></span> [Ps. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.ccviii-p18.1"></span>,
LXX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulancius.](2080281.md)
