[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lb24)  [Next](lb26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 24

In the morning I went down stairs early in the hope of seeing Edith
alone. In this, however, I was disappointed. Not finding her in the
house, I sought her in the garden, but she was not there. In the course
of my wanderings I visited the underground chamber, and sat down there
to rest. Upon the reading table in the chamber several periodicals and
newspapers lay, and thinking that Dr. Leete might be interested in
glancing over a Boston daily of 1887, I brought one of the papers with
me into the house when I came.

At breakfast I met Edith. She blushed as she greeted me, but was
perfectly self-possessed. As we sat at table, Dr. Leete amused himself
with looking over the paper I had brought in. There was in it, as in all
the newspapers of that date, a great deal about the labor troubles,
strikes, lockouts, boycotts, the programmes of labor parties, and the
wild threats of the anarchists.

"By the way," said I, as the doctor read aloud to us some of these
items, "what part did the followers of the red flag take in the
establishment of the new order of things? They were making considerable
noise the last thing that I knew."

"They had nothing to do with it except to hinder it, of course," replied
Dr. Leete. "They did that very effectually while they lasted, for their
talk so disgusted people as to deprive the best considered projects for
social reform of a hearing. The subsidizing of those fellows was one of
the shrewdest moves of the opponents of reform."

"Subsidizing them!" I exclaimed in astonishment.

"Certainly," replied Dr. Leete. "No historical authority nowadays doubts
that they were paid by the great monopolies to wave the red flag and
talk about burning, sacking, and blowing people up, in order, by
alarming the timid, to head off any real reforms. What astonishes me
most is that you should have fallen into the trap so unsuspectingly."

"What are your grounds for believing that the red flag party was
subsidized?" I inquired.

"Why simply because they must have seen that their course made a
thousand enemies of their professed cause to one friend. Not to suppose
that they were hired for the work is to credit them with an
inconceivable folly. <span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4) In the United
States, of all countries, no party could intelligently expect to carry
its point without first winning over to its ideas a majority of the
nation, as the national party eventually did."

"The national party!" I exclaimed. "That must have arisen after my day.
I suppose it was one of the labor parties." "Oh no!" replied the doctor.
"The labor parties, as such, never could have accomplished anything on a
large or permanent scale. For purposes of national scope, their basis as
merely class organizations was too narrow. It was not till a
rearrangement of the industrial and social system on a higher ethical
basis, and for the more efficient production of wealth, was recognized
as the interest, not of one class, but equally of all classes, of rich
and poor, cultured and ignorant, old and young, weak and strong, men and
women, that there was any prospect that it would be achieved. Then the
national party arose to carry it out by political methods. It probably
took that name because its aim was to nationalize the functions of
production and distribution. Indeed, it could not well have had any
other name, for its purpose was to realize the idea of the nation with a
grandeur and completeness never before conceived, not as an association
of men for certain merely political functions affecting their happiness
only remotely and superficially, but as a family, a vital union, a
common life, a mighty heaven-touching tree whose leaves are its people,
fed from its veins, and feeding it in turn. The most patriotic of all
possible parties, it sought to justify patriotism and raise it from an
instinct to a rational devotion, by making the native land truly a
father land, a father who kept the people alive and was not merely an
idol for which they were expected to die."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](lb26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4](#fr_4) I fully admit the difficulty of
accounting for the course of the anarchists on any other theory than
that they were subsidized by the capitalists, but at the same time,
there is no doubt that the theory is wholly erroneous. It certainly was
not held at the time by any one, though it may seem so obvious in the
retrospect.
