[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma35)  [Next](syma37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

### CHAPTER XXXII

### THE MIDDLE CHAMBER

The ascent toward a place representing the Middle Chamber of King
Solomon's Temple is the outstanding ceremony of the Second Degree;
because of this, and because of the space devoted to it by the Ritual,
we shall devote several sections to its study. In the present section we
shall deal with the Middle Chamber itself, and with the truth of which
it is a symbol.

That it is a symbol, and not a bit of history, there is every evidence
to show. Sir Charles Warren, while Master of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge
of Research, gave expression to the opinion of the best modern scholars
in saying that, "There never was a Middle Chamber in the Temple. . . .
As the Fellow Crafts were only employed during the building of the
Temple, they could not have used this Chamber for the service mentioned
\[you will recall what this service is supposed to have been\] even if
it had existed. . . . Even if this Chamber had existed they would not
have been allowed to desecrate it by use as a pay office."

Albert Mackey, one of the most conservative of Masonic writers, and who
wrote his "Symbolism of Freemasonry" some twenty years before Brother
Warren delivered his speech, took the same position. As we may read, p.
210: "The whole legend is, in fact, an historical myth, in which the
mystic number of the steps, the process of passing to the Chamber, and
the wages there received, are inventions added to or ingrafted on the
fundamental

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

history contained in the sixth chapter of Kings, to inculcate important
symbolic instructions relative to the principles of the order."

The passage in the Book of Kings, to which Mackey here refers, is in the
authorised version of the Bible as follows: "They went up with winding
stairs into the middle chamber." Modern Biblical scholarship has shown
that the term here translated "chamber" really means a "storey," and
that there were three such storeys on one side of the Temple composed of
small rooms in which the priests kept their vestments, utensils, etc.
That workmen were paid their wages in this middle storey, or that Fellow
Crafts were there prepared for a higher grade, there is not a hint in
the record to show. This account of the matter, as Mackey has said, is
"an historical myth."

A myth has been defined as "philosophy in the making." It is an
allegorical piece of fiction designed to convey some abstract teaching.
The purpose of our ceremonies is not to furnish truth rather than
history, and that truth is nowise affected by the accuracy or inaccuracy
of the narrative behind which it is veiled. To remember this in all
connections will save one from those pitfalls of literalism into which
so many Masonic students used to fall.

When understood purely as a symbol, the Middle Chamber stands for that
place in life in which we receive the rewards of our endeavours. This is
the broadest sense of it. Its narrower sense, as found in the Second
Degree lecture, is that it represents the wages of education, of mental
culture, for learning is described as the peculiar work of the Fellow
Craft. Learning stores the mind with facts, preserves one from bigotry
and superstition, offers to one the fellowships of great minds, quickens
perception, strengthens the faculties, gives one, in short, a masterful
intellect. It is into the possession

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of such riches as these that the Winding Stairs of the Liberal Arts and
Sciences bring a man at last.

We may rejoice that William Preston gave this teaching so large a place
in our lectures, for without it Masonry would have been wholly
inadequate as a complete system of life. Ignorance is a sin, in most
cases at least, and the sooner we thus regard it the better will it be
for all of us, Masons and profane. In olden days when men had so few
opportunities for learning it was inevitable that the common man should
be ignorant; but in these days, with public schools, correspondence
schools, cheap books and periodicals, and free libraries, a man who
remains content with not possessing the best that has been thought and
said in the world is wholly without excuse. Always and everywhere should
men have in the house of life a winding stair of art and of science up
which to climb into a middle chamber wherein to hold converse with the
good and great of all ages!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. Operative and Speculative](syma37.md)
