[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma12)  [Next](syma14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### THE SHARP INSTRUMENT

After the candidate has effected his entrance a "certain sharp
instrument"—(which should never be one of the working tools)—is applied
in a peculiar manner, and a certain hint of the meaning of this is
given, as the initiated reader will clearly remember. On all this there
is no reason to comment save in brief manner, and then only on the
meaning given as aforesaid. This meaning has especial significance to us
because it sets forth the only *real penalty* that a Mason ever suffers
for violating his obligation. (On "Obligation," see [p.
110](syma18.htm#page_110).)

It is accurate to say that a majority of the attacks on Freemasonry have
been occasioned by the "Penalties" which are supposed to be enforced on
oath-violating members. Of these Penalties it is manifestly impossible
here to speak, though there is much that could be said, orally, in a
tyled lodge. It seems that their present form was derived from the
seventeenth century English Treason laws, though certain particulars may
be elsewhere traced. It is certain that we have not inherited them from
the operative Masons, for we have many of their OB's in print, and a
comparison of our own form with theirs is not altogether to our
advantage, as witness the following passage from MacBride's "Speculative
Masonry":

"It seems to us, with these OB's before us, there is only one course
open to all Masons desiring the welfare of our ancient institution, and
that is to insist that a simpler, more sensible, and consequently, more
solemn and binding

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

form shall be substituted, wherever the corrupt form now prevails. The
latter has neither the sanction of age, of law, of reason, nor of good
taste."

This, it may be emphasised, is but a criticism of the *form* of the
Penalties; I am very sure that neither Brother MacBride nor any other
wise Mason will advocate the abandoning of Penalties else we leave out
of our Symbolism a symbol of the everywhere present moral law that "the
wages of sin is death." Truth dies out in the liar, Beauty dies out in
the vulgar, Goodness dies out in the wicked, and the way of the
transgressor is hard. Would ours be a complete *moral* science if it
ignored this Divine law built into the spiritual structure of man?

There is more to be said. He who violates the laws of an art will lose
out of his mind the power of that art. The pianist who occupies himself
wholly with tin-pan rag-time loses the ability to play, and even to
appreciate, real music. The author who descends to the "Diamond Dick"
level of literature forfeits his ability to write nobler pages. The
architect who scamps and cheats in his building will soon lose the skill
of erecting structures that deserve the name of architecture, a fact
brought out with convincing power by Robert Herrick in his great novel,
"The Common Lot." So is it with him who deliberately transgresses the
laws of the Royal Art of Freemasonry, the Art of noble brotherhood lived
in the bonds of the Eternal Life; its skill and its influence will die
out within him as if an instrument of torture had been plunged into his
heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Invoking the Blessing of Deity](syma14)
