[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma48)  [Next](syma50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

### CHAPTER XLV

### THAT WHICH WAS LOST

#### I

We come now to the crux and the climax of Blue Lodge symbolism, the
master symbol by means of which all other symbols have their meaning.
Well will it be for us to walk warily, here, not only because the
origins of the symbolism of the Lost Word are bound up with an ancient
and tangled tradition and, not only because it has been so often
prostituted to the level of magic and superstition, even in recent
times, but also because it is the embodiment of one of those ideas so
high and so deep that they contain whole systems of philosophy and
theology within them. It is like the "flower in the crannied wall" of
Tennyson's poem; if we could understand it, "root and all, all in all,"
we would know "what God and man is."

Much has been written about the "Mason's word" as employed in old days,
when brethren were sometimes "made Mason" by having that secret term
entrusted to them; research has failed to show what this word was though
some scholars believe it to have been that sovereign name which stands
at the centre of one of the Higher Grades. Some who hold to this
last-named theory would have us believe that this transfer of the word
from the Blue Lodge to that degree was so disastrous to the symbolic
structure of the Blue Lodge that to patch up the damage a substitute
word was devised to take its place until the candidate, passed on to the
higher grade. But as there is little or no evidence to prove that the

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

great word of the degree is the same as the "Mason's Word" of the old
lodges that theory must be left suspended in the mid-air of conjecture.

#### II

For my own part—and I can speak here for no other—I can not believe that
the Blue Lodge system was ever rifled of its chiefest treasure to grace
the forehead of a "higher" grade nor can I see why we should think that
the Third Degree, just as it is, has lost the one key to its mysteries.
The search for a lost word is not the search for a mere vocable of a few
letters which one might write down on a piece of paper; it is the
seeking for a truth, nay, a set of truths, a secret of life, and that
secret truth is so clearly set forth in the Hiram Abiff drama that one
is led to wonder why anybody should suppose that it had ever been lost.
"The Lost Word" does not refer, so it seems to me, to any term once in
possession of the Third Degree and accidentally lost, but rather it
denotes the ancient *Tetragrammaton*, or "four-lettered name," for which
search has been made these two and a half millenniums.

According to a very old tradition (how much actual history may be in it
we cannot know) the Legend of the *Tetragrammaton* goes back to ancient
Israel as far as the time of Exile. Like all people of that day the Jews
saw in a person's name not a mere handy cognomen whereby a man be
addressed but a kind of sign standing for the personality of the one who
bore it. Jacob was Jacob because he actually had been a "supplanter," as
that name means; and he later became Israel because he grew to be a
"prince of God." Jacob's name was a revelation of his character. So was
it with all names. Therefore was it that the ancients held proper names

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

in a reverence difficult for us to understand, as is hinted in an old
Chaldean oracle:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Never change native Names;  
 For there are names in every nation, God-given,  
 Of unexplained power in the Mysteries."

</div>

Bearing this in mind we can understand why the Jews threw about the name
of Deity the wrappings of secrecy and sanctity. At first, after the
dread secret had been imparted to Moses, the people pronounced the name
in whispers or not at all. They were bidden never to use it except on
the most solemn occasions as witness the Third Commandment which reads,
when literally translated, "Thou shalt not utter the name of thy God
idly." As time went on the priests forbade them to do more than hint at
it, one of the priestly commands in Leviticus reading, "He that
pronounceth the Name of the Lord *distinctly*, shall be put to death."
(Ch. 24, v. 16) At last, only the High Priest was permitted to utter the
Name at all, and then on some great occasion, such as the day of
Atonement. At the same time, it must be remembered, the Jews were using
no vowels in their writing; for some strange reason only consonants were
ever written or printed; therefore only the four consonants, JHWH, were
ever seen.

When the Jews were taken into Exile, all traces of the true
pronounciation was lost, either because the High Priest was killed
before he could impart it or died in Babylonia before a successor
entitled to the secret could be found. Consequently, the Exile was no
sooner ended than priests and scribes began their search for the Lost
Name. The four consonants only did they have; what the vowels were
nobody could learn, nor has anybody since discovered, at least according
to the Legend.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

#### III

This *Tetragrammaton* became a storm-centre of theology and around it a
great mass of symbolism gradually accumulated. So deeply did it sink
into the imagination of Israel that the later theosophists who built up
the speculative system we call the Kabbala made it the very core of
their teaching; and through the Kabbala, the literature of which was so
popular even as late as Reformation times, the legends of the Lost Name
made its way into the thought and Literature of Mediæval Europe.

But the form of the legend did not always remain the same; "now it is a
spoiled sanctuary; now a sacramental mystery; now the abandonment of a
great military and religious order; now the age-long frustrations of the
greatest building plan which was ever conceived; now the lost word of
Kabbalism; now the vacancy of the most holy of all sanctuaries."
Whatever the disguise the quest was always the same, a search for
something strangely precious which men believed had been lost out of the
world but might be found again.

#### IV

This wonderful symbolic idea still retains its power to cast a spell
over us, as witness its use by modern writers. Eugène Sue incorporated
it in his haunted tale, "The Wandering Jew." Tennyson wove it into his
Arthur epic, where it has assumed the form of the search for the Lost
Grail, the cup used by the Lord at His Last Supper. Henry Van Dyke has
embodied it in his book of stories, "The Blue Flower," and Maurice
Maeterlinck has woven about it a strangely beautiful drama, "The Blue
Bird."

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

Shall we not add to that list the drama of the Third Degree? Surely,
"that which was lost" can refer to nothing else, as the evidence, both
internal and external, so abundantly seems to show. If that indeed be
the case how it does light up with prophetic meaning the whole mystery
of the Third Degree: for it shows that the candidate is not on a hunt
for a mystic term to be used like a magic spell, still less is it some
mysterious individual that he seeks. That for which he really searches
is to discover the divine in himself and in the world.

Going out to find God we need not wonder when he finds no one word, or
one thing, to reward his labours; nor need we be disappointed if he is
"put off with a substitute," for though his search is not fruitless it
is not altogether successful, as is fitting when we recall that the
complete unveiling of God cannot come to any man in any one lifetime.
That hope must ever remain an ideal to us humans in the shadow of our
earth life—a flying Ideal, eluding us while it beckons us, leading us
over the hills of Time into the tireless searchings of Eternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI. The Trowel](syma50)
