[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma36)  [Next](syma38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIII

### OPERATIVE AND SPECULATIVE

In mediæval times the builders were organised into a secret fraternity
composed of separate lodges, which was for the purposes of
self-protection, and for preserving the secrets of the trade; and men
were given words, grips, and tokens on their admittance to a lodge. This
fraternity had an ancient traditional history, and it used its tools and
trade processes as emblems and symbols whereby to teach a code of
morality far above the average ethical standards of the time. This was
called Operative Masonry because its followers were engaged in the work
of actual building.

At the time of the Reformation ecclesiastical building, in which the
Freemasons were mostly engaged, fell into a decline. During the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Operative Lodges began to
receive a large number of members who had no intention of practical
building, but were attracted by the history and symbolism of the Order.
In course of time this Speculative element outtopped the Operative so
that, at the Revival of 1717, Masonry became wholly a Speculative Body.

The details of this picture may be filled out by a remarkable paragraph
in Brother MacBride's "Speculative Masonry" (p. 124): "The view we wish
to consider is, that down through the Roman Collegia and the Mediæval
Craft Guilds, along with certain traditions, there was probably
transmitted some of the symbolism of the Ancient

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mysteries; and
that the great quickening of intellectual life in the sixteenth century,
resulting from the social and political upheaval of the Reformation,
gave new life and a more developed form to the speculative element
within the old Craft Lodges. The mental activities of men had so long
been 'cribbed, cabined, and confined' under ecclesiastical rule that,
having burst its bonds, it fairly revelled and rioted in all sorts of
ways. Hence we find Kabbalism, Theosophy, Alchemy, and Astrology
receiving attention and support from the learned scholars of the age. .
. . The spirit of inquiry was rampant, and ill directed as it was in
many respects, it had on the whole a wonderfully stimulating effect.
Science, in all its branches, expanded and developed; literature, art,
and social and political life, acquired fresh vigour. It is from this
period that we can mark the presence of the speculative element in the
old Craft Lodges. Our view is, that the seed of our present Speculative
System, lying latent in these old lodges, was quickened into life
through the influence of the Reformation period, and, later on, in 1717,
developed into the present organised form."

On another page of the same work Brother MacBride gives a more specific
description of the moral and symbolic germ in the craft guilds which
later expanded into Speculative Masonry: "Taking the Old Charges, and
reading them over, no one can fail to be impressed with the moral
precepts they contain, and how the speculative bulks over the purely
operative parts. In every case the Mason is charged first of all to be
true to God, the King and to his fellows. Stealing and vice are
explicitly named to be avoided. Falsehood and deceit are condemned and
the general impression left after reading these ancient documents is,
that they are not those of a mere trades union or operative guild. There
is an element in them,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

apart from and above the operative work, that refers to conduct and
morals, and it is in this, more than anything else, that their
relationship with modern Masonry shows itself. After all, what is the
purpose of our speculative system but to shape life and conduct to noble
ends."

In these passages Brother MacBride takes the position that Speculative
Masonry is the expansion of a germ that lay in Operative Masonry. Other
writers, while holding this view, also believe that the non-operatives
who were accepted during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries brought
with them an entirely new element. Brother A. E. Waite speaks for these
writers in his booklet, "Deeper Aspects of Masonic Symbolism":

"The interest in Operative Masonry and its records, though historically
it is of course important, has preceded from the beginning on a
misconception as to the aims and symbolism of Speculative Masonry. It
was and it remains natural, and it has not been without its results, but
it is a confusion of the chief issues. It should be recognised
henceforth that the sole connection between the two Arts and Crafts
rests on the fact that the one has undertaken to uplift the other from
the material plane to that of morals on the surface, and of spirituality
in the real intention. . . . My position is that the traces of a
symbolism which may in a sense be inherent in Operative Masonry did not
produce, by a natural development, the Speculative Art and Craft, though
they helped undoubtedly to make a possible and partially prepared field
for the great adventure and experiment."

On another page of the same book Brother Waite contends that among the
men who were accepted into the Operative Lodges were many
"Latin-writing" scholars who brought with them ideas and symbolisms from
Kabbalism and Rosicrucianism. With this position Albert pike and many
other authorities agree.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

Brother Waite's argument, it seems to me, does not contradict, but
rather supplements, Brother MacBride's position. If this be the case, we
may say that from Operative Masonry our Speculative System has received
an organisation, a moral element, and certain emblems and symbols
derived from the building art; but that there is an element of
philosophy and mysticism in it, in the Third Degree more especially, is
derived from other sources.

Leaving for other pages a discussion of the mystical and philosophical
element, we may examine here only the elements inherited from the
Operative Guilds. The Operative Mason used actual tools to erect
structures of wood and stone; for this he received material wages. The
Speculative Mason uses moral, mental, and spiritual forces to erect
himself into a nobler manhood, and society into a nobler Brotherhood;
his wages consist in the enrichment of his own and his race's life.

These words are familiar enough to every Mason; indeed they have become
almost hackneyed and threadbare; but familiarity must not be permitted
to blind us to the radical, I had almost said, the revolutionary,
character of this teaching. For it implies that human nature may be
modified, reformed, regenerated; and the world likewise. The cry of the
reactionary, the obstructionist, the ultra-conservative, has ever been,
"As the world is so has it always been, so will it always be. Poverty,
ignorance, vice,—these are fated things, built into the nature of the
race, and can in no wise be improved." Against this position Masonry
throws itself with all its weight, and contends that out of the stuff of
the Present a nobler Future can be made; that a man's nature is plastic
material out of which a better man can be fashioned; that the world of
to-day is a rough quarry out of which may be hewn the stones for a
Temple of To-morrow, in which

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

a God may be found to dwell. If his philosophy of Masonry be true, as we
Masons are most profoundly convinced that it is, it gives us the one
Great Hope of Man, the one certain pledge of Progress.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Man is not man as yet,  
 Nor shall I deem his object served, his end  
 Attained, his genuine strength put fairly forth,  
 While only here and there a star dispels  
 The darkness, here and there a towering mind  
 O’erlooks its prostrate fellows.

"When all mankind is perfected;  
 Equal in full-blown powers—then, not till then,  
 I say, begins man's general infancy,  
 Such men are even now upon the earth  
 Serene amid the half-formed creatures ’round."  
                                (Robert Browning.)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. The Two Great Pillars](syma38.md)
