[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma19)  [Next](syma21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

### THE LESSER LIGHTS

#### I

The Sun, Moon, and Master of the lodge, is, according to our best
authorities, a Hermetic symbol and must be interpreted accordingly. The
sun throws out light from itself, it dispenses energy, and in the
physical sense is the creator of life. In view thereof the Hermetists
made the sun to signify the active principle in nature. By a peculiar
coincidence it is still a popular custom to speak of the sun as *he* or
*him* and this suggests that the Hermetic theory was not very
far-fetched.

By virtue of a similar kind of reasoning the moon was accepted as the
symbol of the passive forces of nature, and here again we find the
popular custom in agreement, for we all speak of the moon as *she* or
*her*. The moon has no light of her own but merely reflects to us that
which she has received from the sun; therefore she may be understood as
symbolising the receptive, passive, and feminine principles.

This cleavage between masculine and feminine, active and passive, goes
down to the roots of the world; it is a distinction found in all
nature's processes and in every man and woman. Work and rest,
ruthlessness and pity, hardness and tenderness—everywhere are these
qualities found, mingling in various proportions; and the secret of the
full-orbed life is to hold them in equilibrium. John Woolman was so
tender that he grieved for days over a robin's death; Friedrich
Nietzsche looked upon pity as a

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

weakness, and taught men to flee it as a disease and urged his disciples
to be hard. Too much of John Woolman in human nature would people the
world at last with a race of sentimentalists too soft for the mastery of
the hard, grey facts of nature; too much of Nietzsche would give us a
world full of blond beasts, preying on each other, like the dragons in
the slime; but when Woolman and Nietzsche balance each other, the one
correcting the extravagances of the other, man will be tender with
little children, chivalrous to women, patient with his fellows, and he
will have strength to wage the warfare against death, disaster, and
destruction. Out of Isis and Osiris, comes Horus, the master of life.
Out of the woman and the man, comes Christ, "the man-woman." Out of the
Sun and the Moon comes the Master, even the Master of a Lodge, for the
Master of the Lodge, in our symbology, is nothing other than a
representation of the Complete Man.

#### II

This, I have said, is the Hermetic explanation of the symbolism of the
three Lesser Lights; but with this reading of the matter some scholars
will not agree, preferring to trace it to usages in the old Operative
Lodges. The hut, or the lodge, they say, was always erected "against the
southerly wall of the church," and could therefore receive no light from
the north, or "dark side"; accordingly the windows of the workroom were
necessarily on the east, south, and west sides. Steinbrenner, who traces
the Order to the German Steinmetzen, argues that windows were known as
*lights*, and quotes Cicero and Vitruvius in support of his contention.
He holds that these windows were the origin of the Great Lights, while
others of the same school of thought believe them to have been the
prototype of the Lesser Lights.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

This interpretation of the matter is on the side of simplicity, and
makes unnecessary that one go afield into occultism, but to some of us
it is not convincing, and that for more than one reason. That Operative
Lodges always, or even *frequently*, built their temporary headquarters
on the south side of the church is not supported by evidence, and may
well be questioned; besides it is difficult to understand how these
windows could ever have become identified with the Holy Bible, Square
and Compass, or with the Sun, Moon and Master. Moreover, the last-named
symbolism was in use by occult fraternities long before lodges were
built, as many authorities have testified, and it seems most reasonable
to believe it to have been introduced into our Ritual by the
Speculatives accepted into the Craft in the latter part of the
seventeenth century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Lux e Tenebris](syma21.md)
