[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma38)  [Next](syma40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV

### THE GLOBES

On the top of each of the Two Pillars thus described stand two Globes,
one, the Celestial, representing the heavens; the other, the
Terrestrial, representing the earth. Whence came these? and what do they
signify?

In answer to the first of these questions our scholars have offered two
hypotheses: first, that they are of Egyptian origin; second, that they
are a modified form of the chapiters, or head-pieces, of the Two
Pillars. The first of these theories was evidently suggested by the
ancient Egyptian symbol of the winged globe, often found on the
entablature above a temple surrounded by a snake holding its tail in its
mouth and flanked by two wide, outstretched wings. So common was this
device that it became at last one of the national emblems, so that
Isaiah speaks of Egypt as "the land of the winged globe." This globe was
in all probability oval in shape, to suggest the egg, symbol of life;
the serpent was the symbol of infinity; the wings, of power; combined,
the figure stood for the infinite life-giving power of Deity. If it be
supposed that the globe was a true circle, as some contend that it was,
instead of an oval then it may have represented the Sun, the first great
god of Egypt, but the meaning remains practically the same.

If our two Globes could be made to serve as a modern form of the
Egyptian winged globe they might be enriched in meaning and interest,
but there is no evidence whatever that the older symbol ever
transmigrated into Masonry. The probability is all against it, for we
have

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

two globes instead of one, and we do not have the serpent or the wings;
besides, as actually exhibited, our Globes manifestly refer to the earth
and the heavens as modernly understood.

The chapiters on the Two Pillars were spherical in shape and always so
represented. It would evidently seem, therefore, that the men who framed
our present Ritual of the Second Step, among whom Preston was
conspicuous, simply modified the chapiters into Globes. But why did they
do this? Because Preston and his circle undertook to transform the lodge
into a school and consequently required symbols for geography and
astronomy, two very important branches of the curriculum they outlined.
This theory is verified, it seems to me, by reference to the Prestonian
lectures, in which we find the following paragraphs, as slightly
abridged by Webb:

"The sphere, with the parts of the earth delineated on its surface, is
called the Terrestrial Globe; and that with the constellations, and
other heavenly bodies, the Celestial Globe.

"The principal use of the Globes, besides serving as maps to distinguish
the outward parts of the earth, and the situation of the fixed stars, is
to illustrate and explain the phenomena arising from the annual
revolution and the diurnal rotation of the earth around its own axis.
*They are the noblest instruments for improving the mind* \[this was
Preston's motive—H.L.H.\], and giving it the most distinct idea of any
problem or proposition, as well as enabling it to solve the same."

Some of our writers have ridiculed all this. They say that the use now
made of the globes is schoolboyish. Perhaps! but even so, the idea
behind it all is sound and worthy of serious consideration. It is good
to think about this marvellous planet on which we live, and it is good
to gaze into the heavens by which we are surrounded.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The heavens and
the earth together, this is the Universe, the All-Thing as the old
Norsemen called it, the contemplation of which, as old Samuel Kant once
confessed, fills one with unspeakable awe. If a man cannot feel
reverence in the presence of all that which is represented by the Two
Globes there is something lacking out of his nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI. The Ascent](syma40.md)
