[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma37)  [Next](syma39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIV

### THE TWO GREAT PILLARS

#### I

Of all objects to which the candidate's attention is called as he begins
his ascent to the Middle Chamber, none are more conspicuous, or more
deserving of the most thorough investigation, than the Two Great Pillars
which stand at the entrance. At one and the same time they guard the
Sanctum from the outer world, and invite the Initiate into its
mysteries; so noble in proportion, so intricate in design, so beautiful
to see, they seem to keep solemn watch above the scene, as if to throw a
hush of awe about the soul that would mount to the Upper Room of the
Spirit. If throughout our history students of Masonry have surrounded
them with a host of swarming theories more intricate than the network,
and more multitudinous than the pomegranates it is because so many hints
of ancient wisdom and secrets of symbolism have of old been hidden
within these mighty columns. And if our own studies of the matter lead
us to meanings numerous and almost conflicting we need not worry about
it, for a symbol that says but one thing is hardly a symbol at all.

It was the custom of many of the most primitive peoples, as Frazer
describes so abundantly in his "Golden Bough," to set up stones about
their huts, and their villages, and over the graves of their dead. In
some cases these crude rock pillars were thought to be the abodes of
gods or demons; in others, homes of the ghosts; and often as symbols of
sex. Of the last-named

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

usage one writer has said that "pillars of stone, when associated with
worship, have been from time immemorial regarded as symbols of the
active and passive, the generative and fecundating principles." In
Egypt, Horus and Sut were regarded as two living pillars, twin builders
and supporters of the heavens, and Sir Arthur Evans has shown that
pillars "were everywhere worshipped as gods." "In India, and among the
Mayas and Incas," we read in "The Builders," "there were three pillars
at the portals of the earthly and skyey temple—Wisdom, Strength, and
Beauty. When man set up a pillar, he became a fellow worker with Him
whom the old sages of China used to call the first Builder. Also,
pillars were set up to mark the holy places of vision and Divine
deliverance, as when Jacob erected a pillar at Bethel, Joshua at Gilgal,
and Samuel at Mizpeh and Shen. Always they were symbols of stability, of
what the Egyptians described as 'the place of establishing
forever'—emblem of the faith 'that the pillars of the earth are the
Lords,' and He hath set the world upon them."

"In all countries," remarks another writer, "as the earliest of man's
work we recognise the sublime, mysteriously speaking, ever recurring
monolith": but by no people were pillars so venerated, or so variously
used as by the Egyptians. Originally, perhaps, they served as
astronomical instruments to mark the time, to denote the stages of the
heavenly bodies, and to assist in the orienting of temples. Connected
with the places of worship they were gradually associated with the gods,
and became in time symbols of deity, as we may learn from Professor
Breasted's "History of the Development of Religion and Thought in
Ancient Egypt," in which delightful book he tells us that the obelisk,
as Egyptians called the pillar, came at last to stand pre-eminently for
the great Sun God.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

This veneration of upstanding stones answered so deep a need in man's
habits of worship that it proved to be one of the last forms of idolatry
to give way before Monotheism, the worship of the One Invisible God. The
Israelites, as the Bible witnesses, cling stubbornly to their "stocks
and stones," reverence for which they may have learned in Egypt during
their long sojourn there; and even in Christian countries the custom
remained with such tenacity that the Lateran Council formally prohibited
stone worship as late at 452.

From Egypt, it is said, the custom of placing Pillars before temples was
borrowed by the Phœnicians, but this has been somewhat disputed; be that
as it may, we know that Hiram of Tyre erected two great columns before
his magnificent temple of Melkarth, where Herodotus saw them five
centuries afterwards. It was these, perhaps, that served Hiram as models
for the more famous Pillars which he erected before the Temple of
Solomon.

Of these Pillars one description is in the Book of Kings, another in the
Book of Chronicles. In the former record the height is given as eighteen
cubits; in the latter as thirty-five; if a cubit be accepted as denoting
eighteen inches, the former height would be twenty-seven, the latter
fifty-two and one-half feet, a variation of twenty-five feet. To explain
this discrepancy scholars have supposed Kings to give the height of only
one, Chronicles the combined height of both, leaving allowances for the
sockets of the head-pieces. Concerning these head-pieces, historians
have differed, but none have given a clearer explanation than Mackey:

"Above the pillar, and covering its upper part to the depth of nine
inches, was an oval body or chapiter seven feet and a half in height.
Springing out from the pillar, at the junction of the chapiter with it,
was a row of lotus petals, which, first spreading around the chapiter,
afterwards

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

gently curved downward towards the pillar, something like the Acanthus
leaves on the capital of a Corinthian column. About two-fifths of the
distance from the bottom of the chapiter, or just below its most bulging
part, a tissue of network was carved, which extended over its whole
upper surface. To the bottom of this network was suspended a series of
fringes, and on these again were carved two rows of pomegranates, one
hundred being in each row."

#### II

The Pillars were cylindrical in shape, probably, and were cast of brass,
and the combined weight must have been not less than fifty-three tons.
One of them was called Boaz, the other Jachin, and the former stood in
the northeast corner of the Porch, the latter in the southeast; Jachin
was the right pillar, Boaz the left, and this means that right and left
have reference to one standing inside the Temple, which faced the East.
According to the tradition, the Pillars were cast in foundries situated
between Succoth and Zeredatha, about thirty-five miles northeast of
Jerusalem, whose moulders and jewellers still use clay brought from that
region.

The network about the chapiter was probably an ornamental lattice work
of metal, though some think it was an interlacing of branches or vines.
The lily-work, doubtless, was a formal design, made to represent a
species of the Egyptian lotus, a sacred plant among the dwellers of the
Nile and much used by them. There were no globes on these Pillars,
though the chapiters themselves were spherical; the globes were added at
a late date by some Masonic ritualist, Preston it may be.

Those Pillars, strange to say, were not often copied by mediæval
builders, though they seem to have been imitated

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

in the Cathedral of Notre Dame, at Poitiers, erected in 1161; and in the
Wurtzburg Cathedral, in Bavaria, the work, it seems, of the Comacines.
But at a very early date they were used by Masons for symbolical
purposes, as testified by the history of the Compagnonage, and by the
"Old Charges" of the Freemasons.

In the latter we find a curious legend. The Cooke MS. of about 1350
relates that before Noah's flood, Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal Cain knew that
God was to destroy the world; "wherefore they wrote the sciences that
they had found out on two pillars of stone. Hermes, that was son to
Cush, afterwards found the two pillars, and the sciences written
thereon; and Abraham taught them to the Egyptians." Inasmuch as it was
supposed that Masonry had come from Egypt the old chronicles thus
quaintly sought to link their traditions up to the very beginnings of
the world. From these Old Charges, we may suppose, the legend crept into
the symbolic lore of the Craft, and was thus preserved until Speculative
days, when the Pillar symbolism became embodied in the Rituals as we now
have them.

It has often been shown that in the descriptions and interpretations
given in our work of the Pillars there are many inaccuracies and
inconsistencies. Thus, only fourteen American jurisdictions use the
Pillars as being eighteen cubits in height; one jurisdiction makes them
thirty, and twenty-seven make them thirty-five! Thirty-five cubits is a
lofty height indeed and would make the Pillars entirely out of
proportion to a Temple that was only ninety feet long and thirty feet
wide! But such inaccuracies as these, historical and architectural, need
not trouble us if we will but keep in mind the fact that with us the
Pillars have become symbols of truth, and that errors of fact do not
touch the hidden meanings.

What are these hidden meanings? William Preston

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

saw in them a reference to the Pillar of Cloud and the Pillar of Fire by
which, it is said, the Israelites were guided, and accordingly made them
to stand for Providence. This is ingenious but altogether out of harmony
with the long historical use of the emblems, for no other interpreter
had ever found such meanings in them. Caldecott believed that the Jewish
king stood before one Pillar in public ceremonies and the High Priest
before the other, and that the Pillars consequently stand for Government
and Religion in society. Brother Covey-Crump, writing in the
*Transactions of the Authors’ Lodge*, vol. I, made them to stand for
Space and Time, the two pillars through which the human mind passes into
knowledge; of similar character is the other reading which sees in them
the two tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. Mackey, reasoning from their
names, Jachin, which means, "He shall establish," and Boaz, "In it is
strength," makes them to mean the strength and the stability of Masonry.

Many of the old Jewish Rabbis, afterwards followed by the Kabbalists,
found in them the symbolism of birth; as one wrote: "The names of the
pillars signified potency and perpetuity; the pomegranates on their
capitals or chapiters were symbols of generation." With this, after
everything is taken into consideration, I am inclined to agree. Being
properly stationed at the door of the lodge room, or on the Porch of the
Temple, they signify entrance, for it is through them that the candidate
passes to his initiation, and Initiation, as we have already seen, is
birth into a new life.

When thus understood the Two Pillars represent a law that applies
throughout the world of men, as well as in the lodge, and that in a
sense not at all far-fetched. We have learned that many of our human
ills spring from bad heredity and come to us in birth, and not until men

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

are well born will they be well men, sound in body and soul. And what is
true of birth into life is also true of any new birth into any of the
realms of life. If the pillars at the door of the family be strong and
clean the child will be wholesome and happy in its life therein. If wise
men guard the doorways of the schools our youth will enter into the
mind's world of light and power, but not otherwise. For always is it,
that if one would anywhere become a Master he must make a right entrance
into Life's Temple. And he who thus lives will himself become a Pillar,
strengthened and strengthening, against which Kings and Priests may
lean, and past which others may be enabled to enter into the life that
is life indeed. Woe be it to human society, if ever it neglects to give,
in any of its spheres, right birth to its children, its seekers and
learners!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. The Globes](syma39.md)
