[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma26)  [Next](syma28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

### WORKING TOOLS OF AN ENTERED APPRENTICE

#### I

"Man is a Tool-using Animal; weak in himself, and of small stature, he
stands on a basis, at most for the flattest-soled, of some half-square
foot, insecurely enough; has to straddle out his legs, lest the very
wind supplant him. Feeblest of bipeds! Three quintals are a crushing
load to him; the steer of the meadow tosses him aloft, like a waste rag.
Nevertheless he can use tools, can devise tools; with these the granite
mountain melts into light dust before him; he kneads glowing iron, as if
it were soft paste; seas are his smooth highway, winds and fire his
unwearying steeds. Nowhere do you find him without tools; without tools
he is nothing, with tools he is all."

Thus writes Thomas Carlyle, who was not always as Masonic as he is here.
It would be difficult to state in language more forceful the whole
philosophy underlying the Working Tools of Masonry, albeit reference
might also be made to Henri Bergson, who wrote his "Creative Evolution"
many years after Carlyle had penned his "Sartor Resartus," and when new
light had come, and men had grown wiser in science. In his book, which
is the most original discussion of Evolution since Darwin's "Origin of
Species," Bergson shows that nothing more distinguishes the man from the
brute than his use of tools. The brute has his tools built into his own
body

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and consequently can neither modify nor change them; the beaver's teeth,
the spider's spinnet, the eagle's talons, the lion's claws, in all these
and similar cases the brute's tool is a part of the brute's anatomy,
with the result that its operations are confined within very narrow
limits. But man makes his own tools, can modify or change them at will,
and is always free to adapt himself and his work to ever-changing needs;
from this has arisen man's superiority to the brute creation, for he can
use his tools upon himself and thus change his own nature as well as the
external world. Accordingly, Bergson defines man as "the animal that
makes things," and he is careful to show that man's superiority lies in
his power to work upon *himself* as well as upon *things*.

Here, in this last clause, is the key to Masonry's use of Working Tools.
In no case are they instruments to be used on external things, though
they are symbolised by the tools of the Operative Builders; in every
case they are mental or moral forces with which a man may reshape
himself into a masterful man and help reshape society into a great
Brotherhood. With the implements thus understood, no man or Mason can
ever hope to build except he be equipped with his kit of tools.

But some tools are simpler in use than others, and better adapted to
simpler work; therefore the Craft has wisely distributed the implements
among the Degrees, in recognition of the candidate's increase of skill
and responsibility; in the First Degree the Apprentice is given the
Twenty-four Inch Guage and Common Gavel; in the Second the candidate is
allotted the Plumb, Square and Level; while the Master Mason, in token
of his task in completing the building work, is given the Trowel.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

#### II

The Twenty-four Inch Guage.

This is nothing other than an ordinary two-foot rule such as may be
found in use among stone-masons of to-day; as such we need not go far to
seek its origin or dive deep to find its meaning. Our Monitors make it
the symbol of time well systematised, and our older writers have often
referred to Sts. Ambrose and Augustine, and to King Alfred, as exemplars
of the wisdom of devoting eight hours to the service of God and
distressed worthy brethren, eight hours to their usual vocation, and
eight to rest and to refreshment. This reading of the symbolism may be
accepted without reserve, but is not this right use and dividing of time
itself suggestive of that wider use of law and order so necessary in the
life of the individual and the world?

What time is in itself we do not know, perhaps we shall never know. But
in every-day life it is nothing other than our opportunity to live and
work. We have our allotted span of existence; we have our allotted task;
our wisdom consists in making one fit the other. Time flows over some
men as water flows over a stone; to others a single hour may bring a new
depth of experience and open out new vistas of vision. It is not the
least among the secrets of genius that it understands the value of the
odd moment or the spare hour. Many Illinois lawyers between 1840 and
1860 found their days eaten up by their practice; Abraham Lincoln was as
busy as the others but he managed in his *spare time* to learn White's
Geometry by heart, to study the technique of politics, and to master
every phase and angle of the slavery question. There were only
twenty-four hours in one of Albert Pike's days even as in ours; he made
of himself, in spite of a thousand handicaps, one of the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

profoundest scholars of his day—antiquarian, linguist, jurist,
philologist, what not; he "found the Scottish Rite a log-cabin and left
it a palace"; he ploughed his influence into America, and all because he
knew how to apply the guage to his time.

Much of the waste and confusion of human existence arises from men's
failure to measure their work by some standard or rule; they float down
the stream like chips, take things as they come and go, and suffer
themselves to be blown this way and that like a derelict at sea. Their
days are as mere heaps of stone to which no quarryman has ever brought
his tools. He who has learned how to transform time into life, deals
with circumstances as an artist uses his materials; he has ever before
him a plan laid out on his mind's tracing-board; he selects his
materials and appoints each to its appropriate function, fitting and
shaping all according to his design.

What is the standard by which we may test our work? What is the measure
of rightness? For many centuries we have been dividing our actions into
two opposing tables, one made up of *good* actions, and one of *bad*.
When we have desired to learn whether or not some proposed action was
good or bad we searched for it in the two lists. But this *morality by
code* is rapidly breaking down, for we find that a deed will be wrong
under some circumstances, right under others. If I shoot a man for
assaulting my family I may do right; if I shoot a friend in a quarrel I
do evil. The one test which we can apply to any and every action is,
"What is its effect on life?" If it enlarges, exalts, ennobles, if it
makes life more musical, more worthful, more rich, it is good; if it
cramps, corrupts, debases, defiles, it is evil. This is *life morality*
and every evidence indicates that it is to be the morality of the
future.

And it is also, I believe, the morality of Masonry, as

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

symbolised by that Working Tool which would teach us how to transform
time into life. He who learns this use of it need never regret the
passing of "every year," for every year will but add honour to his head
and riches to his heart until the end comes when time will lead him to
eternity.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Old time will end our stay,  
 But no time, if we end well, will end our glory."

</div>

#### III

In the Middle Ages the Gavel was a symbol often made use of by religious
bodies to signify possession, a meaning derived, perhaps, from the
ancient custom of throwing a gavel (or hammer) across a field to claim
ownership. In the Scandinavian mythology it was Thor's hammer and stood
for power, often seen in the thunderings and lightnings by which that
dread god split the rocks and destroyed the trees. It is similarly used,
we learn from H.G.M. Murray-Aynsley ("A.Q.C.," vol. VI, p. 51) by New
Zealanders, the Maoris, and Channel Island savages. In Masonry it has
other meanings, being derived from the tool used by the workmen in
dressing a stone to the desired shape.

As a Working Tool it must not be confused with the Master's hammer
which, because it stands for his authority, is often called "Hiram," in
commemoration of the authority wielded by the First Grand Master. The
Gavel is a tool with one sharp edge and combines the functions of the
hammer and the chisel. When looked at from the end, with the cutting
edge turned up, it has the appearance of the gable of a house, and this
suggested to Mackey that it may have been derived from the German
"gipful," or gable. However that may be, it is a

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

tool for shaping and not for breaking and is therefore not an emblem of
*force*, as some have fancied, though it is obvious that force must be
employed to use it.

According to the Monitorial explanation, "The *common gavel* is an
instrument made use of by Operative Masons, to break off the corners of
rough stones, the better to fit them for the builder's use; but we, as
free and accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more
noble and glorious purpose of divesting our minds and consciences of all
the vices and superfluities of life, thereby fitting our bodies, as
living stones, for that spiritual building, that house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens." In other connections we are told that
the Gavel was used by Operative Masons to break off the knobs and
excrescences of stones in order to shape the Rough Ashlar into the
Perfect Ashlar, or finished building stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. An Introduction to the Second Step](syma28)
