[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma20)  [Next](syma22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

### "LUX E TENEBRIS"

#### I

"All great minds love the light," writes Brother J. F. Newton. "It is
the mother of beauty and the joy of the world. It tells men all they
know and their speech about it is gladsome and grateful. Light is to the
mind what food is to the body; it brings the morning, when the shadows
flee away, and the loveliness of earth is uncurtained. This is the
mystery of light. It is not matter, but a form of motion; it is not
spirit, though it seems closely akin to it; it is the gateway where
matter and spirit pass and repass. Of all that is in nature it the most
resembles God, in its gentleness, in its beauty, and in its pity."

This passage, so beautiful to read, and so revealing, would have met
with a still more cordial response from the men of ancient days, for it
seems that the first great religion of the world was the worship of
light. As we read in Norman Lockyer's "Dawn of Astronomy": "Sunrise it
was that inspired the first prayers of our race, and called forth the
first sacrificial flames." After telling how large a place this light
worship occupied among the remote peoples of India, the same author goes
on to say, "The ancient Egyptians, whether they were separate from, or
more or less allied in their origin to, the early inhabitants of India,
had exactly the same view of Nature Worship, and we find in their hymns
and in the lists of their gods that the Dawn and the Sunrise were the
great

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

revelations of Nature, and the things which were most important to man;
and therefore everything connected with the Sunrise and the Dawn was
worshipped." Knowing little of the cure return of nature's cycles, the
Egyptians were fearful lest, the sun having disappeared at dusk, he
would forget to return; accordingly, the night was a season of
foreboding and fear, while the Dawn was an occasion of rejoicing. Out of
this alternation of fear and gladness, of the sun's apparent death, and
his apparent return to life, arose that ancient Egyptian Light Religion,
so many echoes of which remain with us in our Masonic symbolism.

### II

The ritualism of light and darkness occurs and recurs throughout the
Bible like a refrain. When Jehovah would bring the world out of the
dripping chaos He is made to say, "Let there be Light"; of Him the
Psalmist cried, "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path"; the Evangelist says of Him that "God is Light, and in Him is no
darkness at all"; and the Book of Revelation promises the faithful that
in the Great Life beyond, there will be no more night.

Jamblichus wrote that "Light is the simplicity, the penetration and the
ubiquity of God." Zoroaster made light to stand for all the good of
life, and darkness for its evil. In the Ancient Mysteries the candidate,
clothed in white, went into the caverns of the night to issue thence
into a place of illumination. The Kabbalist's great book was the
"Zohar," which means light, and it is an exposition of the saying, "Let
there be Light." Similarly one of the great mottoes of Masonry is "lux e
tenebris," light out of darkness, while Masons, true Masons, are justly
called the "sons of light"; and in all the ceremonies there is not

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

one more eloquent act than the "bringing of the candidate to light."

What is this Light that has been shed abroad in our lives? It is
sometimes explained as Knowledge, and it is that; but it is more than
that, for it is also Truth. Knowledge is the mind's awareness of a fact,
while truth is the mind's understanding of the meaning of that fact.
Facts may heap themselves up like the grains in a pile of sand; they may
have little or no apparent relations with each other; and the man who is
said to have knowledge of them may know little more than their number
and their names. But when he has learned the hidden connections of these
facts, how they bear upon each other, and what import they have for
human life, he has learned Truth.

#### III

With this in mind, consider the world of men. Individuals jostle each
other, they love and fight, events come and go, and the facts of life
make and unmake themselves like summer clouds; thus considered the world
is a jumble of unrelated happenings enough to bewilder the mind and
freeze the heart. But Masonry says to this world, "Each and all of your
facts are mystically bound together, your individuals are linked by
unseen ties, and all your apparently warring forces are steadily at work
to build a Temple in the world." Consider, also, the individual,
himself. He finds in himself an array of feelings, thoughts, impulses,
experiences, existing side by side, but apparently making for no end. To
this man Masonry says, "The deepest forces in you are making toward
Goodness, Beauty, Truth; far withdrawn in your nature is a Buried
Temple; at the core of your being is the hidden Master; you are a
potential Christ." When

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masonry utters
this word, which is more than a word, to the world and to the man who
lives in the world, it is revealing the hidden unity that binds the
jangling facts together; it is finding the song among the strings; it is
discovering the Lost Word; it is bringing truth, that is to say, Light,
into the race of men; it says, "Let there be light, and there is light."
To this end every symbol speaks; of this mission the Ritual is eloquent
more than the tongues of men and of angels, from the first of it unto
the last.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Words, Grips and Tokens](syma22.md)
