[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma57)  [Next](syma59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

### CHAPTER LIV

### CONCLUSION

#### I

The Hour Glass. In writing of Masons’ Marks, Brother Gould notes that
one of the commonest has ever been the figure of an Hour Glass. "The
Hour Glass form, very slightly modified, has been used in every age down
to the present, and in almost every country. According to some good
authorities, it was a custom (at the period immediately preceding the
era of Grand Lodges) to inter an Hour Glass with the dead, as an emblem
of the sands of life having run out." What could more clearly prove the
hold which this simple but eloquent symbol has ever had on the
imagination of man? "The sands of life! they are swiftly running away.
Be up, mortal, and about your task. Soon the night cometh when no man
can work. In the grave man will seek him out no more inventions; what
you do you must do while it is still called To-day!" Such is the message
of the Hour Glass, too simple to need any interpreter. He who has
learned how to transform time into life, and how to make the years leave
behind them that which perishes not, who lives the Eternal Life in the
midst of time—such a one has learned the lesson of the Glass.

#### II

The Scythe. If the Hour Glass is the symbol of the fleetingness of a
mortal life in which all do fade as Both the leaf, in which the sands
are ever running out, the Scythe is the figure of Time which is itself
that stream

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

in which the sands are borne along. Time! What a mighty theme! The
libraries of the world could not hold the books that might be written
about this eternally fascinating, eternally elusive mystery! so infinite
are the suggestions of one small symbol in Masonry's House of Doctrine.

#### III

Time is ever with us, flowing through our minds as the blood courses
through our veins, yet does it mystify us; and the more thinking we do
about it the more mysterious does it become. We divide it into Past,
Present, and Future. But what is the Past? Has it ceased to exist? If
so, why does it continue to influence us? If it continues to exist why
do we call it the Past? What is the Future? Is it something already
made, awaiting us Out There as the land waits for its explorer? What is
the Present? We feel that it exists, yet it eludes us. Before I have
said "Now" it is still future; the moment I have said it, it belongs to
the past. How can one's mind lay hold of that which is always becoming
but never is? If one's mind can not apprehend it, how can it be said to
exist? It is such puzzles as these that have led our most opulent minds
to despair of ever surprising its secret from Time.

Nevertheless, Time is here, a part of the scheme of things, for good or
for bale; indeed, it seems to be the very stuff of life itself, as
Bergson has argued so brilliantly in his "Creative Evolution." Existence
itself is a process of duration and man begins to die the moment he is
born.

#### IV

The stately solemn words of the Lecture, offered in elucidation of the
symbol, leave the mind saddened and

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

weighted with a sense of the frailty, or even futility, of life. William
Morris, who is in so many ways the poet of architecture, felt in the
same way about it. All through his pages one feels its presence like a
shadow against which life's little events become etched into brighter
relief, so that the little amenities of the day become all the dearer in
that they flutter so fragilely over the abysm of eternity, all the more
precious because "the sweet days die."

But there is no need that we be shadowed by the sad-sweetness of this
melancholy. Time is a part of the scheme of things, it is the very form
of life, so that he who accepts life must also accept Time and look upon
it as friend and ally rather than enemy. Time helps to solve our
problems, assuages our griefs, and always carries us farther into the
strange adventure of existence. The most triumphant minds have trusted
themselves to it, as a child to its mother, learning how to transform it
into ever richer life, not lamenting the past, nor impatient for the
future, but living in an Eternal Now which must be such Time as heaven
knows. "Man postpones or remembers," complains Emerson; "he does not
live in the present, but with reverted eye laments the past, or,
heedless of the riches which surround him, stands on tiptoe to foresee
the future. He cannot be happy and strong until he too lives with Nature
in the present above time!

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Great souls live many an eon in Man's brief years,  
   To him who dreads no spite of Fate or Chance,  
 Yet loves the Earth, and Man, and starry spheres,  
   Life's swiftness is the pulse of life's romance;  
 And when the footsteps fall of Death's advance  
   He hears the feet; he quails not, but he hears."

</div>

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

#### V

It is above all things fitting that the Ritual which began with the
candidate's birth into the world of the lodge should end by bringing him
to that death which is but a larger birth into the Grand Lodge above;
thus does our sublime symbolism, like the sky, gather all things into
its embrace and overarch the end as well as the beginning. So also is it
fitting that the Ritual should throw about the instruments and trappings
of the grave the memories of the slain Master, thus reminding us that
death may be transfigured by a great soul into a pæan and a triumph.

To die is as natural as to be born. Death is no interloper in the
universe, but at one with its laws and its life; in truth, it is itself
the friend and servant of life in that it keeps fresh the stream and
removes the outworn and the old "lest one good custom should corrupt the
world." The very act of death proves this, for, however much we shrink
from its approach, we yield peacefully to it when it comes. Of this all
our physicians testify, as witness these words from one of the noblest
of them, Dr. Osier

"I have careful notes of about five hundred death beds, studied
particularly with reference to the modes of death and the sensations of
the dying. Ninety suffered bodily pain or distress of one sort or
another; eleven showed mental apprehension; two positive terror; one
expressed spiritual exaltation; one bitter remorse. The great majority
gave no sign one way or another; like their birth their death was a
sleep and a forgetting."

Natural as it is, however, death will ever remain solemn, and even sad,
not only because of what comes after, or "because of the body's
masterful negation," but because, as the Lecture reminds us, the day of
death is a kind of judgment day, for it brings to an end and sets

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

a lasting seal upon the life of a man. The world with its problems, its
imperious needs, its grey tragedies, and ancient heartbreaks, is left
behind; the man's career is ended, and the influences of his life, the
harvest of his deeds—all these are now taken from his control. What he
has done he has done, and death places it beyond his changing. Surely,
it must be an awful thing for a human being to realise at the last that,
so far as he has been concerned, there is less happiness, less love,
less kindliness and honour among men than before he entered life. To so
live in the midst of this mystery-haunted world, to so work among the
winged days that little children may be happier, youth more joyous,
manhood more clean, and old age less lonely; to so live that men will
hate less and love more, be honourable in public dealings as in private
acts, create more than destroy; to so live that the great Kingdom of
Brotherhood may be brought near and man be bound closer to man, and
woman closer to woman; that it is to be a Mason!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix: Questions for Discussion](syma59)
