[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma14)  [Next](syma16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### CHAPTER XI

### CIRCUMAMBULATION

#### I

We come now to the Rite of the Mystic Journey wherein the candidate
travels from the East to the West by way of the South, a ceremony of
much interest and many meanings. How it found its way into our Ritual
is, I believe, a mystery, though some have sought its origin in the
Operative custom of leading the initiate from one station to another for
examination; but this origin seems unreasonable because such a journey
would have been conducted in a very different manner. It is more
probable that Circumambulation ("walking around") is one of our
inheritances from ancient times.

Primitive people firmly believed that they could wield influence over a
god by imitating his actions. They believed the sun to be a god, or the
visible embodiment of a god, who made a daily tour of the heavens,
beginning in the east (in the northern hemisphere), and progressing
toward the west by way of the south; it was most natural, therefore,
that they should evolve a ceremony in imitation of this. Accordingly, in
India, in Egypt, in Greece, and in Rome we early find the practice of
circumambulation.

In Greece, the priest, or the priest leading the worshippers, would walk
three times around the altar, always keeping it to the right, sprinkling
it the while with meal and holy water. (See Mackey's "Symbolism," ch.
21.) The Romans employed a similar ceremony and called it

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "dextroversum,"
meaning "from the right to the left." Being so often used in connection
with the rites whereby a person or an object was "purified,"
circumambulation became, after a time, the Roman equivalent of
purification. Also "among the Hindoos," says Mackey, "the same rite of
Circumambulation has always been practised," in illustration of which he
cites the early morning ceremonies of a Brahmin priest who first adores
the sun then walks towards the west by way of the south saying, "I
follow the course of the sun." Mackey likewise refers to the Druids as
having performed the same rite, and to the fact that even in recent
years it has been a custom in the remoter portions of Ireland. Some have
seen in the circular row of stones at Stonehenge a huge altar built for
the purposes of Circumambulation, and others have seen in the various
processions of the early Christian church an example of the same custom.
It will be interesting, further, to note that the Greeks accompanied the
journey with a sacred chant, divided into three parts, the *strophe*,
the *antistrophe*, and the *epode*, on which Mackey makes a significant
comment: "The analogy between the chanting of an ode by the ancients and
the recitation of a passage of Scripture in the Masonic Circumambulation
will be at once apparent."

#### II

What is the meaning of Circumambulation for us as Masons, and in our
daily lives?

Circumambulation is sometimes understood, among older Masonic writers
especially, as a symbol of the progress of Masonry itself, which,
according to the old Legends, was supposed to have originated in the
East, in Egypt more particularly. This is hinted at in certain of the
Old Charges in which we find the following scrap

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of dialogue: "When did it \[Masonry\] begin? It did begin with the first
men of the East."

Other writers, Pike among them, see in this symbolism a figure of the
progress of the civilisation of humanity. Whether that civilisation
began in Egypt as some argue, or in Babylonia as others contend, it did
begin in the Orient and travelled thence, along the Mediterranean, to
the Occident, for, "all knowledge, all religion, and all arts and
sciences have travelled according to the course of the sun from east to
west."

Again, some writers see in Circumambulation a drama of the development
of the individual life, which begins in the young vigour of the Rising
Sun, reaches its climax in the meridian splendour of the South, and
declines to the old age of the West.

Pierson sees in it an analogy of the individual's Masonic progress
("Traditions of Freemasonry," ch. 2): "The Masonic symbolism is that the
Circumambulation and the obstructions at the various points refer to the
labours and difficulties of the student in his progress from
intellectual darkness or ignorance to intellectual light or truth."

#### III

Yet again, others see in it an allegory of the pilgrimage of the soul
through the shadows of this earth life. We are born in darkness and walk
all our days in search of That which is Lost, "the lost harmony among
the strings." Believing that somewhere there exists the Absolute Life we
make a continual search and transform our days into a long Pilgrim's
Progress.

These various interpretations, you will have observed, have their point
of departure, one and all, in the thought that Circumambulation is a
journey; with this one cannot

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

quarrel, but may one not also be permitted to fashion an explanation
which builds on the fact that the candidate walks in harmony with the
sun? To my mind this is its point of greatest significance, even as it
was evidently the original idea embodied. Let the sun represent the
powers and laws of nature as in the ancient ceremonies: let
Circumambulation be understood as an attempt to work in harmony with
those powers and laws, and we see at once that the Rite gives us the
secret of human accomplishment. To fight nature is suicide; to work in
co-operation with her is power. To keep step with her cycles, to move in
sympathy with her vibrations, that gives us fulness of life. The sailor
clasps hands with her winds, the farmer adjusts himself to her chemic
processes, the artist vibrates with the pulses of her beauty, the poet
weaves her rhythms into his lines, the saint harmonises himself with her
laws as they rise in the soul. It is thus and thus only that we mount
the stairs to Life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Approaching the East](syma16)
