[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma17)  [Next](syma19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

### THE OBLIGATION

#### I

The turning point in the ceremony of each degree is the Obligation, for
it is that which marks the Apprentice an Apprentice, the Fellow Craft a
Fellow Craft, and the Master Mason a Master Mason; consequently the
subject is worthy of careful consideration in this connection,
especially as there will be no need of a repetition of the discussion in
our study of the Second and Third Degrees.

Obligation, being a Latin word, literally means a "binding to"; it is
more than an oath, and more than a vow, for it combines both, and it has
been used, in one form or another, from antiquity. Philo described it as
"the most sure symbol of good faith," and Cicero defined it as "an
affirmation under the sanction of religion." Brother Twining (*American
Tyler-Keystone*, vol. xviii, p. 423), writing in our own day, gives it a
similar meaning: "An oath may be defined as an asseveration or promise
made under non-human penalty or sanction." Some oaths have an
imprecation attached but others do not.

The widespread use of oaths, in ancient and in modern times, has been
well described by J. E. Tyler: "Through all the diversified stages of
society from the lowest barbarism to the highest cultivation of
civilised life—where the true religion has been professed, no less than
where paganism has retained its hold, recourse has been had to oaths as
affording the nearest approximation to certainty in

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

evidence, and the surest pledge of the performance of a promise."

In the England of Operative days, oaths were taken as a matter of
course, as witness Gould's "Concise History": "From the time of
Athelstan down to the Norman Conquest, and from the Conqueror to Edward
I and later, the oath of allegiance was annually administered to every
free man." Gould suggests that this oath of allegiance to the king may
have been the original of the Masonic Obligation: "The wording of this
oath, as given in a publication of 1642; 'you shall be true and faithful
to our Sovereign Lord the King,' is substantially the same as that of
the corresponding 'charge' or inculcation which is met with in Masonic
Constitutions. The two obligations . . . virtually stand on the same
level as regards antiquity, and, as survivals of still earlier forms,
their close resemblance is very suggestive of their common origin." It
must be remembered, however, that the guild of that day could enforce
its oaths only within narrow limits; grave offences were necessarily
turned over to the courts which administered the common law. At the
present day oaths and obligations are in very common use, from the
crowning of a king to the "swearing in" of a juror. "The world is held
together by oaths and affirmations, administered by the proper
authorities, to all rulers and officials of a high and low degree in
State and municipalities, and in every phase of human society. Without
official oaths the country would undoubtedly lapse into a state of
disorder, confusion, and finally anarchy." (*Trestle Board*, vol. xx, p.
247.) This right Freemasonry also enjoys, and for the same reasons, as
another writer has expressed it: "In Freemasonry a number of men form
themselves into a society, whose main end is to improve in commendable
skill and knowledge, and to promote universal beneficence and the social
virtues of human

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

life under the solemn obligations of an oath. This liberty all human
societies enjoy without impeachment or reflection."

#### II

It is difficult to believe, in the light of all this, that any sane
person could attack Masonry for being an oath-bound Fraternity,
especially since its oath is itself a symbol of those ties and
obligations which everywhere bind men together; but such has been the
case. The Roman Catholic attacks, from 1738 when Pope Clement the
Twelfth issued the first papal bull against us, until the present year
of grace, have all been principally aimed at our Obligation, a very
inconsistent course in a society that authorises such a secret
fraternity as the Jesuits. A few other churches and sects have followed
suit, usually on the ground that Christ's saying that "whatsoever is
more than yea or nay cometh of evil," makes oaths unchristian. Laying
aside the false interpretations thus made of the Gospel text, this
position is difficult to explain on the part of such organisations, for
they use an obligation in the marriage ceremony of the most solemn kind,
and their members often do not refuse to take oath when entering public
office. The attack on Masonry made in America early last century, which
used the Morgan affair as its subterfuge, and which was really a
political scheme in disguise, grew savage in its condemnation of the
Masonic Obligation, as is made clear by the words of one of its leaders,
John Quincy Adams:

"The whole case between Masonry and Anti-Masonry, now on trial before
the tribunal of public opinion, is consecrated in a single act. Let a
single lodge resolve that they will cease to administer the oath, *and
that lodge is dissolved*. Let the whole Order resolve that this oath

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

shall be no longer administered, *the Order is dissolved; for the
abolition of the oath necessarily imports the extinction of all other
landmarks*."

Of the penalties supposed to be attached to the Obligation, and which
have especially aroused the animosity of the Anti-Masons, we have
already spoken but more may be said in the present connection, with due
reserves of secrecy; and I may say that I am herein much indebted to the
illuminating article published in *The Builder* (vol. n, p. 135) by my
friend and Colleague, Brother Robert I. Clegg.

#### III

Commenting on one phase of the matter he writes: "Death by slow drowning
was once by legal authority \[in England—H.L.H.\] established as a
proper punishment. . . . Consider the following: In the curious
ordinances of Henry VI. for the proper conduct of the Court of Admiralty
of the Humber, are enumerated various offences of a maritime connection
and their due punishments. To adhere closely to the character of the
Court, and to be within proper jurisdiction of the Admiralty, the
punishments were generally inflicted at low-water mark." This court, he
says, being composed of "Masters, merchants, and marines, with all
others that do enjoy the King's stream with hook, net, or any engine"
(or implement), was addressed, when assembled, as follows:

"You, Masters of the Quest, if you or any of you discover or disclose
anything of the King's secret counsel or of the counsel of your fellows
(for the present you are admitted to be the King's Counsellors) you are
to be, and shall be, had down to the low-water mark, where must be made
three times, O Yes! for the King, and then and there this punishment, by
the law prescribed,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

shall be inflicted upon them; that is, their hands and feet bound, their
throats cut, their tongues pulled out, and their bodies thrown into the
sea."

In the England of the seventeenth century the death penalty, and that in
its most terrible forms, was often inflicted because of comparatively
small offences such as petty theft. Oaths were so freely given and taken
that every little organisation had its own, even the brotherhood of pig
drivers! If certain far-off echoes of these practices seem to be heard
now and then in our own form it is because the Obligation was probably
cast in its present mould in the early eighteenth century. This
contention that the Penalties are thus of comparatively recent origin is
apparently borne out by the fact that such Obligations as are found in
the Old Charges are very brief and of quite a different character. I may
cite, as one specimen of these, that found in the Harleian Mss. No.
2054, of the seventeenth century:

"There are several words and signs of a Freemason to be revealed to you
which as you will answer before God at the great and terrible day of
Judgment, you keep secret and not to reveal the same to any in the
hearing of any person whatsoever but to the Masters and fellows of the
said society of Freemasons. So help me God." (Spelling modernised.)

As to the agitation for the simplification of the Obligation, the
Penalties more especially, much may be said pro and con. Archaic usages
and obsolete terms, often unintelligible to the modern Mason, may be
often found in the Ritual. Many are contending that these should be
eliminated or modernised, as witness the following from Brother
MacBride: "There are many errors in our ceremonies to be corrected, and
not a few rude customs should be abolished, before our lodges can become
what they ought to be, schools, in which men may learn the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

ways of right living and high thinking." With the spirit of this I am in
sympathy, but I have often felt, while witnessing the work in lodge,
that these very "errors" and archaisms are valuable in that they link us
up to a long past and thus give us the feeling, so much needed in a
hasty age too often irreverent of the past, of historical continuity.
But, on the other hand, other considerations connect up with the
Obligation, and other issues are at stake, and I have long believed that
the Penalties should be changed to conform, not only with common sense
and practicality, but with the modern spirit of humanitarianism, of
which Masonry itself was one of the first exemplars.

#### IV

After all, the one object of the Obligation, aside from its official
function of legally binding men to the Craft, is to secure secrecy, is
it not? And there is one little word often used by Masons which carries
all this within itself. This word is often spelled as it is pronounced,
"Hail," but it is properly the Anglo-Saxon word "hele" ("hell" is
derived from it!) and means "to bury, or to cover up." If "I hail" it
means that down in the underground of my memory, far out of reach of the
profane, I hide away all the affairs of my lodge, and all the secrets of
my brother.

Too much, perhaps, has already been written on the subject, but there is
yet another angle of it which deserves a word. We use all our arts and
influences to make the member realise his obligation to the Craft;
should we not do as much to make the lodge realise its obligation to the
member? A man spends a sum of money he can sometimes ill spare to join
the Fraternity; he devotes much time to learning the lectures; he is
admitted and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

entered as a member; and very often—very often indeed—the lodge itself
does not do one thing to explain to that man its symbolism or to
instruct him in its history! Is this right? I do not believe it is. I
believe that every lodge should do its utmost to place the right type of
literature in the hands of its members; that it should conduct courses
of lectures and Masonic schools; that it should encourage and support
study classes whenever possible; in short, that it should as completely
fulfil its duties to the candidate as it asks the candidate to do for
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Three Great Lights](syma19.md)
