[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma05)  [Next](syma07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### CHAPTER II

### THE PETITION FOR MEMBERSHIP

#### I

The first step toward seeking admission into the membership of a Masonic
lodge is to file with the Worshipful Master of the lodge nearest one's
residence a petition, which is a printed form fundamentally the same in
all jurisdictions; this form sets forth the petitioner's answers to the
usual constitutional questions and solemnly asserts that he has not been
"improperly solicited," but that he has sought the portals of the
Fraternity of his own free will and accord. Before this petition can be
presented to the lodge, which is usually done at the next regular
monthly communication, or business meeting, it must bear the signatures
of at least two Masons by way of recommendation; and then, after an
interval, usually of one month, is put to the ballot. If the prayer for
membership is then granted the petitioner is instructed to present
himself for initiation: if the prayer is denied the fee, which has
accompanied the petition, is returned, and the petitioner is notified of
his rejection. In a majority of American jurisdictions (by
"jurisdiction" is meant the territory over which a Grand Lodge holds
sway: in the United States it is almost always coincident with the
political boundaries of a state) the man is permitted to enter another
petition after a certain fixed interval, after which second application
the procedure is substantially the same as outlined above.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

#### II

The manner and details of making application for membership in a Masonic
lodge have changed somewhat from country to country and from century to
century but for the most part the custom has remained the same in
fundamentals. The points to be noted in the petition are (1) that the
candidate makes application of his own initiative, and not after having
been solicited; (2) that he holds himself to be in accord with the
Order's own teachings concerning the "constitutional questions"; (3)
that he voluntarily and at the beginning places himself entirely under
the authority and laws of the Fraternity, pledging himself the while to
a full obedience to the officers as well as to the laws; (4) and that he
seeks admittance, not for any gain to himself, but out of having heard
the good repute of the Order these many years.

In older times it was often permitted a man to shape the wording of his
own petition within certain limits: one of the most beautiful petitions
of this type of which there is any record is that presented by the first
great American naval hero, John Paul Jones, to the Lodge of St. Bernard,
Kirkcudbright, Scotland, under date of November 27, 1770 (see The
*Builder, August*, 1920, page 221):

"To the Worshipful, the Master, the Wardens and Permanent Brethren of
Free and Accepted Masons of the Lodge of St. Bernard held at
Kirkcudbright. The petition of John Paul, Commander of the 'John' of
Kirkendal, humbly sheweth—that your petitioner, for a considerable time
past, hath entertained a strong and sincere regard for your most noble,
honourable, and ancient Society of Free and Accepted Masons, but
hitherto not meeting with reasonable opportunity, do now most humbly
crave the benefit of receiving and admitting me into your

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fraternity as an
Entered Apprentice, promising, assuring and engaging to you that I shall
in all rules and orders of your Lodge be most obsequient and observant.
The complyance of you, Right Worshipful Wardens and rest of the
Brethren, will singularly oblige and very much honour, Right Worshipful,
your most humble petitioner and most humble servant.

John Paul."

It is worthy of note in passing, and merely as an item of information,
that Brother John Paul, afterwards known as John Paul Jones, was entered
and passed in the St. Bernard Lodge No. 122, Kilwinning, Scotland,
November 27th, 1770, and that his petition was endorsed by one Brother
James Smith as follows: "I do attest the petitioner to be a good man and
a person whom I have no doubt will in due time become a worthy brother."

#### III

In the days of John Paul Jones towns and cities were very small as
compared with the great urban centres of our day, and men did little
moving about from community to community, so that it was usually the
case that nearly all the members of a lodge would be personally
acquainted with a petitioner; under such conditions it was quite easy to
determine his fitness or unfitness. With us it is different. Our country
villages have grown to be towns of five to ten thousand population. Our
cities are deemed small if they contain not at least one hundred
thousand persons. Families live next door to each other without ever
becoming acquainted, and men work in the same shop, factory, or offices
without coming to know each other. Accordingly it is the rule rather
than the exception that a petitioner is not personally known to the
members of the lodge to which he submits his petition, and to meet this
situation it has become the custom for

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the Worshipful Master to appoint a committee to investigate into the
character and record of the man.

If it be true—as it undoubtedly is—that Freemasonry's future usefulness
and present welfare depends upon the quality of membership admitted,
then it is instantly apparent that in the whole structure of the Order
there is not another office of more urgent importance than that of the
investigating committee. The Worshipful Master should make it one of the
first of his duties to use great caution in naming such a committee, and
he should follow up his appointment by seeing that the committee
carefully perform their functions as are necessary. In the old days of
Operative Masonry the Master of the Works stood by with a watchful eye
to see that no rotten stone was incorporated into the walls of the
edifice over which he was superintendent: so should it be to-day with
the Worshipful Master, the Master of the Works in a Speculative Lodge.
In the long run his Mastership is judged, not by the number of
initiations he has given, or by the elaborateness of his ceremonials, or
the amount of money received during his administration, but by the
quality of the members he has permitted to enter Freemasonry during the
days of his authority. For if ever the walls of Freemasonry go
down—which God prevent—it will be due to no failure in the Order itself,
but to the defective and illy qualified men who are received within its
portals.

Many of the larger lodges, and in some instances Grand Lodges
themselves, are requiring a petitioner to fill out a questionnaire in
which he makes records of all the salient facts about himself, his life,
and his connections. This document duly signed and attested is, after it
has served its immediate purpose with the investigating committee, filed
in the archives of the lodge for future reference.

In some quarters opposition has developed to the questionnaire

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

system, why it is difficult to discover, because the same conditions
that have made an investigating committee necessary operate also to make
it good sense to use a questionnaire; the information therein entered is
merely a substitute for the personal knowledge men had of each other in
earlier times when communities were small and men were known to each
other. Moreover, modern society has grown very complicated, like the
vision Ezekiel had of wheels within wheels, and the Masonic institution
has had to readapt itself to changing conditions, so that now a lodge
performs functions it did not dream of in older days. Consider how
relief work has been organised and systematised; how employment bureaus
have been instituted; social clubs formed; and all of that: it is
immediately apparent that it is necessary to have "a line" on the men
who must be adjusted to and controlled by all this complicated
machinery. The information contained in a questionnaire has become
necessary, and how that information is to be obtained and preserved is a
mere matter of detail, but it is difficult to think of any other method
more effectual than the printed questionnaire.

#### IV

In the petition which a man presents to a lodge no statement is more
important than that he has not been solicited. This question of
solicitation, why it is an evil, and why it must be strictly forbidden
is a subject which, if there were space to go into it with the
thoroughness it deserves, would let us into some of the inmost truths
about Freemasonry, because it would help us to see, as by a kind of
internal illumination, something of the very soul of Freemasonry. As
things are in this book it is only possible to touch upon one of the
most superficial of the many matters that hinge upon it.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Solicitation is an evil, whenever practised, and utterly condemned by
the public opinion as well as by the laws of the Fraternity. Why is this
so? Because solicitation is an injustice to the petitioner and a danger
to the Craft, and that for many reasons, one or two of which may be
suggested.

Solicitation is wrong to a petitioner because at the door of the lodge,
when he for the first time presents himself there, he must solemnly
swear that he has not been solicited; but if he *has* been solicited,
how is he truthfully to make such a solemn declaration? See in what an
embarrassment the man's own friends have placed him!

Furthermore, those that solicit—supposing there are such for the sake of
the discussion—would usually be the men least qualified to present the
nature and claims of Freemasonry to a man with accuracy, and without
misleading misinterpretations: and the chances are that they would hold
out some kind of an appeal in order to win the man over, and tell him
that he will gain such and such a thing for himself if he will submit
his petition. But Freemasonry offers no rewards for membership except
itself; it does not offer emoluments, prestige, fame, position,
commercial advantages or any other such thing, and they who so interpret
it do it a wrong, and mislead the man that is persuaded by such means to
seek its doors.

Solicitation is quite as great a wrong to the Order itself, for it needs
not great numbers but sincere and devoted members, and your solicited
member—as every one knows who belongs to a society that encourages
solicitation—usually assumes the attitude that something is owing to
him, that the promises that were made of the advantages that would
accrue must be now fulfilled and consequently he is not useful at all,
and becomes not a Mason but a mere member, which is only so much dead

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

timber weighing down the Craft. Unless a man is willing to work, to
endure hardships, and to make sacrifices, he should stay outside the
Order; his name and his dues are valueless if they are not accompanied
by his willingness ever to serve as a loyal son of Freemasonry. It is of
his own "free will" that he comes, and that means "willingness" if it
means anything, and not otherwise will a man progress far in the
attainment of the Royal Art.

#### V

"But suppose," a Mason may here interject, "that I have a friend who
would, I am certain, make a genuine Mason; but he knows so little about
Freemasonry that he may never become enough interested in it voluntarily
to apply: this would be a loss to the lodge as well as to himself, would
it not? Therefore would it not be proper for me to seek to persuade him
to become a Mason?" This is a fair and honest question and it has been
answered often and often by the wise heads of the Order, which answer
may be put into my own words as follows: "Explain to him as best you are
able the principles of Freemasonry; acquaint him (as much as your
obligations will permit) with its spirit and its aims; give him Masonic
literature to read; but do not once, directly or indirectly, ask him to
submit a petition for membership, else you will violate your own
obligation and make it necessary for him to lie, if ever he stands at a
lodge door." Just as one may explain astronomy to a man without urging
him to become an astronomer so is it lawful to explain Masonry to men,
as is done times without number in publicly circulated books; but
solicitation is another matter, for its aim is not to instruct a man but
to persuade him to take a step which he must take, if he takes it at
all, on his own initiative.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

A few of our authorities—Albert Pike for example—have discouraged Masons
from going even this far, and they have argued that Masonry's teachings
are Masonry's secret and belong only to the initiated: but this, surely,
is carrying the matter too far, for Masonry has obligations to the world
as well as to its own membership. One might refute Pike's contention out
of his own mouth, for no other Mason has ever written more eloquently,
or to more effect, of the social mission of the Craft, as when he says:
"Masonry cannot in our age forsake the broad ways of life. She must walk
in the open street, appear in the crowded square, and teach by her
deeds, her <span class="small">LIFE</span>, more eloquent than any
lips."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Ballot](syma07)
