[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma11)  [Next](syma13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### THE ENTRANCE

#### I

Bearing in mind all this manifold significance of the lodge and all that
is implied by membership therein we can understand that entrance into
its precincts is a step having something of the importance and the
dignity of birth. Accordingly the candidate is placed in the care of
trusty friends who will see that he is duly prepared; and he is given
necessary instructions by one of the Officers of the Craft who is
careful to ascertain that he comes with no unworthy motive. When he
steps inside the door and enters for the first time into a tiled Masonic
lodge he may well feel a certain awe, or even tremble a bit with
apprehension; for he is about to participate in a rite, and to stand in
the presence of symbols, over which hovers the awful impressiveness of
centuries. The badges of rank, the tokens of distinction, the costumery
of the world, the manifold ties of the temporal and external order now
stand him in no stead, and he is thrown back on the resources of his own
naked and essential humanity. The will to do, the mind to know, the
heart to love, the imagination to conceive—these and these only can
serve as the materials out of which his own Masonic temple can be built.

If he must knock for entrance into this world it is to remind him that
everywhere and always he must knock for entrance into any of the great
worlds of existence. God in His unsearchable wisdom has ordained

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

that, except for the involuntary entrance into physical existence, every
birth comes from our willing to have it so. The world of nature, the
various worlds of literature, of science, of art, of religion, lie about
man, but the doors leading therein never open except a man knock once,
twice, thrice. It is only after the blows of his hammer, after his
tireless, patient study of details, that the heavy portals of the rocks
open their secrets to the geologist; it is only after the student has a
hundred times implored in toil and prayer that music can be persuaded to
swing back her ivory wickets of sweet sound. Over the lintels of every
realm of great achievement the Infinite has carved His irreversible law,
"Knock and it shall be opened unto you."

#### II

At the time of his entrance the candidate is given a definition of
Masonry. This definition is beautiful and true as far as it goes, and
that in the nature of the case cannot be far, but we shall be wise to
press toward a more complete understanding of the matter than the Ritual
makes possible. If such a definition as may be fashioned here falls far
short of its purpose one can comfort himself by the reflection that the
truer and more vital a thing is the less capable is it of definition,
and that Masonry in this regard is in the same case as religion, or
friendship, or art.

In discussing the "mission of Masonry," Brother A. S. MacBride
("Speculative Masonry," p. 1) defines mission as "the aim and purpose of
anything." Of Masonry he writes, "The word carries with it through all
the variants known to us, the idea of unity. To mass a body of men or
troops, for instance, is to bring them into close touch or united
action. From this view it

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

appears that Masonry is the building together of various units, such as
stones, bricks, wood, iron, or human beings, into a compact mass or
structure." Speculative Masonry he defines as "the building morally of
humanity into an organised structure, according to a design of plan."

Of similar purpose is the definition given by Thomas Green: "True
Speculative Masonry teaches a man by the industrious application of the
principles of Eternal Truth and Right to the untaught material of
humanity, to shape its thoughts and actions so as to erect from it a
spiritual building, on sure foundations, with intelligence and purpose,
and admirable to contemplate."

The Royal Arch lectures give the definition a religious turn: "The glory
of God is the grand object of our mysteries." Dr. J. D. Buck, who
interpreted Masonry from the mystical point of view, states that
"Masonry is really a school of instruction and preparation for the most
profound wisdom ever opened to man." A. E. Waite, another mystic, albeit
of a different school, says that "Masonry, in its proper understanding,
is a summary of the quest after that which is divine." In connection
with these it will be well to carry in mind the time-tried definition
long accepted by the Craft: "Masonry is a beautiful system of morality,
veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols." These several
definitions are all acceptable in their way as would be many others that
might be cited.

For myself I have long thought of the Masonic life being, in one of its
principal aspects, a quest for that which is divine in the universe and
in the human soul; this purpose is expressed, it seems to me, in all our
symbols, now in subdued whispers, and again in eloquent, ringing voices.
And, because our ceremonies represent the combination of at least three
streams of symbolism, it would be possible to set this purpose forth
from as many points of view.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

#### III

If we study the matter from the point of view of the architectural
symbolism we may say that Masonry is the attempt to release in us those
materials of our nature which are most divine and to build them into a
temple fit for the indwelling deity; and that, in turn, the individual
is to be used as a living building stone in that larger temple of human
brotherhood which is now building, sometimes in the day and often in the
night, among the children of men.

There is also in our Ritual a stream of symbolism representing the Mason
as on a quest after that which is lost. This may be understood as a
secret once in our possession but now escaped; or it may be known as the
ultimate Truth, Goodness, and Beauty which lie behind the veils of time
and sense. Of this latter significance of the quest, Brother MacBride
has given us an illustration of rare appropriateness: "There is an
ancient Gaelic poem called 'The Poem of Trathal' part of which describes
a mother playing a harp to her children, and which translated runs thus:
'Two children with their fair locks rise at her knee. They bend their
ears above the harp as she touches with white hands the trembling
strings. She stops. They take the harp themselves but cannot find the
cord they admired. Why, they ask, does it not answer us? Show us the
strings where dwells the song. She bids them search for it until she
returns. Their little fingers wander among the wires. And so with the
children of men. Their fingers wander among the wires of the harp of
life. They say 'show us the string where dwells the song.' We search for
the lost song, the lost harmony of the soul."

Again, we have in our Ritual a symbolism that hints of a death, and a
rising again to life. Let this not be

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

understood as a rising up after the death of the body; the raising is
done in the present. It signifies that there is in each of us, here and
now, that which is truly Eternal, that which the old Christian Mystics
called the divine spark in the soul. "Within thyself," declares the
Bhagavad-Gita, and truly, "thou hast a sublime friend thou knowest not.
God dwells within all men." To this heart-subduing truth all the seers
have borne witness, and all the Ancient Mysteries, and all religions. It
is Masonry's chief mission also to hear that same witness, for Masonry
is, I believe, a drama of regeneration.

#### IV

Let us consider this a moment! There is that in a man which serves only
his private, his physical, and his present temporal needs; food,
clothing, drink, riches, these have almost wholly a reference to the
body, and the body's desires, and for that reason are transient only,
for "the flesh passeth away and the lust thereof." But there is also
that in a man which has reference to the needs of his spirit, which
craves Goodness, Truth, and Beauty. For these the spirit will be
searching long after the body lies a heap of dust within its narrow
house, will be searching and finding in all the worlds and in all the
Eternities. It is the misfortune of the merely natural man, of him whom
the prophets have called the unregenerate, that in his life the merely
physical, the merely temporal, are in command; it is the great privilege
of the new-born man, the regenerate, that in him the Good, the True, and
the Beautiful, that is, the Spiritual, have full control, so that in the
midst of the fleeting days, while he walks through the shadows of the
earth life, and everything about him is steadily falling away into
oblivion, he is already living "the life that shall endless be." To
teach men the secret

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of this present Eternal Life is, I am convinced, Masonry's chief and
greatest mission; and I may say that this interpretation can carry with
it the weight of the authority of Albert Pike, whose brain was made like
a continent, and whose soul towered like a Himalayan range: a
farther-reaching, a deeper-going definition of Masonry than the
following was never written:

"Freemasonry is the subjugation of the Human that is in man by the
Divine; the conquest of the Appetites and Passions by the Moral Sense
and the Reason; a continual effort, struggle and warfare, of the
Spiritual against the Material and Sensual. That victory—when it has
been achieved and secured, and the conqueror may rest upon his shield
and wear the well-earned laurels—in the true Holy Empire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Sharp Instrument](syma13.md)
