[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma18)  [Next](syma20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### CHAPTER XV

### THE THREE GREAT LIGHTS

The first objects to greet the candidate's unblinded eyes are the Three
Great Lights, an appropriate arrangement, for they symbolise his duty to
himself, to his neighbour, and to his God. Sending their rays into every
nook and cranny of the lodge, they are fit representatives of those high
realities of the spirit which are indeed the *Great* Lights, the master
lights of all our seeing. In these three symbols, the Holy Bible, the
Square, and the Compass, we shall find inspiration, as well as
instruction, one as much as the other, and they may be studied in order.

#### I

Without the open Bible on its altar a lodge can neither receive nor
initiate candidates, nor can it transact its own business, for the Book
is a part of its indispensable furniture. So much of the Ritual is drawn
from it that students have traced to it some seventy-five references,
while almost every name found in the work is a Biblical name. The
teachings of the Craft are based upon it as a house is built upon the
ground, and it is fitting that the candidate should salute it in
recognition of this fact. This salutation of the Book was much used by
the church of mediæval times; from the ecclesiastics the courts derived
the custom; and it is probable that early Masons adopted their usage
from the courts. Some, basing their theory on references scattered among
the Old Charges, believe that in Operative days the candidate sealed his

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

oath by placing his hands on the open Bible, but of this we cannot be
certain. At any rate we do know that the V.S.L. was considered a part of
the furniture of the lodge long before the Revival, though it was not
made a Great Light until 1760, or thereabouts.

Our Masonic forefathers were led by a wise instinct in this for they
could have found no other book or object capable of sending out so many
rays of healing and of revelation; at least so we of the western world
believe. A library of sixty-six books of the most diverse character,
drawn from many peoples and conditions, the Bible is yet one Book, its
miscellaneous chapters being linked one to another by a single,
pervading spirit, as pearls are strung upon a silver wire. The most
recent of its pages are almost two thousand years old, while other
portions go back a thousand years beyond, yet is its force unabated, and
it seems to speak as though written yesterday. The history of the
collecting of its books together is so marvellous that many have deemed
it miraculous. That which "drew from out the boundless deep" of racial
experiences makes its appeal to men of all races. It has been translated
into more than five hundred languages and dialects, and read by men of
the most opposite cultures and traditions to whom it seems as if it had
been written especially for them. Truly such a literature is inspired if
anything can be, and we Masons may well believe it to be the perfect
symbol of the mind and will of God. We do not permit ourselves to be
"carried to that extreme of fetichistic bibliolatry that has been such a
serious obstacle to the spread of knowledge and to the progress of the
race and is now just beginning to be set aside by scientific research
and sound criticism," yet we may reasonably hold it to be mankind's
divinest Book to date. The Bible was not written to be a textbook in
history, or science, or philosophy, and as such it should not

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

be judged; it was written to show us what manner of God God is, and what
is the way of the soul.

With this, men of all faiths and of little faith may well agree. Goethe
confesses that "it is a belief in the Bible, the fruit of deep
meditation, which has served me as the guide of my moral and literary
life." Huxley can give a similar testimony, agnostic though he is: "Take
the Bible as a whole; make the severest deductions which fair criticism
can dictate, and there still remains in this old literature a vast
residuum of moral beauty and grandeur. By the study of what other book
could children be more humanised!" To these ascriptions we may add a
tribute spoken in a Masonic Lodge by Brother J. F. Newton:

"My brethren, here is a Book whose scene is the sky and the dirt and all
that lies between—a Book that has in it the arch of the heavens, the
curve of the earth, the ebb and flow of the sea, sunrise and sunset, the
peaks of mountains and the glint of sunlight on flowing waters, the
shadow of forests on the hills, the song of birds and the colour of
flowers. But its two great characters are God and the Soul, and the
story of their life together is its one everlasting romance. It is the
most human of books, telling the old forgotten secrets of the heart, its
bitter pessimism and its death-defying hope, its pain, its passion, its
sin, its sob of grief and its shout of joy—telling all, without malice,
in its Grand Style which can do no wrong, while echoing the sweet-toned
pathos of the pity and mercy of God. No other book is so honest with us,
so mercilessly merciful, so austere and yet so tender, piercing the
heart, yet healing the deep wounds of sin and sorrow."

While holding to all this with the tenacity of our minds we must
nevertheless remember that to Masonry the Bible itself is a symbol and
stands for something larger than

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

itself, even the whole race's "Book of Faith, the will of God as man has
learned it in the midst of the years—that perpetual revelation of
himself which God is making mankind in every age and every land."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Slowly the Bible of the race is writ,  
   And not on paper leaves nor leaves of stone;  
 Each age, each kindred, adds a verse to it,  
   Texts of despair or hope, or joy or moan.  
 While swings the sea, while mists the mountain shroud,  
   While thunder's surges burst on cliffs of cloud,  
 Still at the prophet's feet the nations sit."

</div>

Accordingly, our Craft permits lodges to use as the Great Light the book
held sacred by the land in which they may be situated—the Old Testament
to the Jews, the Koran to the Mohammedans, the Zend-Avesta to the
Parsees, the Bhagavad-Gita and the Vedas in India. Also, we are not
asked to accept any given interpretation of the Book, but are left free
to fashion our own creed out of its materials, which is a privilege that
theologians themselves have always enjoyed.

The members of the Operative Lodges were Trinitarians, as the invocation
set at the head of the Old Charges will testify, but at the formation of
the first Grand Lodge, the Fraternity ceased to be specifically
Christian, though Hutchinson in an early day (see his "Spirit of
Masonry," a volume of beautiful spirit and rich insights), and Whymper
at a later time ("Religion of Free Masonry") have undertaken to
interpret it in the terms of that faith. A Deputy District Grand Master
of Burma wrote, in a letter to G. W. Speth: "I have just initiated
Moring Ban Ahm, a Burman, who has so far modified his religious belief
as to acknowledge the existence of a personal God. The W.M. was a
Parsee, one

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

warden a Hindu, or Brahmin, the other an English Christian, and the
deacon a Mohammedan." This is wholly in harmony with the principles of a
society that asks of its members only that they hold to that religion in
which all men agree, and longs for the time, when, "high above all
dogmas that divide, all bigotries that blind, all bitterness that
beclouds, will be written the simple words of the one eternal
religion—The Fatherhood of God, the Brotherhood of Man, the Moral Law,
the Golden Rule, and the hope of Life Everlasting!"

The Fraternity does not even seek to impose upon us any given conception
of the S.G.A.O.T.U., its position being that each must fashion for
himself his own conception of Deity. On this Albert Pike has spoken for
us all: "To every Mason there is a God—One, Supreme, Infinite in
Goodness, in Wisdom, Foresight, Justice and Benevolence; Creator,
Disposer and preserver of all things. How, or by what intermediate
Powers or Emanations He creates and acts, and in what way He unfolds and
manifests Himself, Masonry leaves to Creeds and Religions to inquire."

#### II

In our Blue Lodge Ritual the square has three distinct and different
symbolisms: it serves as an emblem of the W.M., as a working tool of a
Fellow Craft, and as the second of the Great Lights. Being concerned
with it here only in its last-named capacity, I shall postpone until a
future page much that may be said about it, asking the reader,
meanwhile, to remember that it is a try-square and not a carpenter's
square, as it is often depicted; and that it must not be confused with
the square as a four-sided figure of right angles and equal sides, which
is a very different symbol.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Until some four hundred years ago all men, save for a few isolated
scholars, believed the earth to be an "oblong square." In consequence of
this, figures of square-form were generally used as having reference to
the earth, or to the earthly; and as the try-square was an instrument
used for testing angles, or squareness, it came to serve as a symbol of
that which is mundane or human, as opposed to the Divine. But as it was
used to prove that angles were right, it received the further
significance of true character, of conformity with righteousness, of
duty done, etc. The ancient Chinese, to give one example of this, built
their temple to the earth in square form, and called a person of
rectitude, a "square man." This, I believe, is the meaning of the square
when serving as one of the Great Lights; it is the symbol of right
character in its human relationships.

#### III

The compasses are used in the entrance ceremony of the Second Degree,
and in another connection in the Hiram Abiff drama, but here we are to
interpret them as one of the Great Lights, and then in close connection
with the exposition of the square as just given. The same crude
observations that led the men of antiquity to see the earth as an oblong
square caused them also to believe that the heavens were circular. Was
not the sky itself a dome? Did not the heavenly bodies move in curved
tracks? Were not the sun and the moon discs in shape? Was not an
astronomical chart an assemblage of curves and circles? By an inevitable
association of ideas the compasses, which were used to test or to draw
curves and circles, were made to stand for the heavenly or the divine in
man, and this is their meaning still, as they lie on the altar of the
lodge.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

In the First Degree the candidate is an Apprentice, a representative of
crude, natural man, his earthly nature dominating or covering the
spiritual; in the Fellowcraft Degree he has advanced halfway, and the
nobler elements are struggling for control; when he has become a Master,
as symbolised in the Third Degree, the "divine in him has subjugated the
human." If you will carefully examine the relative positions of the
square and compasses in the various degrees you will find an eloquent
hint of this.

Right human conduct, right spiritual aspirations, and the revealed will
of God; fitting is it that the lodge place the symbols of these
principles at its very centre, for the Mason who walks in their light
continually will never wander far from the paths of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Lesser Lights](syma20)
