[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](syma30)  [Next](syma32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002J9HE6I/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symbolical Masonry*, by H.L. Haywood, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

### CHAPTER XXVII

### THE SCRIPTURE READING FROM AMOS

#### I

The Greeks, as we recall from our discussion of circumambulation,
chanted an ode as the worshipper moved about the altar from left to
right, for their odes were the most sacred literature in their
possession; but the Master of the Masonic lodge reads from the Holy
Bible as the Fellow Craft makes his mystic rounds, and that for the same
reason. He on whose life's journey the Great Light sends its rays may
walk confidently and cheerfully and not as those who stumble through the
dark.

And it is fitting that in this connection the rays come from the
prophecy of Amos, for that seer sought to bring order and light into the
workaday world of men, one of the chief tasks of the Fellow Craft, who
receives knowledge that he may become a social builder. Amos wrought his
great work during the days of Jeroboam II, in whose reign religion had
grown hard and formal, pleasure had rotted into vice, luxury had become
a disease, and the aristocracy fattened on the poor. Against these
conditions Amos set himself, though he was "no prophet, nor the son of a
prophet," and he lashed the abuses of his people with such effective
fury, that the high-ups had him banished from the kingdom. "The first
great social reformer in history" Amos was no mere denunciator, but one
who condemned things as they are by setting before them a picture of
things as they should be.

In the graphic visions recorded in his book, Amos sets

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

before us a picture of Israel being judged by a plague of locusts; then
follows a fire that "devoured the great deep, and had begun to devour
the tilled land;" these visitations are stayed by the supplication of
the prophet, and then Jehovah brings a new kind of judgment to bear on
his people. As we may read in Amos’ own words; "Thus the Lord shewed me;
and behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumbline, with a
plumbline in his hand. And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest thou?
And I said, a plumbline. Then said the Lord, behold, I will set a
plumbline in the midst of my people Israel; I will not pass by them any
more."

#### II

This was no mere dramatic way of saying, The people had been bad; they
must now be good. The lesson is no such banality as that, but cuts
deeper into things. It is really a vision of an entirely new kind of
judgment, for consider:—At first Jehovah chastised his people
physically, as one may whip a child; later, he passed from external
things into their hearts and said, In your conscience you will be judged
and in your conscience you will be punished. It was just the Lord's
method of plunging a sharp instrument into the naked left breast of
Israel! External punishments came and passed, but when the inner
standard was set up, it remained whatever came and went, and the Lord
did "not pass by them any more."

Ever is this the truth of things, the law of life—that bad men are not
always visited by physical evils, and that good men do not always
receive material reward. This was a lesson learned by Job many centuries
ago. But there is a harvest from wrongdoing that is always sure, as sure
as the tides, and it is nothing other than inward corruption. To lie
blunts the moral perception; to fall

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

into impurity beclouds the heart; to live in selfishness puts out the
eyes of love, for "the wages of sin is death." Like the path of the
eagle the ways of the punishment of transgression may be viewless, but
they are sure, as sure as a plumbline; the universe is just, and in its
laws there is neither variableness nor turning, and he that is a skilled
Fellow Craft in the building tasks of life will be wise to govern
himself accordingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. The Oblong Square](syma32.md)
