<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act023)  [Next](act025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001)

[Acts 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 24:1</span></span>

And (1) after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the
elders, and \[with\] a certain orator \[named\] Tertullus, who informed
the governor against Paul.

\(1\) Hypocrites, when they can not do what they want to do by force and
deceit, at length they go about to accomplish it by a show of law.

[Acts 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 24:2</span></span>

And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse \[him\], saying,
Seeing that (a) by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very (b)
worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence,

\(a\) Felix ruled that province with great cruelty and covetousness, and
yet Josephus records that he did many worthy things, such as taking
Eleazar the captain of certain cutthroats, and put that deceiving wretch
the Egyptian to flight, who caused great troubles in Judea.

\(b\) He uses a word which the Stoics defined as a perfect duty and
perfect behaviour.

[Acts 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 24:5</span></span>

For we have found this man \[a\] (c) pestilent \[fellow\], and a mover
of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a (d)
ringleader of the sect of the (e) Nazarenes:

\(c\) Literally, "a plague".

\(d\) As one would say, a ringleader, or a flag bearer.

\(e\) So they scoffingly called the Christians, taking the name from the
towns where they thought that Christ was born, whereupon it happened
that Julian the apostate called Christ a Galilean.

[Acts 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 24:9</span></span>

And the Jews also (f) assented, saying that these things were so.

\(f\) Confirmed what Tertullus said.

[Acts 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 24:10</span></span>

\(2\) Then Paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak,
answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of (g) many years a
judge unto this nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for myself:

\(2\) Tertullus, by the devil's rhetoric, begins with flattery and
finishes with lies: but Paul using heavenly eloquence, and but a simple
beginning, casts off from himself the crime of sedition, with which he
was being charged, with a simple denial.

\(g\) Paul pleaded his cause two years before Felix departed out of the
province, see ([Act 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027)), but he had
governed Trachonite, and Batanea, and Galavnite, before Claudius made
him governor of Judea; see Josephus in the History of the Jewish War,
lib. 2, cap. 11.

[Acts 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 24:13</span></span>

Neither can they (h) prove the things whereof they now accuse me.

\(h\) They cannot lay forth before you and prove with good reasons.

[Acts 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 24:14</span></span>

\(3\) But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
(i) heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things
which are written in the law and in the prophets:

\(3\) Paul proceeds in the case of religion from a conjectural state to
a practical state, not only admitting of the religion which he was
accused of, but also proving it to be true, to be heavenly and from God,
and to be the oldest of all religions.

\(i\) Here this word "heresy" or "sect" is taken in a good sense.

[Acts 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 24:17</span></span>

\(4\) Now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation, and
offerings.

\(4\) Paul in conclusion tells the things thing which was truly done,
which Tertullus before him had corrupted in various ways.

[Acts 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 24:18</span></span>

\(k\) Whereupon certain Jews from (l) Asia found me purified in the
temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

\(k\) And while I was occupied with those things.

\(l\) By this it is evident that these from Asia were Paul's enemies,
and the ones that stirred up the people against him.

[Acts 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 24:20</span></span>

Or else let these same \[here\] say, if they have found any evil doing
in me, while I stood before the (m) council,

\(m\) Where the tribune brought me.

[Acts 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 24:22</span></span>

\(5\) And when Felix heard these things, having more (n) perfect
knowledge of \[that\] way, he deferred them, and said, When Lysias the
chief captain shall come down, I will know the uttermost of your matter.

\(5\) The judge suspends his sentence because the matter is doubtful.

\(n\) Felix could not judge whether he had done wickedly in the matter
of his religion or not until he had a better understanding of the way
which Paul professed: and as for other matters with regard to the charge
of sedition, he considers it good to defer it until he hears Lysias, and
therefore he gives Paul somewhat more liberty.

[Acts 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 24:23</span></span>

\(6\) And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let \[him\] have
liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister
or come unto him.

\(6\) God is a most faithful keeper of his servants, and the power of
the truth is wonderful, even amongst men who are otherwise profane.

[Acts 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 24:24</span></span>

And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife (o) Drusilla,
which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith
in Christ.

\(o\) This Drusilla was Agrippa's sister of whom Luke speaks afterwards,
a harlot and very licentious woman, and being the wife of Azizus king of
the Emesens, who was circumcised, departed from him, and went to this
Felix the brother of Pallas, who was at one time the slave of Nero.

[Acts 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 24:27</span></span>

\(7\) But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix' room: and
Felix, willing to (p) shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.

\(7\) With an evil mind, that is guilty in itself, and although
sometimes there is some show of fairness, yet eventually the conscience
will be extinguished: but in the meanwhile we have need of continual
patience.

\(p\) For he had behaved himself very wickedly in the province, and had
it not been for favour of his brother Pallas, he would have died for it:
so that we may gather by this why he would have pleased the Jews.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 25](act025)

</div>
