<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act006)  [Next](act008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

[Acts 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 7:1</span></span>

Then (1) said the high priest, Are these things so?

\(1\) Steven is allowed to plead his cause, but for this reason and
purpose, that under a disguise and pretence of the Law he might be
condemned.

[Acts 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 7:2</span></span>

\(2\) And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of (a)
glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in (b) Mesopotamia,
before he dwelt in Charran,

\(2\) Steven witnesses to the Jews that he acknowledges the true
fathers, and the only true God, and more than this shows this that these
are more ancient than the temple and all the temple service appointed by
the Law, and therefore they ought to lay another foundation of true
religion, that is to say, the free covenant that God made with the
fathers.

\(a\) The mighty God full of glory and majesty.

\(b\) When he says afterwards in ([Act
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#004)) that Abraham came out of Chaldea,
it is evident that Mesopotamia contained Chaldea which was near to it,
and bordered upon it; and so writes Plinius, book 6, chap. 27.

[Acts 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 7:5</span></span>

And he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not \[so much as\] to (c)
set his foot on: yet he (d) promised that he would give it to him for a
possession, and to his seed after him, when \[as yet\] he had no child.

\(c\) Not enough ground to even set his foot upon.

\(d\) The promise of the possession was certain, and belonged to
Abraham, though it was his posterity that enjoyed it a great while after
his death: and this is the figure of speech synecdoche.

[Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 7:6</span></span>

And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange
land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat \[them\]
evil (e) four hundred years.

\(e\) Four hundred years are counted from the beginning of Abraham's
progeny, which was at the birth of Isaac: and four hundred and thirty
years which are spoken of by Paul in ([Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)), from the time that Abraham and
his father departed together out of Ur of the Chaldeans.

[Acts 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 7:9</span></span>

\(3\) And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but
God was (f) with him,

\(3\) Steven diligently recounts the horrible misdeeds of some of the
fathers, to teach the Jews that they ought not rashly to rest in the
authority or examples of the fathers.

\(f\) By these words are meant the peculiar favour that God shows men:
for he seems to be away from those whom he does not help: and on the
other hand, he is with those whom he delivers out of troubles, no matter
how great the troubles may be.

[Acts 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 7:10</span></span>

And delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him (g) favour
and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him
governor over Egypt and all his house.

\(g\) Gave him favour in Pharaoh's sight because of his wisdom.

[Acts 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 7:16</span></span>

And were (h) carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that
Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor \[the father\] of
Sychem.

\(h\) The patriarchs who were the sons of Jacob, though only Joseph is
mentioned; ([Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)).

[Acts 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 7:19</span></span>

The same (i) dealt subtilly with our kindred, and evil entreated our
fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they
might not live.

\(i\) He devised a subtle plan against our stock, in that he commanded
all the males to be cast out.

[Acts 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 7:20</span></span>

In which time Moses was born, and was (k) exceeding fair, and nourished
up in his father's house three months:

\(k\) This child was born through God's merciful goodness and favour, to
be of a lovely and fair countenance.

[Acts 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 7:30</span></span>

And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount Sina an (l) angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in
a bush.

\(l\) Now, he calls the Son of God an angel, for he is the angel of
great counsel, and therefore immediately after he describes him as
saying to Moses, "I am the God of thy fathers, etc."

[Acts 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 7:35</span></span>

This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge?
the same did God send \[to be\] a ruler and a deliverer by the (m) hand
of the angel which appeared to him in the bush.

\(m\) By the power.

[Acts 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 7:37</span></span>

\(4\) This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel, A
prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like
unto me; him shall ye hear.

\(4\) He acknowledges Moses as the Lawgiver, but in such a way that he
proves by his own witness that the Law had respect to a more perfect
thing, that is to say, to the prophetical office which accompanied
Christ, the head of all Prophets.

[Acts 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 7:41</span></span>

And they made a (n) calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the
idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.

\(n\) This was the superstition of the Egyptian's idolatry: for they
worshipped Apis, a strange and marvellous looking calf, and made
beautiful images of cows.

[Acts 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 7:42</span></span>

Then God turned, and (o) gave them up to worship the (p) host of heaven;
as it is written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have
ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices \[by the space of\] forty
years in the wilderness?

\(o\) Being destitute and void of his Spirit, he gave them up to Satan,
and wicked lusts, to worship stars.

\(p\) By "the host of heaven" here he does not mean the angels, but the
moon, and sun, and other stars.

[Acts 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 7:43</span></span>

Yea, ye (q) took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god
Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them: and I will carry you
away beyond Babylon.

\(q\) You took it upon your shoulders and carried it.

[Acts 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 7:44</span></span>

\(5\) Our fathers had the tabernacle of (r) witness in the wilderness,
as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it
according to the fashion that he had seen.

\(5\) Moses indeed erected a tabernacle, but that was to call them back
to the one whom he had seen on the mountain.

\(r\) That is, of the covenant.

[Acts 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 7:45</span></span>

Which also our fathers that came after (s) brought in with Jesus into
the (t) possession of the Gentiles, whom God drave out (u) before the
face of our fathers, unto the days of David;

\(s\) Delivered from hand to hand.

\(t\) This is said using the figure of speech metonymy, and refers to
the countries which the Gentiles possessed.

\(u\) God drove them out that they should yield up the possession of
those countries to our fathers when they entered into the land.

[Acts 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 7:47</span></span>

\(6\) But Solomon built him an house.

\(6\) Solomon built a temple according to God's commandment, but not
under any condition that the majesty of God should be enclosed within
it.

[Acts 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 7:51</span></span>

\(7\) Ye stiffnecked and (x) uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers \[did\], so \[do\] ye.

\(7\) Steven, moved with the zeal of God, at length judges his own
judges.

\(x\) They are of uncircumcised hearts who still lie drowned in the sins
of nature, and are stuck fast in them: for otherwise all the Jews were
circumcised with regard to the flesh, and therefore there are two kinds
of circumcision; ([Rom 2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028)).

[Acts 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">act 7:53</span></span>

Who have received the law by the (y) disposition of angels, and have not
kept \[it\].

\(y\) By the ministry of angels.

[Acts 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">act 7:54</span></span>

\(8\) When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they
gnashed on him with \[their\] teeth.

\(8\) The more Satan is pressed, the more he breaks out into an open
rage.

[Acts 7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">act 7:55</span></span>

\(9\) But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus (z) standing on the right
hand of God,

\(9\) The nearer that martyrs approach to death, the nearer that they
rise up, even into heaven, as they behold Christ.

\(z\) Ready to affirm him in the confession of the truth, and to receive
him unto himself.

[Acts 7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">act 7:57</span></span>

\(10\) Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and (a) ran upon him with one accord,

\(10\) The zeal of hypocrites and superstitious people eventually breaks
out into a most open madness.

\(a\) This was done in a rage and fury, for at that time the Jews could
put no man to death by law, as they confessed before Pilate saying that
it was no lawful for them to put any man to death, and therefore it is
reported by Josephus that Ananus, a Sadducee, slew James the brother of
the Lord, and for so doing was accused before Albinus, the president of
the country; lib. 20.

[Acts 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">act 7:58</span></span>

And cast \[him\] out of the city, and stoned \[him\]: and the (b)
witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was
Saul.

\(b\) It was appointed by the Law that the witnesses should cast the
first stones; ([Deu 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)).

[Acts 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">act 7:60</span></span>

\(11\) And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, (c) lay
not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he (d) fell
asleep.

\(11\) Faith and charity never forsake the true servants of God, even to
the last breath.

\(c\) The word which he uses here refers to a type of imputing or laying
to one's charge that remains firm and steady forever, never to be
remitted.

\(d\) See ([Th1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 8](act008)

</div>
