<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act001)  [Next](act003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

[Acts 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 2:1</span></span>

And (1) when the day of Pentecost was (a) fully come, they were (b) all
with one accord in one place.

\(1\) The Apostles being gathered together on a most solemn feast day in
one place, that it might evidently appear to all the world that they all
had one office, one Spirit, and one faith, are by a double sign from
heaven authorised, and anointed with all the most excellent gifts of the
Holy Spirit, and especially with an extraordinary and necessary gift of
tongues.

\(a\) Literally, "was fulfilled": that is, was begun, as in ([Luk
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#021).md). For the Hebrews say that a day
or a year is fulfilled or ended when the former days or years are ended,
and the other has begun; ([Jer 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012).md):
"And it will come to pass that when seventy years are fulfilled, I will
visit, etc." For the Lord did not bring his people home after the
seventieth year was ended, but in the seventieth year: Now the day of
Pentecost was the fiftieth day after the feast of the Passover.

\(b\) The twelve apostles, who were to be the patriarchs as it were of
the Church.

[Acts 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 2:4</span></span>

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with
(c) other tongues, as the (d) Spirit gave them utterance.

\(c\) He calls them "other tongues" which were not the same as the
apostles commonly used, and Mark calls them "new tongues".

\(d\) By this we understand that the apostles were not speaking one
language and then another by chance at random, or as eccentric men used
to do, but that they kept in mind the languages of their hearers: and to
be short, that they only spoke as the Holy Spirit directed them to
speak.

[Acts 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 2:8</span></span>

\(e\) And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?

\(e\) Not that they spoke one language, and different languages were
heard, but the apostles spoke with different languages: for otherwise
the miracle would have been in the hearers, whereas it is really in the
speakers; Nazianzen in his oration of Whitsunday.

[Acts 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 2:10</span></span>

Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about
Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, (f) Jews and proselytes,

\(f\) By Jews he means those that were both Jews by birth and Jews by
profession of religion, though they were born in other places: and these
latter ones were proselytes, who were born Gentiles, and embraced the
Jewish religion.

[Acts 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 2:12</span></span>

\(2\) And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to
another, What meaneth this?

\(2\) God's word pierces some in such a way that it drives them to seek
out the truth, and it so chokes others that it forces them to be
witnesses of their own impudency.

[Acts 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 2:13</span></span>

Others (g) mocking said, These men are full of new wine.

\(g\) The word which he uses here signifies a kind of mocking which is
reproachful and insolent: and by this reproachful mocking we see that no
matter how great and excellent the miracle, the wickedness of man still
dares to speak evil against it.

[Acts 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 2:14</span></span>

But Peter, standing up with the eleven, (h) lifted up his voice, and
said unto them, Ye men of Judaea, and all \[ye\] that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words:

\(h\) The holiness of Peter is to be marked, in which the grace of the
Holy Spirit is to be seen, even from the very beginning.

[Acts 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 2:15</span></span>

For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is \[but\] the (i)
third hour of the day.

\(i\) After the sunrise, which may be about seven or eight o'clock to
us.

[Acts 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 2:16</span></span>

But this is that which was spoken by the (k) prophet Joel;

\(k\) There is nothing that can dissolve questions and doubt except
testimony taken out of the Prophets: for men's reasonings may be
overturned, but God's voice cannot be overturned.

[Acts 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 2:17</span></span>

\(3\) And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour
out of my Spirit upon (l) all (m) flesh: and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your
old men shall dream dreams:

\(3\) Peter setting forth the truth of God against the false accusations
of men, shows in himself and in his companions that the prophecy of Joel
concerning the full giving of the Holy Spirit in the latter days has
been fulfilled: and this grace is also offered to the whole Church, to
the certain and undoubted destruction of those who condemn it.

\(l\) All without exception, both upon the Jews and Gentiles.

\(m\) That is, men.

[Acts 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 2:21</span></span>

\(4\) And it shall come to pass, \[that\] whosoever shall (n) call on
the name of the Lord shall be saved.

\(4\) The most important use of all the gifts of the Holy Spirit is to
bring men to salvation by faith.

\(n\) These words "call on" signify in Holy Scriptures and earnest
praying and craving for help from God's hand.

[Acts 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 2:22</span></span>

\(5\) Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man (o)
approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God
did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know:

\(5\) Christ, being innocent, was by God's providence crucified by
wicked men.

\(o\) Who is by those works which God did by him so manifestly approved
and admitted of, that no man can deny him.

[Acts 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 2:23</span></span>

Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and (p) foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked (q) hands have crucified and (r)
slain:

\(p\) God's everlasting foreknowledge, which can neither be separated
from his determinate counsel, as the Epicureans say, neither yet be the
cause of evil: for God in his everlasting and unchangeable counsel
appointed the wicked act of Judas to an excellent end: and God does that
well which the instrument does wickedly.

\(q\) God's counsel does not excuse the Jews, whose hands were wicked.

\(r\) The fact is said to be theirs by whose counsel and urging on it is
done.

[Acts 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 2:24</span></span>

\(6\) Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the (s) pains of death:
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.

\(6\) As David foretold, Christ did not only rise again, but also was
void of all decay in the grave.

\(s\) The death that was full of sorrow both of body and mind: therefore
when death appeared conqueror and victor over those sorrows, Christ is
rightly said to have overcome those sorrows of death when, as being
dead, he overcame death, to live forever with his Father.

[Acts 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 2:27</span></span>

Because thou wilt not (t) leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.

\(t\) You will not allow me to remain in the grave.

[Acts 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 2:28</span></span>

Thou hast (u) made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt make me full
of joy with thy countenance.

\(u\) You have opened to me the way of true life.

[Acts 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 2:30</span></span>

Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had (x) sworn with an
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he
would raise up Christ to sit on his throne;

\(x\) Had sworn solemnly.

[Acts 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 2:32</span></span>

\(7\) This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.

\(7\) Peter witnesses that Jesus Christ is the appointed everlasting
King, which he manifestly proves by the gifts of the Holy Spirit and the
testimony of David.

[Acts 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 2:33</span></span>

Therefore being by the (y) right hand of God exalted, and having
received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth
this, which ye now see and hear.

\(y\) Might and power of God.

[Acts 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 2:36</span></span>

Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath (z)
made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

\(z\) Christ is said to be "made" because he was advanced to that
dignity, and therefore it is not spoken with reference to his nature,
but with reference to his position and high dignity.

[Acts 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 2:38</span></span>

\(8\) Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

\(8\) Repentance and remission of sins in Christ are two principles of
the Gospel and therefore of our salvation: and they are obtained by the
promises apprehended by faith, and are ratified by us in baptism; and
with our salvation comes the power of the Holy Spirit (Ed.).

[Acts 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 2:39</span></span>

For the (a) promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, \[even\] as many as the Lord our God shall call.

\(a\) The word that is used here shows us that it was a free gift.

[Acts 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 2:40</span></span>

\(9\) And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save
yourselves from this untoward generation.

\(9\) He is truly joined to the Church who separates himself from the
wicked.

[Acts 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 2:41</span></span>

\(10\) Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the
same day there were added \[unto them\] about three thousand souls.

\(10\) A notable example of the power of the Holy Spirit: but such are
not baptized until they make confession of their faith. (Ed.)

[Acts 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 2:42</span></span>

\(11\) And they continued stedfastly in the apostles' doctrine and (b)
fellowship, and in (c) breaking of bread, and in prayers.

\(11\) The marks of the true Church are the doctrine of the apostles,
the duties of charity, the pure and simple administration of the
ordinances, and the true invocation used by all of the faithful.

\(b\) Sharing of goods, and all other duties of charity, as is shown
afterwards.

\(c\) The Jews used thin loaves, and therefore they broke them rather
than cut them: so by breaking of bread they meant living together, and
the banquets which they used to keep. And when they kept their love
feasts, they used to celebrate the Lord's supper, which even in those
days began to be corrupted, and Paul corrects this in (1Co. 11:17-34).

[Acts 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 2:43</span></span>

\(12\) And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were
done by the apostles.

\(12\) As often as the Lord thinks it to be expedient, he bridles the
rage of strangers, so that the Church may be planted and have some
refreshing.

[Acts 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 2:44</span></span>

\(13\) And all that believed were together, and had all things common;

\(13\) Charity makes all things common with regard to their use,
according as necessity requires.

[Acts 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 2:46</span></span>

\(14\) And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart,

\(14\) The faithful came together at the beginning with tremendous
results, not only for the hearing of the word, but also to eat.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 3](act003.md)

</div>
