<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](joh021)  [Next](act002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

[Acts 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 1:1</span></span>

The (1) former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began both to (a) do and teach,

\(1\) Luke switches over from the history of the Gospel, that is from
the history of the sayings and doings of Christ, unto the Acts of the
Apostles.

\(a\) The acts of Jesus are the miracles and deeds which showed his
Godhead, and his most perfect holiness, and examples of his doctrine.

[Acts 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 1:3</span></span>

\(2\) To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many (b)
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the kingdom of God:

\(2\) Christ did not immediately ascend into heaven after his
resurrection in order to thoroughly prove his resurrection, and with his
presence strengthen and encourage his Apostles in the doctrine which
they had heard.

\(b\) He called those things infallible proofs which are otherwise
termed necessary: now in that Christ spoke, and walked, and ate, and was
felt by many, these are sure signs and proofs that he truly rose again.

[Acts 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 1:4</span></span>

And, being (c) assembled together with \[them\], commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
Father, which, \[saith he\], ye have heard of me.

\(c\) They were dispersed here and there, but he gathers them together
so that all of them might together be witnesses of his resurrection.

[Acts 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 1:5</span></span>

For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized (d) with
the Holy Ghost not many days hence.

\(d\) Either by the Father, or by me: so that either the Father or
Christ is set here contrasted with John, as the Holy Spirit is
contrasted with water, as things that are comparable to one another.

[Acts 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 1:6</span></span>

\(3\) When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying,
Lord, wilt thou at this time (e) restore again the kingdom to Israel?

\(3\) We must fight before we triumph, and we must not search curiously
after those things which God has not revealed.

\(e\) To the old and ancient state.

[Acts 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 1:7</span></span>

And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the (f)
seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.

\(f\) That is, the proper occasions that provide opportunities for doing
matters, which occasions the Lord has appointed to bring things to pass
in.

[Acts 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 1:9</span></span>

\(4\) And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

\(4\) After Christ had promised the full power of the Holy Spirit, with
whom he would govern his church (even though he would be absent in
body), he took up his body from us into heavenly tabernacles to remain
there until the latter day of judgment, as the angels witness.

[Acts 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 1:11</span></span>

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
this same Jesus, which is taken up (g) from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

\(g\) That is, out of your sight.

[Acts 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 1:12</span></span>

Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is
from Jerusalem a sabbath (h) day's journey.

\(h\) About two miles.

[Acts 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 1:13</span></span>

\(5\) And when they were (i) come in, they went up into an upper room,
where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and
Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James \[the son\] of Alphaeus, and
Simon Zelotes, and Judas \[the brother\] of James.

\(5\) Ecclesiastical assemblies to hear the word, and to make common
prayer, were first instituted and kept in private houses by the
Apostles.

\(i\) They went into the house which the Church had chosen at that time
to be a gathering place for the whole assembly.

[Acts 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 1:14</span></span>

These all (k) continued with (l) one accord in (m) prayer and
supplication, with the (n) women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with
his (o) brethren.

\(k\) The Greek word signifies an invincible constancy and
steadfastness.

\(l\) It is to good purpose that this agreement is mentioned: for those
prayers are most acceptable to God which are made with agreeing minds
and wills.

\(m\) The disciples prayed for the sending of the Holy Spirit, and also
to be delivered from present dangers, of which there were many that they
were experiencing.

\(n\) For it was appropriate to have the wives strengthened and
encouraged who would afterwards be partakers of the dangers with their
husbands.

\(o\) With his relatives.

[Acts 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 1:15</span></span>

\(6\) And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples,
and said, (the number of (p) names together were about an hundred and
twenty,)

\(6\) Peter is made the spokesman and interpreter of the whole company
of the Apostles, either by secret revelation of the Holy Spirit, or by
the express judgment of the congregation.

\(p\) Because men are commonly referred to and enrolled by their names.

[Acts 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 1:16</span></span>

\(7\) Men \[and\] brethren, this scripture must needs have been
fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before
concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus.

\(7\) Peter anticipates the offence that might be taken at the falling
away of Judas the betrayer, showing that all things which happened to
him were foretold by God.

[Acts 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 1:18</span></span>

Now this man (q) purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and (r)
falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed out.

\(q\) Luke did not consider Judas' purpose, but that which followed it,
and so we used to say that a man has done himself harm, not that he
wanted and intended to, but in respect of that which followed.

\(r\) The Greek words signify this much, that Judas fell down flat and
was torn apart in the middle, with a tremendously great noise.

[Acts 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 1:20</span></span>

For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate,
and let no man dwell therein: and his (s) bishoprick let another take.

\(s\) His office and ministry: David wrote these words against Doeg the
King's herdsman: and these words "shepherd", "sheep", and "flock" are
used with reference to the Church office and ministry, so that the
Church and the offices are called by these names.

[Acts 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 1:21</span></span>

\(8\) Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time
that the Lord Jesus (t) went in and out among us,

\(8\) The Apostles do not deliberate at all, but first they consult and
take guidance from God's word: and again they do nothing that concerns
and is incumbent upon the whole body of the congregation, without making
the congregation a part of the decision.

\(t\) This kind of speech signifies as much in the Hebrew language as
the exercising of a public and difficult office, when they speak of such
as are in any public office; ([Deu
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002); [Ch1
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#001)).

[Acts 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 1:22</span></span>

Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken
up (u) from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his
resurrection.

\(u\) From our company.

[Acts 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 1:23</span></span>

\(9\) And they (x) appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was
surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

\(9\) The Apostles must be chosen immediately from God: and therefore
after praying, Matthias is chose by lot, which is as it were God's own
voice.

\(x\) Openly, and by the voices of the entire company.

[Acts 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 1:25</span></span>

That he may take (y) part of this ministry and apostleship, from which
Judas by transgression (z) fell, that he might go to his own place.

\(y\) That he may be a member and partaker of this ministry.

\(z\) Departed from, or fallen from: and it is a metaphor taken from the
word "way": for callings are signified by the name of "ways" with the
Hebrews.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 2](act002)

</div>
