<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Amos Index](amo.md)  
  [Previous](joe003)  [Next](amo002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

[Amos 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 1:1</span></span>

The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of (a) Tekoa, which he saw
concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days
of (b) Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the
(c) earthquake.

The Argument - Among many other Prophets that God raised up to admonish
the Israelites of his plagues for their wickedness and idolatry, he
stirred up Amos, who was a herdman or shepherd of a poor town, and gave
him both knowledge and constancy to reprove all estates and degrees, and
to make known God's horrible judgments against them, unless they
repented in time. And he showed them, that if God did not spare the
other nations around them, who had lived as it were in ignorance of God
compared to them, but for their sins punished them, then they could look
for nothing, but a horrible destruction, unless they turned to the Lord
in true repentance. And finally, he comforts the godly with hope of the
coming of the Messiah, by whom they would have perfect deliverance and
salvation.

\(a\) Which was a town five miles from Jerusalem in Judea, but he
prophesied in Israel.

\(b\) In his days the kingdom of Israel flourished the most.

\(c\) Which as Josephus writes, was when Uzziah would have usurped the
priest's office, and therefore was smitten with leprosy.

[Amos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 1:2</span></span>

And he said, The LORD will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top
(d) of Carmel shall wither.

\(d\) Whatever is fruitful and pleasant in Israel, will shortly perish.

[Amos 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 1:3</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; For (e) three transgressions of Damascus, and for
four, I will not turn away \[the punishment\] thereof; because they have
(f) threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:

\(e\) He shows first that all the people round about would be destroyed
for their manifold sins: which are meant by three and four, which make
seven, so that the Israelites would the more deeply consider God's
judgments toward them.

\(f\) If the Syrians will not be spared for committing this cruelty
against one city, it is not possible that Israel would escape
punishment, which has committed so many and such grievous sins against
God and man.

[Amos 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 1:4</span></span>

But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour the
(g) palaces of Benhadad.

\(g\) The antiquity of their buildings will not avoid my judgments. See
[Jer 49:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#027.md)

[Amos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 1:5</span></span>

I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from
the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of
Eden: and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto (h) Kir,
saith the LORD.

\(h\) Tiglath Pileser led the Assyrians captive, and brought them to
Cyrene, which he here calls Kir.

[Amos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 1:6</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I
will not turn away \[the punishment\] thereof; because they (i) carried
away captive the whole captivity, to deliver \[them\] up to Edom:

\(i\) They united themselves with the Edomites their enemies, who
carried them away captive.

[Amos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 1:9</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I
will not turn away \[the punishment\] thereof; because they delivered up
the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the (k) brotherly
covenant:

\(k\) For Esau (from whom came the Edomites) and Jacob were brothers,
therefore they ought to have admonished them by their brotherly
friendship, and not to have provoked them to hatred.

[Amos 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 1:11</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I
will not turn away \[the punishment\] thereof; because he did pursue his
brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did
tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath (l) for ever:

\(l\) He was a continual enemy to him.

[Amos 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 1:13</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of the children of Ammon,
and for four, I will not turn away \[the punishment\] thereof; because
they (m) have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might
enlarge their border:

\(m\) He notes the great cruelty of the Ammonites, that did not spare
the women, but most tyrannously tormented them, and yet the Ammonites
came from Lot, who was of the household of Abraham.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 2](amo002.md)

</div>
