<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1009)  [Next](co1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 10:1</span></span>

Moreover, (1) brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that
all our (a) fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the
sea;

\(1\) He sets out that which he said, laying before them an example of
the horrible judgment of God against those who had in effect the very
same pledges of the same adoption and salvation that we have. And yet
nonetheless when they gave themselves to idol's feasts, they perished in
the wilderness, being horribly and manifoldly punished. Now, moreover
and besides that these things are fitly spoken against those who
frequented idol's feasts, the same also seems to be alleged to this end
and purpose, because many men think that those things are not of such
great weight that God will be angry with them if they use them. And so
they frequent Christian assemblies and are baptized, and receive the
communion, and confess Christ.

\(a\) Paul says this in respect of the covenant, and not in respect of
the persons, except generally.

[1 Corinthians 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 10:2</span></span>

\(2\) And were all (b) baptized unto (c) Moses in the cloud and in the
sea;

\(2\) In effect the ordinances of the old fathers were all one with
ours, for they respected Christ alone, who offered himself to them in
different forms.

\(b\) All of them were baptized with the outward sign, but not indeed,
because of which God cannot be blamed, but they themselves.

\(c\) Moses being their guide.

[1 Corinthians 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 10:3</span></span>

And did all eat the (d) same spiritual (e) meat;

\(d\) The same that we do.

\(e\) Manna, which was a spiritual meat to the believers, who in faith
lay hold upon Christ, who is the true meat.

[1 Corinthians 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 10:4</span></span>

And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that (f) followed them: and that Rock was (g) Christ.

\(f\) Of the River and running Rock, who followed the people.

\(g\) Did signify Christ as an ordinance, so that together with the
sign, there was the thing signified, and the truth itself. For God does
not offer a bare sign, but the thing signified by the sign together with
it, which is to be received with faith.

[1 Corinthians 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 10:6</span></span>

\(3\) Now these things were our (h) examples, to the intent we should
not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

\(3\) An amplifying of the example against those who are carried away
with their lusts beyond the bounds which God has measured out. For this
is the beginning of all evil, as of idolatry (which has gluttony as a
companion), fornication, rebelling against Christ, murmuring, and such
like. And these things God punished most sharply in that old people, to
the end that we who succeed them, and have a more full declaration of
the will of God, might by that means take better heed.

\(h\) Some read "figures": which signified our ordinances. For
circumcision was to the Jews a seal of righteousness, to us a symbol of
baptism, and so in the other ordinances.

[1 Corinthians 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 10:9</span></span>

Neither let us tempt (i) Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
destroyed of serpents.

\(i\) To tempt Christ is to provoke him to a combat as it were, which
those men do who abuse the knowledge that he has given them, and make it
to serve for a cloak for their lusts and wickedness.

[1 Corinthians 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 10:11</span></span>

Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the (k) ends of the world are
come.

\(k\) This our age is called the end, for it is the culmination of all
the ages.

[1 Corinthians 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 10:12</span></span>

\(4\) Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall.

\(4\) In conclusion he descends to the Corinthians themselves, warning
them that they do not please themselves, but rather that they prevent
the wiles of Satan. Yet he uses an declaration and comforts them, that
he may not seem to make them altogether similar to those wicked
idolaters and condemners of Christ, who perished in the wilderness.

[1 Corinthians 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 10:13</span></span>

There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to (l) man: but
God \[is\] faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able; but will with the temptation also (m) make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear \[it\].

\(l\) Which comes from weakness.

\(m\) He that would have you tempted for your profit's sake, will make a
way for you to escape out of the temptation.

[1 Corinthians 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 10:15</span></span>

\(5\) I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say.

\(5\) Now returning to those idol's feasts, that he may not seem to
delay at all: first he promises that he will use no other reasons, than
such as they knew very well themselves. He gives the following line of
reasoning. The holy banquets of the Christians are pledges, first of
all, of the community that they have with Christ, and next, one with
another. The Israelites also do ratify in the sacrifices, their mutual
union in the very same religion. Therefore so do the idolaters also join
themselves with their idols, or demons rather (for idols are nothing) in
those solemn banquets, whereupon it follows, that that table is a table
of demons, and therefore you must avoid it. For you cannot be partakers
of the Lord and of idols together, much less may such banquets be
considered as indifferent things. Will you then strive with God? And if
you do, do you think that you will get the upper hand?

[1 Corinthians 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 10:16</span></span>

The cup of (n) blessing which we bless, is it not the (o) communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ?

\(n\) Of thanksgiving: whereupon, that holy banquet was called
"eucharist", which is Greek for thanksgiving.

\(o\) A most effectual pledge and note of your joining together with
Christ, and ingrafting to him.

[1 Corinthians 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 10:18</span></span>

Behold Israel after the (p) flesh: are not they which eat of the
sacrifices (q) partakers of the altar?

\(p\) That is, those who yet observe their ceremonies.

\(q\) Are consenting and guilty, both of that worship and sacrifice.

[1 Corinthians 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 10:20</span></span>

But I \[say\], that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have
(r) fellowship with devils.

\(r\) Have anything to do with the demons, or enter into that society
which is begun in the demon's name.

[1 Corinthians 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 10:21</span></span>

Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the (s) cup of devils: ye
cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils.

\(s\) The heathen and profane people were accustomed to finish up and
make an end of their feasts which they kept to the honour of their gods,
in offering meat offerings and drink offerings to them, with banquets
and feastings.

[1 Corinthians 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 10:23</span></span>

\(6\) (t) All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

\(6\) Coming to another type of things offered to idols, he repeats that
general rule, that in the use of indifferent things we ought to have
consideration not of ourselves only, but of our neighbours. And
therefore there are many things which of themselves are lawful, which
may be evil when done by us, because of offence to our neighbour.

\(t\) See before in ([Co1 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013).md).

[1 Corinthians 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 10:25</span></span>

\(7\) Whatsoever is sold in the (u) shambles, \[that\] eat, asking no
question for conscience sake:

\(7\) An applying of the rule to the present matter: whatever is sold in
the market, you may indifferently buy it as if it were from the Lord's
hand, and eat it either at home with the faithful, or being called home
to the unfaithful, that is, in a private banquet. But yet with this
exception, unless any man is present who is weak, whose conscience may
be offended by setting meats offered to idols before them: for then you
ought to have a consideration of their weakness.

\(u\) The flesh that was sacrificed used to be sold in the markets, and
the price returned to the priests.

[1 Corinthians 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 10:26</span></span>

For the earth \[is\] the Lord's, and the (x) fulness thereof.

\(x\) All those things of which it is full.

[1 Corinthians 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 10:29</span></span>

Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: (8) for why is my
liberty judged of another \[man's\] conscience?

\(8\) A reason: for we must take heed that our liberty is not spoken of
as evil, and that the benefit of God which we ought to use with
thanksgiving is not changed into impiety. And this is through our fault,
if we choose rather to offend the conscience of the weak, than to yield
a little of our liberty in a matter of no importance, and so give
occasion to the weak to judge in such sort of us, and of Christian
liberty. And the apostle takes these things upon his own person, that
the Corinthians may have so much the less occasion to oppose anything
against him.

[1 Corinthians 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 10:30</span></span>

For if I by (y) grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that
for which I give thanks?

\(y\) If I may through God's grace eat this meat or that meat, why
should I through my fault cause that benefit of God to turn to my blame?

[1 Corinthians 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 10:31</span></span>

\(9\) Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God.

\(9\) The conclusion: we must order ourselves in such a way that we seek
not ourselves, but God's glory, and so the salvation of as many as we
may. In which the apostle does not thrust himself to the Corinthians
(even his own flock) as an example, except so that he calls them back to
Christ, to whom he himself has regard.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 11](co1011.md)

</div>
