<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1004)  [Next](co1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 5:1</span></span>

It is (1) reported commonly \[that there is\] fornication among you, and
such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one
should have his father's wife.

\(1\) They are greatly to be reprehended who by allowing wickedness, set
forth the Church of God to be mocked and scorned by infidels.

[1 Corinthians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 5:2</span></span>

\(2\) And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that
hath done this deed might be taken away from among you.

\(2\) There are none more proud than they that least know themselves.

[1 Corinthians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 5:3</span></span>

\(3\) For I verily, as absent in body, but present in (a) spirit, have
judged already, as though I were present, \[concerning\] him that hath
so done this deed,

\(3\) Excommunication ought not to be committed to one man's power, but
must be done by the authority of the whole congregation, after the
matter is diligently examined.

\(a\) In mind, thought, and will.

[1 Corinthians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 5:4</span></span>

In the (b) name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my spirit, (4) with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,

\(b\) Calling upon Christ's name. (4) There is no doubt that the
judgment is ratified in heaven, in which Christ himself sits as Judge.

[1 Corinthians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 5:5</span></span>

\(5\) To (c) deliver such an one unto Satan for the (6) destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

\(5\) The one who is excommunicated is delivered to the power of Satan,
in that he is cast out of the house of God.

\(c\) What it is to be delivered to Satan the Lord himself declares when
he says, "Let him be unto thee as a heathen and publican"; ([Mat
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)). That is to say, to be
disfranchised and put out of the right and privileges of the city of
Christ, which is the Church, outside of which Satan is lord and master.
(6) The goal of excommunication is not to cast away the excommunicate
that he should utterly perish, but that he may be saved, that is, that
by this means his flesh may be tamed, that he may learn to live to the
Spirit.

[1 Corinthians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 5:6</span></span>

\(7\) Your glorying (d) \[is\] not good. Know ye not that a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

\(7\) Another goal of excommunication is that others are not infected,
and therefore it must of necessity be retained in the Church, so that
one is not infected by the other.

\(d\) Is nothing and not grounded upon good reason, as though you were
excellent, and yet there is such wickedness found among you.

[1 Corinthians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 5:7</span></span>

\(8\) Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new (e) lump,
as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our (f) passover is sacrificed for
us:

\(8\) By alluding to the ceremony of the passover, he exhorts them to
cast out that unclean person from among them. In times past, he says, it
was not lawful for those who celebrated the passover to eat unleavened
bread, insomuch that he was held as unclean and unworthy to eat the
passover, whoever had but tasted of leaven. Now our whole life must be
as it were the feast of unleavened bread, in which all they that are
partakers of that immaculate lamb which is slain, must cast out both of
themselves, and also out of their houses and congregations, all
impurity.

\(e\) By lump he means the whole body of the Church, every member of
which must be unleavened bread, that is, be renewed in spirit, by
plucking away the old corruption.

\(f\) The Lamb of our passover.

[1 Corinthians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 5:8</span></span>

Therefore let us keep the (g) feast, not with old leaven, neither with
the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened \[bread\]
of sincerity and truth.

\(g\) Let us lead our whole life as it were a continual feast, honestly
and uprightly.

[1 Corinthians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 5:9</span></span>

\(9\) I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators:

\(9\) Now he speaks more generally: and that which he spoke before of
the incestuous person he shows that it pertains to others, who are known
to be wicked and those who through their wicked life are a slander to
the Church, who ought also by lawful order be cast out of the community
of the Church. And making mention of eating meals, either he means that
feast of love at which the supper of the Lord was received, or else
their common usage and manner of life. And this is to be properly
understood, lest any man should think that either matrimony was broken
by excommunication, or such duties hindered and cut off by it, as we owe
one to another: children to their parents, subjects to their rulers,
servants to their masters, and neighbour to neighbour, to win one
another to God.

[1 Corinthians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 5:10</span></span>

Yet not (h) altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the
covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye needs go
out of the world.

\(h\) If you should utterly abstain from such men's company, you should
go out of the world. Therefore I speak of those who are in the very
bosom of the Church, who must be brought back into order by discipline,
and not of those who are outside of the Church, with whom we must labour
by all means possible, to bring them to Christ.

[1 Corinthians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 5:12</span></span>

\(10\) For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not
ye judge them that are within?

\(10\) Those who are false brethren ought to be cast out of the
congregation. As for those who are outside of it, they must be left to
the judgment of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 6](co1006)

</div>
