<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1014)  [Next](co1016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 15:1</span></span>

Moreover, (1) brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached
unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye (a) stand;

\(1\) The sixth treatise of this epistle, concerning the resurrection:
and he uses a transition, or passing over from one matter to another,
showing first that he brings no new thing, to the end that the
Corinthians might understand that they had begun to swerve from the
right course. And next that he does not go about to entreat of a
trifling matter, but of another chief point of the Gospel, which if it
is taken away, their faith will necessarily come to nothing. And so at
the length he begins this treatise at Christ's resurrection, which is
the ground and foundation of ours, and confirms it first by the
testimony of the scriptures and by the witness of the apostles, and of
more than five hundred brethren, and last of all by his own.

\(a\) In the profession of which you still continue.

[1 Corinthians 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 15:2</span></span>

By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto
you, (b) unless ye have believed in vain.

\(b\) Which is very absurd, and cannot be, for they that believe must
reap the fruit of faith.

[1 Corinthians 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 15:5</span></span>

And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the (c) twelve:

\(c\) Of those twelve picked and chosen apostles, who were commonly
called twelve, though Judas was put out of the number.

[1 Corinthians 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 15:6</span></span>

After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at (d) once; of
whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen
asleep.

\(d\) Not at several different times, but together and at one instant.

[1 Corinthians 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 15:8</span></span>

\(2\) And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due
time.

\(2\) He maintains along the way the authority of his apostleship, which
was required to be in good credit among the Corinthians, that this
epistle might be of force and weight among them. In the mean time he
compares himself, under divine inspiration, in such a way with certain
others, that he makes himself inferior to them all.

[1 Corinthians 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 15:12</span></span>

\(3\) Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?

\(3\) The first argument to prove that there is a resurrection from the
dead: Christ is risen again, therefore the dead will rise again.

[1 Corinthians 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 15:13</span></span>

\(4\) But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not
risen:

\(4\) The second by an absurdity: if there is no resurrection of the
dead, then Christ is not risen again.

[1 Corinthians 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 15:14</span></span>

\(5\) And if Christ be not risen, then \[is\] our preaching vain, and
your faith \[is\] also vain.

\(5\) The proof of that absurdity, by other absurdities: if Christ is
not risen again, the preaching of the Gospel is in vain, and the credit
that you gave to it is vain, and we are liars.

[1 Corinthians 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 15:16</span></span>

\(6\) For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:

\(6\) He repeats the same argument taken from an absurdity, purposing to
show how faith is in vain if the resurrection of Christ is taken away.

[1 Corinthians 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 15:17</span></span>

And if Christ be not raised, your faith \[is\] vain; (7) ye are (e) yet
in your sins.

\(7\) First, seeing death is the punishment of sin, in vain should we
believe that our sins were forgiven us, if they remain: but they do
remain, if Christ did not rise from death.

\(e\) They are yet in their sins who are not sanctified, nor have
obtained remission of their sins.

[1 Corinthians 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 15:18</span></span>

\(8\) Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

\(8\) Secondly, unless it is certain that Christ rose again, all those
who died in Christ have perished. So then, what profit comes of faith?

[1 Corinthians 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 15:19</span></span>

\(9\) If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.

\(9\) The third argument which is also taken from an absurdity: for
unless there is another life, in which those who trust and believe in
Christ will be blessed, they are the most miserable of all creatures,
because in this life they would be the most miserable.

[1 Corinthians 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 15:20</span></span>

\(10\) But now is Christ risen from the dead, (11) \[and\] become the
(f) firstfruits of them that slept.

\(10\) A conclusion of the former argument: therefore Christ is risen
again.

\(11\) He puts the last conclusion for the first proposition of the
argument that follows. Christ is risen again: therefore will we the
faithful (for of them he speaks) rise again. Then follows the first
reason of this conclusion: for Christ is set forth to us to be
considered of, not as a private man apart and by himself, but as the
firstfruits: and he takes that which was known to all men, that is, that
the whole heap is sanctified in the firstfruits.

\(f\) He alludes to the firstfruits of grain, the offering of which
sanctified the rest of the fruits.

[1 Corinthians 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 15:21</span></span>

\(12\) For since by man \[came\] death, by man \[came\] also the
resurrection of the dead.

\(12\) Another confirmation of the same conclusion: for Christ is to be
considered as opposite to Adam, that as from one man Adam, sin came over
all, so from one man Christ, life comes to all. That is to say, that all
the faithful, who die because by nature they were born of Adam, so
because in Christ they are made the children of God by grace, they are
made alive and restored to life by him.

[1 Corinthians 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 15:22</span></span>

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be (g) made alive.

\(g\) Will rise by the power of Christ.

[1 Corinthians 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 15:23</span></span>

\(13\) But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward
they that are Christ's at his coming.

\(13\) He does two things together: for he shows that the resurrection
is in such sort common to Christ with all his members, that nonetheless
he far surpasses them, both in time (for he was the first that rose
again from the dead) and also in honour, because from him and in him is
all our life and glory. Then by this occasion he passes to the next
argument.

[1 Corinthians 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 15:24</span></span>

\(14\) Then \[cometh\] the (h) end, when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down (i) all
rule and all authority and power.

\(14\) The fourth argument with which also he confirms the other, has a
most sure ground, that is, because God must reign. And this is the
manner of his reign, that the Father will be shown to be King in his Son
who was made man, to whom all things are made subject (the promiser
being the only exception) to the end that the Father may afterward
triumph in his Son the conqueror. And he makes two parts of this reign
and dominion of the Son in which the Father's glory consists: that is
first, the overcoming of his enemies, in which some must be deprived of
all power, as Satan and all the wicked, be they ever so proud and
mighty, and others must be utterly abolished, as death. And second, a
plain and full delivery of the godly from all enemies, that by this
means God may fully set forth the body of the Church cleaving fast to
their head Christ, his kingdom and glory, as a King among his subjects.
Moreover he puts the first degree of his kingdom in the resurrection of
the Son, who is the head: and the perfection, in the full conjunction of
the members with the head, which will be in the latter day. Now all
these tend to this purpose, to show that unless the dead do rise again,
neither the Father can be King above all, neither Christ the Lord of
all. For neither should the power of Satan and death be overcome, nor
the glory of God be full in his Son, nor his Son in his members.

\(h\) The conclusion and finishing of all things.

\(i\) All his enemies who will be robbed of all the power that they
have.

[1 Corinthians 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 15:25</span></span>

For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies (k) under his feet.

\(k\) Christ is considered here as he appeared in the form of a servant,
in which respect he rules the Church as head, and that because this
power was given to him from his Father.

[1 Corinthians 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 15:26</span></span>

The (l) last enemy \[that\] shall be destroyed \[is\] death.

\(l\) The conclusion of the argument, which is taken from the whole to
the part: for if all his enemies will be put under his feet, then it
will necessarily be that death also will be subdued under him.

[1 Corinthians 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 15:28</span></span>

And when all things shall be subdued unto him, (m) then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that (n)
God may be all in all.

\(m\) Not because the Son was not subject to his Father before, but
because his body, that is to say, the Church which is here in distress,
and not yet wholly partaker of his glory, is not yet fully perfect: and
also because the bodies of the saints which are in the graves, will not
be glorified until the resurrection. But Christ as he is God, has us
subject to him as his Father has, but as he is Priest, he is subject to
his Father together with us. Augustine, book 1, chap. 8, of the trinity.

\(n\) By this high type of speech is set forth an incomprehensible glory
which flows from God, and will fill all of us, as we are joined together
with our head, but yet in such a way that our head will always preserve
his preeminence.

[1 Corinthians 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 15:29</span></span>

\(15\) Else what shall they do which are baptized (o) for the dead, if
the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?

\(15\) The fifth argument taken of the end of baptism, that is, because
those who are baptized, are baptized for dead: that is to say, that they
may have a remedy against death, because baptism is a token of
regeneration.

\(o\) They that are baptized to this end and purpose, that death may be
put out in them, or to rise again from the dead, of which baptism is a
seal.

[1 Corinthians 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 15:30</span></span>

\(16\) And why stand we in jeopardy every hour?

\(16\) The sixth argument: unless there is a resurrection of the dead,
why should the apostles so daily cast themselves into danger of so many
deaths?

[1 Corinthians 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 15:31</span></span>

I protest by your (p) rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
die daily.

\(p\) As though he said, "I die daily, as all the miseries I suffer can
well witness, which I may truly boast of, that I have suffered among
you."

[1 Corinthians 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 15:32</span></span>

\(17\) If (q) after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? (18) let us (r)
eat and drink; for to morrow we die.

\(17\) The taking away of an objection: but you, Paul, were ambitious,
as men commonly and are accustomed to be, when you fought with beasts at
Ephesus. That is very likely, says Paul: for what could that profit me,
were it not for the glory of eternal life which I hope for?

\(q\) Not upon any godly motion, nor casting my eyes upon God, but
carried away with vain glory, or a certain headiness.

\(18\) The seventh argument which depends upon the last: if there is no
resurrection of the dead, why do we give ourselves to anything else,
except for eating and drinking?

\(r\) These are sayings of the Epicureans.

[1 Corinthians 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 15:33</span></span>

\(19\) Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners.

\(19\) The conclusion with a sharp exhortation, that they take heed of
the wicked company of certain ones. And from this he shows where this
evil sprang from: warning them to be wise with sobriety to
righteousness.

[1 Corinthians 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">co1 15:35</span></span>

\(20\) But some \[man\] will say, How are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come?

\(20\) Now that he has proved the resurrection, he demonstrates their
doltishness, in that they scoffingly demanded how it could be that the
dead could rise again: and if they did rise again, they asked mockingly,
what manner of bodies they should have. Therefore he sends these
fellows, who seemed to themselves to be marvellously wise and
intelligent, to be instructed of poor rude farmers.

[1 Corinthians 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">co1 15:36</span></span>

\(21\) \[Thou\] fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
die:

\(21\) You might have learned either of these, Paul says, by daily
experience: for seeds are sown, and rot, and yet nonetheless they are
far from perishing, but rather they grow up far more beautiful. And
whereas they are sown naked and dry, they spring up green from death by
the power of God: and does it seem incredible to you that our bodies
should rise from corruption, and that endued with a far more excellent
quality?

[1 Corinthians 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">co1 15:38</span></span>

\(22\) But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every
seed his own body.

\(22\) We see a diversity both in one and the self same thing which has
now one form and then another, and yet keeps its own type: as it is
evident in a grain which is sown bare, but springs up far after another
sort: and also in different types of one self same sort, as among
beasts: and also among things of different sorts, as the heavenly bodies
and the earthly bodies; which also differ very much one from another.
Therefore there is no reason why we should reject either the
resurrection of the bodies, or the changing of them into a better state,
as a thing impossible, or strange.

[1 Corinthians 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">co1 15:42</span></span>

\(23\) So also \[is\] the resurrection of the dead. It is (s) sown in
corruption; it is raised in incorruption:

\(23\) He makes three manner of qualities of the bodies being raised:
first, incorruption, that is, because they will be sound and altogether
of a nature that can not be corrupt. Second, glory, because they will be
adorned with beauty and honour. Third, power, because they will continue
everlasting, without food, drink, and all other helps, without which
this frail life cannot keep itself from corruption.

\(s\) Is buried, and man is hid as seed in the ground.

[1 Corinthians 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">co1 15:43</span></span>

It is sown in (t) dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in
weakness; it is raised in (u) power:

\(t\) Void of honour, void of glory and beauty.

\(u\) Freed from the former weakness, in which it is subject to such
alteration and change, that it cannot maintain itself without food and
drink and such other like helps.

[1 Corinthians 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">co1 15:44</span></span>

\(24\) It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There
is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

\(24\) He shows perfectly in one word this change of the quality of the
body by the resurrection, when he says that a natural body will become a
spiritual body: which two qualities being completely different the one
from the other he straightway expounds, and sets forth diligently.

[1 Corinthians 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">co1 15:45</span></span>

\(25\) And so it is written, The (x) first man Adam was made a living
soul; the last Adam \[was made\] a (y) quickening spirit.

\(25\) That is called a natural body which is made alive and maintained
by a living soul only in the manner that Adam was, of whom we are all
born naturally. And that is said to be a spiritual body, which together
with the soul is made alive with a far more excellent power, that is,
with the Spirit of God, who descends from Christ the second Adam to us.

\(x\) Adam is called the first man, because he is the root as it were
from which we spring. And Christ is the latter man, because he is the
beginning of all those that are spiritual, and in him we are all
included.

\(y\) Christ is called a Spirit, by reason of that most excellent
nature, that is to say, God who dwells in him bodily, as Adam is called
a living soul, by reason of the soul which is the best part in him.

[1 Corinthians 15:46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">co1 15:46</span></span>

\(26\) Howbeit that \[was\] not first which is spiritual, but that which
is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.

\(26\) Secondly, he wills the order of this twofold state or quality to
be observed, that the natural was first, Adam being created of the clay
of the earth. And the spiritual follows and came upon it, that is, when
the Lord being sent from heaven, endued our flesh, which was prepared
and made fit for him, with the fulness of the Godhead.

[1 Corinthians 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">co1 15:47</span></span>

The first man \[is\] of the earth, (z) earthy: the second man \[is\] the
Lord from (a) heaven.

\(z\) Wallowing in dirt, and wholly given to an earthly nature.

\(a\) As Adam was the first man, Christ is the second man; and these two
are spoken of, as if they were the only two men in the world; because as
the former was the head and representative of all his natural posterity,
so the latter is the head and representative of all the spiritual
offspring: and that he is "the Lord from heaven"; in distinction from
the first man. (Ed.)

[1 Corinthians 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">co1 15:48</span></span>

\(27\) As \[is\] the earthy, such \[are\] they also that are earthy: and
as \[is\] the heavenly, such \[are\] they also that are heavenly.

\(27\) He applies both the earthly naturalness of Adam (if I may so say)
to our bodies, so long as they are naturally conversant upon earth, that
is, in this life, and in the grave. And also the spirituality of Christ
to our same bodies, after they are risen again: and he says that the
former goes before, and that this latter will follow.

[1 Corinthians 15:49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">co1 15:49</span></span>

And as we have borne the (b) image of the earthy, we shall also bear the
image of the heavenly.

\(b\) Not a vain and false image, but such a one as indeed had the truth
with it.

[1 Corinthians 15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">co1 15:50</span></span>

\(28\) Now this I say, brethren, that (c) flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.

\(28\) The conclusion: we cannot be partakers of the glory of God unless
we put off all that gross and filthy nature of our bodies subject to
corruption, that the same body may be adorned with incorruptible glory.

\(c\) Flesh and blood are taken here for a living body, which cannot
attain to incorruption, unless it puts off corruption.

[1 Corinthians 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">co1 15:51</span></span>

\(29\) Behold, I shew you a (d) mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed,

\(29\) He goes further, declaring that it will come to pass that those
who will be found alive in the latter day will not descend into that
corruption of the grave, but will be renewed with a sudden change, which
change is very necessary. And he further states that the certain
enjoying of the benefit and victory of Christ, is deferred to that
latter time.

\(d\) A thing that has been hid, and never known before now, and
therefore worthy that you give good care to it.

[1 Corinthians 15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">co1 15:52</span></span>

In (e) a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed.

\(e\) He shows that the time will be very short.

[1 Corinthians 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">co1 15:58</span></span>

\(30\) Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
labour is not in vain in the (f) Lord.

\(30\) An exhortation taken from the profit that ensues, that seeing
they understand that the glory of the other life is laid up for faithful
workmen, they continue and stand fast in the truth of the doctrine of
the resurrection of the dead.

\(f\) Through the Lord's help and goodness working in us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 16](co1016.md)

</div>
