<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1010)  [Next](co1012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 11:2</span></span>

\(1\) Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and
keep the ordinances, as I delivered \[them\] to you.

\(1\) The fifth treatise of this epistle concerning the right ordering
of public assemblies, containing three points, that is of the comely
apparel of men and women, of the order of the Lord's supper, and of the
right use of spiritual gifts. But going about to reprehend certain
things, he begins nonetheless with a general praise of them, calling
those particular laws of comeliness and honesty, which belong to the
ecclesiastical policy, traditions: which afterward they called cannons.

[1 Corinthians 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 11:3</span></span>

\(2\) But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ;
and the head of the woman \[is\] the man; and the (a) head of Christ
\[is\] God.

\(2\) He sets down God, in Christ our mediator, as the end and mark not
only of doctrine, but also of ecclesiastical comeliness. Then applying
it to the question proposed, touching the comely apparel both of men and
women in public assemblies, he declares that the woman is one degree
beneath the man by the ordinance of God, and that the man is so subject
to Christ, that the glory of God ought to appear in him for the
preeminence of the sex.

\(a\) In that Christ is our mediator.

[1 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 11:4</span></span>

\(3\) Every (b) man praying or prophesying, having \[his\] head covered,
dishonoureth his head.

\(3\) By this he gathers that if men do either pray or preach in public
assemblies having their heads covered (which was then a sign of
subjection), they robbed themselves of their dignity, against God's
ordinance.

\(b\) It appears, that this was a political law serving only for the
circumstance of the time that Paul lived in, by this reason, because in
these our days for a man to speak bareheaded in an assembly is a sign of
subjection.

[1 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 11:5</span></span>

\(4\) But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with \[her\] head
uncovered dishonoureth her head: (5) for that is even all one as if she
were shaven.

\(4\) And in like manner he concludes that women who show themselves in
public and ecclesiastical assemblies without the sign and token of their
subjection, that is to say, uncovered, shame themselves. (5) The first
argument taken from the common sense of man, for so much as nature
teaches women that it is dishonest for them to go abroad bareheaded,
seeing that they have given to them thick and long hair which they do so
diligently trim and deck, that they can in no way abide to have it
shaved.

[1 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 11:7</span></span>

\(6\) For a man indeed ought not to cover \[his\] head, forasmuch as he
is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.

\(6\) The taking away of an objection: have not men also hair given to
them? "I grant that", says the apostle, "but there is another matter in
it. For man was made to this end and purpose, that the glory of God
should appear in his rule and authority. But the woman was made so that
by profession of her obedience, she might more honour her husband."

[1 Corinthians 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 11:8</span></span>

\(7\) For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man.

\(7\) He proves the inequality of the woman by the fact that from the
man is the substance of which woman was first made.

[1 Corinthians 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 11:9</span></span>

\(8\) Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the
man.

\(8\) Secondly, by the fact that the woman was made for man, and not the
man for the woman's sake.

[1 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 11:10</span></span>

\(9\) For this cause ought the woman to have (c) power on \[her\] head
because of the (10) angels.

\(9\) The conclusion: women must be covered, to show by this external
sign their subjection.

\(c\) A covering which is a token of subjection.

\(10\) What this means, I do not yet understand.

[1 Corinthians 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 11:11</span></span>

\(11\) Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the
woman without the man, (d) in the Lord.

\(11\) A digression which the apostle uses, lest that which he spoke of
the superiority of men, and the lower degree of women, in consideration
of the policy of the Church, should be so taken as though there were no
measure of this inequality. Therefore he teaches that men have in such
sort the preeminence, that God made them not alone, but women also. And
woman was so made of man, that men also are born by the means of women,
and this ought to put them in mind to observe the degree of every sex in
such sort, that the marriage relationship may be cherished.

\(d\) By the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 11:13</span></span>

\(12\) Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered?

\(12\) He urges the argument taken from the common sense of nature.

[1 Corinthians 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 11:15</span></span>

But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for \[her\] hair is
given her for a (e) covering.

\(e\) To be a covering for her, and such a covering as should procure
another.

[1 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 11:16</span></span>

\(13\) But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the churches of God.

\(13\) Against those who are stubbornly contentious we have to oppose
this, that the churches of God are not contentious.

[1 Corinthians 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 11:17</span></span>

\(14\) Now in this that I declare \[unto you\] I praise \[you\] not,
that ye come together not for the better, but for the worse.

\(14\) He passes now to the next treatise concerning the right
administration of the Lord's supper. And the apostle uses this harsher
preface, that the Corinthians might understand that whereas they
generally observed the apostle's commandments, yet they badly neglected
them in a matter of greatest importance.

[1 Corinthians 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 11:18</span></span>

\(15\) For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear
that there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it.

\(15\) To celebrate the Lord's supper correctly, it is required that
there is not only consent of doctrine, but also of affections, so that
it is not profaned.

[1 Corinthians 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 11:19</span></span>

\(16\) For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are
(f) approved may be made manifest among you.

\(16\) Although schisms and heresies proceed from the devil, and are
evil, yet they come not by chance, nor without cause, and they turn to
the profit of the elect.

\(f\) Whom experience has taught to be of sound religion and godliness.

[1 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 11:20</span></span>

When ye come together therefore into one place, \[this\] is (g) not to
eat the Lord's supper.

\(g\) This is a usual metaphor by which the apostle flatly denies that
which many did not do well.

[1 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 11:21</span></span>

For in eating every one taketh (h) before \[other\] his own supper: and
one is hungry, and another is drunken.

\(h\) Eats his food and does not wait until others come.

[1 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 11:22</span></span>

\(17\) What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye
the church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to
you? shall I praise you in this? I praise \[you\] not.

\(17\) The apostle thinks it good to take away the love feasts because
of their abuse, although they had been practised a long time, and with
commendation used in churches, and were appointed and instituted by the
apostles.

[1 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 11:23</span></span>

\(18\) For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you, That the Lord Jesus the \[same\] night in which he was betrayed
took bread:

\(18\) We must take a true form of keeping the Lord's supper, out of the
institution of it, the parts of which are these: touching the pastors,
to show forth the Lord's death by preaching his word, to bless the bread
and the wine by calling upon the name of God, and together with prayers
to declare the institution of it, and finally to deliver the bread
broken to be eaten, and the cup received to be drunk with thanksgiving.
And touching the flock, that every man examine himself, that is to say,
to prove both his knowledge, and also faith, and repentance: to show
forth the Lord's death, that is, in true faith to yield to his word and
institution: and last of all, to take the bread from the minister's
hand, and to eat it and to drink the wine, and give God thanks. This was
Paul's and the apostles' manner of ministering.

[1 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 11:24</span></span>

And when he had given thanks, he brake \[it\], and said, Take, eat: this
is my body, which is (i) broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

\(i\) This word "broken" denotes to us the manner of Christ's death, for
although his legs were not broken, as the thieves legs were, yet his
body was very severely tormented, and torn, and bruised.

[1 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 11:27</span></span>

\(19\) Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink \[this\] cup
of the Lord, (k) unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord.

\(19\) Whoever condemns the holy ordinances, that is, uses them
incorrectly, are guilty not of the bread and wine, but of the thing
itself, that is, of Christ, and will be grievously punished for it.

\(k\) Otherwise than how such mysteries should properly be handled.

[1 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 11:28</span></span>

\(20\) But let (l) a man examine himself, and so let him eat of \[that\]
bread, and drink of \[that\] cup.

\(20\) The examination of a man's self, is of necessity required in the
supper, and therefore they ought not to be admitted to it who cannot
examine themselves: such as children, furious and angry men, also such
as either have no knowledge of Christ, or not sufficient, although they
profess Christian religion: and others that cannot examine themselves.

\(l\) This passage overthrows the idea of the faith of merit, or
undeveloped faith, which the papists maintain.

[1 Corinthians 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 11:29</span></span>

For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
damnation to himself, not (m) discerning the Lord's body.

\(m\) He is said to discern the Lord's body that has consideration of
the worthiness of it, and therefore comes to eat of this food with great
reverence.

[1 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 11:30</span></span>

\(21\) For this cause many \[are\] weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep.

\(21\) The profaning of the body and blood of the Lord in his mysteries
is harshly punished by him, and therefore such wrongs ought diligently
to be prevented by each one judging and correcting himself.

[1 Corinthians 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 11:31</span></span>

For if we would (n) judge ourselves, we should not be judged.

\(n\) Try and examine ourselves, by faith and repentance, separating
ourselves from the wicked.

[1 Corinthians 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 11:33</span></span>

\(22\) Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one
for another.

\(22\) The supper of the Lord is a common action of the whole church,
and therefore there is no place for private suppers.

[1 Corinthians 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 11:34</span></span>

\(23\) And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not
together unto condemnation. (24) And the rest will I set in order when I
come.

\(23\) The supper of the Lord was instituted not to feed the belly, but
to feed the soul with the communion of Christ, and therefore it ought to
be separated from common banquets.

\(24\) Such things as pertain to order, as place, time, form of prayers,
and other such like, the apostle took order for in congregations
according to the consideration of times, places, and persons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 12](co1012.md)

</div>
