<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 3:3</span></span>

\[Forasmuch as ye are\] (a) manifestly declared to be the epistle of
Christ (b) ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit
of the (c) living God; (1) not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables
of the heart.

\(a\) The apostle says this wisely, that by little and little he may
come from the commendation of the person to the matter itself.

\(b\) Which I took pains to write as it were.

\(c\) Along the way he sets the power of God against the ink with which
epistles are commonly written, to show that it was accomplished by God.
(1) He alludes along the way to the comparison of the outward ministry
of the priesthood of Levi with the ministry of the Gospel, and the
apostolical ministry, which he handles afterward more fully.

[2 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 3:4</span></span>

And such (d) trust have we through Christ to God-ward:

\(d\) This boldness we show, and thus may we boast gloriously of the
worthiness and fruit of our ministry.

[2 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 3:5</span></span>

Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of
ourselves; but our (e) sufficiency \[is\] of God;

\(e\) In that we are proper and able to make other men partakers of so
great a grace.

[2 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 3:6</span></span>

\(2\) Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of
the (f) letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the
spirit giveth life.

\(2\) He amplifies his ministry and his fellows: that is to say, the
ministry of the Gospel comparing it with the ministry of the Law, which
he considers in the person of Moses, by whom the Law was given: against
whom he sets Christ the author of the Gospel. Now this comparison is
taken from the very substance of the ministry. The Law is as it were a
writing in itself, dead, and without efficacy: but the Gospel, and new
Covenant, as it were the very power of God itself, in renewing,
justifying, and saving men. The Law offers death, accusing all men of
unrighteousness: the Gospel offers and gives righteousness and life. The
administration of the Law served for a time to the promise: the Gospel
remains to the end of the world. Therefore what is the glory of the Law
in comparison of the majesty of the Gospel?

\(f\) Not of the Law but of the Gospel.

[2 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 3:7</span></span>

But if the ministration of death, written (g) \[and\] engraven in
stones, was (h) glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance;
which \[glory\] was to be done away:

\(g\) Imprinted and engraved: so that by this place we may plainly
perceive that the apostle speaks not of the ceremonies of the Law, but
of the ten commandments.

\(h\) This word "glorious" indicates a brightness, and a majesty which
was in Moses physically, but in Christ spiritually.

[2 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 3:8</span></span>

How shall not the (i) ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?

\(i\) By which God offers, indeed, and gives the Spirit, not as a dead
thing, but a living Spirit, working life.

[2 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 3:9</span></span>

For if the ministration of condemnation \[be\] glory, much more doth the
ministration of (k) righteousness exceed in glory.

\(k\) That is, of Christ. And since he is imputed to us as our own, we
are not condemned, and what is more we are also crowned as righteous.

[2 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 3:11</span></span>

For if that which is (l) done away \[was\] glorious, much more that
which remaineth \[is\] glorious.

\(l\) The Law, indeed, and the ten commandments themselves, together
with Moses, are all abolished, if we consider the ministry of Moses
apart by itself.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

\(3\) Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of
speech:

\(3\) He shows what this glory of the preaching of the Gospel consists
in: that is, in that it sets forth plainly and evidently that which the
Law showed darkly, for it sent those that heard it to be healed by
Christ, who was to come, after it had wounded them.

[2 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 3:13</span></span>

\(4\) And not as Moses, \[which\] put a vail over his face, that the
children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the (m) end of that
which is abolished:

\(4\) He expounds along the way the allegory of Moses' covering, which
was a token of the darkness and weakness that is in men, who were rather
dulled by the bright shining of the Law then given. And this covering
was taken away by the coming of Christ, who enlightens the hearts, and
turns them to the Lord, that we may be brought from the slavery of this
blindness, and set in the liberty of the light by the power of Christ's
Spirit.

\(m\) Into the very bottom of Moses' ministry.

[2 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 3:17</span></span>

Now the (n) Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord
\[is\], there \[is\] liberty.

\(n\) Christ is that Spirit who takes away that covering, by working in
our hearts, to which also the Law itself called us, though in vain,
because it speaks to dead men, until the Spirit makes us alive.

[2 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 3:18</span></span>

\(5\) But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, \[even\]
as by the Spirit of the Lord.

\(5\) Continuing in the allegory of the covering, he compares the Gospel
to a glass, which although it is most bright and sparkling, yet it does
not dazzle their eyes who look in it, as the Law does, but instead
transforms them with its beams, so that they also are partakers of the
glory and shining of it, to enlighten others: as Christ said unto his
own, "You are the light of the world", whereas he himself alone is the
light. We are also commanded in another place to shine as candles before
the world, because we are partakers of God's Spirit. But Paul speaks
here properly of the ministers of the Gospel, as it appears both by that
which goes before, and that which comes after, and in that he sets
before them his own example and that of his fellows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004)

</div>
