<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2003)  [Next](co2005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 4:1</span></span>

Therefore (1) seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy,
we (a) faint not;

\(1\) Now he plainly witnesses that both he and his associates (through
the mercy of God) do their vocation and duty uprightly and sincerely,
neglecting all dangers.

\(a\) Though we are broken in pieces with miseries and calamities, yet
we do not yield.

[2 Corinthians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 4:2</span></span>

But have renounced the (b) hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God (c) deceitfully; but by
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God.

\(b\) Subtilty and every type of deceit which men hunt after, as it were
dens and lurking holes, to cover their shameless dealings with.

\(c\) This is that which he called in the former chapter, making
merchandise of the word of God.

[2 Corinthians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 4:3</span></span>

\(2\) But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:

\(2\) An objection: many hear the Gospel, and yet are no more
enlightened by it than by the preaching of the Law. He answers, "The
fault is in the men themselves, whose eyes Satan plucks out, who rules
in this world." And yet nonetheless he and his associates set forth the
most clear light of the Gospel to be seen and beheld, seeing that Christ
only whom they preach, is he in whom God will be known, and as it were
seen.

[2 Corinthians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 4:4</span></span>

In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the (d) light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is
the (e) image of God, should shine unto them.

\(d\) The light of plain and enlightening preaching, which shows forth
the glory of Christ.

\(e\) In whom the Father sets himself forth to be seen and beheld.

[2 Corinthians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 4:5</span></span>

\(3\) For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and
ourselves your servants for (f) Jesus' sake.

\(3\) He removes according to his accustomed manner, all suspicion of
ambition, affirming that he teaches faithfully, but as a servant, and
witnessing that all this light which he and his associates give to
others, proceeds from the Lord.

\(f\) To preach this self same Jesus to you.

[2 Corinthians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 4:6</span></span>

For God, (g) who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
shined in our hearts, to \[give\] the (h) light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

\(g\) Who made with his word alone.

\(h\) That being enlightened by God, we should in the same way give that
light to others.

[2 Corinthians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 4:7</span></span>

\(4\) But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, (5) that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.

\(4\) He takes away a stumbling block, which darkened among some, the
bright shining of the ministry of the Gospel, that is, because the
apostles were the most miserable of all men. Paul answers that he and
his associates are as it were, earthen vessels, but yet there is in them
a most precious treasure. (5) He brings marvellous reasons why the Lord
does so afflict his principal servants, to the end, he says, that all
men may perceive that they do not stand by any man's power, but by the
singular power of God, in that they die a thousand times, but never
perish.

[2 Corinthians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 4:10</span></span>

\(6\) Always bearing about in the body the (i) dying of the Lord Jesus,
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body.

\(6\) An amplification of the former sentence, in which he compares his
afflictions to a daily death, and the power of the Spirit of God in
Christ to life, who oppresses that death.

\(i\) So Paul calls that miserable estate and condition that the
faithful, but especially the minsters, are in.

[2 Corinthians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 4:11</span></span>

For we which (k) live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus' sake,
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our (l) mortal
flesh.

\(k\) Who live that life, that is, by the Spirit of Christ, among so
many and so great miseries.

\(l\) Subject to that miserable condition.

[2 Corinthians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 4:12</span></span>

\(7\) So then death worketh in us, but life in you.

\(7\) A very wise conclusion: as if he would say, "Therefore, to be
short, we die that you may live by our death", because they ventured
into all those dangers for the building of the Church's sake, and they
ceased not to strengthen and encourage all the faithful with the
examples of their patience.

[2 Corinthians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 4:13</span></span>

\(8\) We having the same (m) spirit of faith, according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore speak;

\(8\) He declares the former sentence, showing that he and his
associates die in a way to purchase life for others, but yet nonetheless
they are partakers of the same life with them: because they themselves
do first believe that which they offer to others to believe, that is,
that they also will be saved together with them in Christ.

\(m\) The same faith, by the inspiration of the same Spirit.

[2 Corinthians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 4:15</span></span>

\(9\) For all things \[are\] for your sakes, (n) that the abundant grace
might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.

\(9\) He shows how this constancy is preserved in them, that is, because
they are doing it for God's glory, and the salvation of the churches
committed to them.

\(n\) When it will please God to deliver me, and restore me to you, that
exceeding benefit which will be poured upon me will in like sort result
to the glory of God, by the thanksgiving of many.

[2 Corinthians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 4:16</span></span>

For which cause we faint not; (10) but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward \[man\] is (o) renewed day by day.

\(10\) He adds as it were a triumphant song, that he is outwardly
afflicted, but inwardly he profits daily: and he is not bothered by all
the miseries that may be sustained in this life, in comparison of that
most constant and eternal glory.

\(o\) Gathers new strength so that the outward man is not overcome with
the miseries which come freshly one after another, being maintained and
upheld with the strength of the inward man.

[2 Corinthians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 4:17</span></span>

For our (p) light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us
a far more exceeding \[and\] eternal weight of (q) glory;

\(p\) Afflictions are not called light, as though they were light in
themselves, but because they pass away quickly, as indeed our whole life
is not of very long continuance.

\(q\) Which remains forever firm and stable, and can never be shaken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 5](co2005)

</div>
