<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2010)  [Next](co2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 11:1</span></span>

Would (1) to God ye could bear with me a little in \[my\] folly: and
indeed bear with me.

\(1\) He grants that in a way he is playing the fool in this exalting of
things, but he adds that he does it against his will for their profit,
because he sees them deceived by certain vain and crafty men, through
the craft and subtilty of Satan.

[2 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 11:2</span></span>

For I am jealous over you with (a) godly jealousy: for I have espoused
you to one husband, that I may (b) present \[you as\] a chaste virgin to
Christ.

\(a\) He speaks as one who woos them, but yet as one that seeks them not
for himself, but for God.

\(b\) To marry you together.

[2 Corinthians 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 11:3</span></span>

But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be (c) corrupted from the simplicity that
is in (d) Christ.

\(c\) This passage is to be noted against those who hate the plain and
pure simplicity of the scriptures, in comparison of the elegance and
fluency of man's eloquence.

\(d\) Which is proper for those who are in Christ.

[2 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 11:4</span></span>

\(2\) For if he that cometh preacheth (e) another Jesus, whom we have
not preached, or \[if\] ye receive another spirit, which ye have not
received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well
bear with \[him\].

\(2\) He shows that they deceive themselves, if they look to receive
from any other man, either a more excellent Gospel, or more excellent
gifts of the Holy Spirit.

\(e\) A more perfect doctrine of Jesus Christ.

[2 Corinthians 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 11:6</span></span>

\(3\) But though \[I be\] (f) rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but
we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things.

\(3\) He refutes the slanders of those boastful and proud men. I grant,
he says, that I am not so eloquent an orator, but yet they cannot take
away the knowledge of the Gospel from me, of which you have had good
proof, and that in every manner of way.

\(f\) Paul did not lack the type of eloquence which is proper for a man,
and fit for the Gospel, but he willingly lacked that eloquent type of
speech, which too many now a days search after and follow.

[2 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 11:7</span></span>

\(4\) Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be
exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely?

\(4\) Another slander, that is, that he was a rascal, and lived by the
labour of his own hands. But in this, the apostle says, what can you lay
against me, except that I was content to take any pains for your sakes?
For when I lacked, I travailed for my living with my own hands. And also
when poverty forced me, I chose rather to seek my sustenance than to be
any burden to you, even though I preached the Gospel to you.

[2 Corinthians 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 11:9</span></span>

And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man:
for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia
supplied: and in all \[things\] I have kept myself from being burdensome
unto you, (5) and \[so\] will I keep \[myself\].

\(5\) An amplification: so far is he from being ashamed of this act,
that he has also resolved with himself to act in no other way while he
is among them, in order that it may always be truly said that he taught
in Achaia for nothing. And this is not because he disdains the
Corinthians, but rather so that these proud and boastful men may never
find the occasion which they have already sought for, and he in the
meantime may set something before the Corinthians to follow, so that at
length they may truly say that they are like Paul.

[2 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 11:10</span></span>

As the (g) truth of Christ is in me, no man shall (h) stop me of this
boasting in the regions of Achaia.

\(g\) This is a form of an oath, as if he said, "Let me not be thought
to have any truth in me."

\(h\) Will be always open to me.

[2 Corinthians 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 11:12</span></span>

But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them
which desire occasion; that wherein they (i) glory, they may be found
even as we.

\(i\) Paul's adversaries sought all occasions they could to be equal to
him. And therefore seeing they had rather live off the Corinthians then
preach to them for nothing, they sought another occasion, that is, to
make Paul take something. And if he had done this, then they hoped by
this means to be equal to him. For they made such a show of zeal and
knowledge, and set it forth with such a flattering type of eloquence,
that some of them even despised Paul. But he shows that all this is
nothing but frivolities and pretensions.

[2 Corinthians 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 11:13</span></span>

\(6\) For such \[are\] false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the apostles of Christ.

\(6\) Now at length he portrays these fellows as they truly are,
forewarning that it will come to pass that they will at length betray
themselves, no matter how they may be pretending that they have a zeal
for God's glory.

[2 Corinthians 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 11:14</span></span>

And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of (k)
light.

\(k\) By light is meant the heavenly glory, of which the angels are
partakers.

[2 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 11:16</span></span>

\(7\) I say again, Let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a
fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little.

\(7\) He goes forward boldly, and using a vehement irony or type of
taunting, desires the Corinthians to pardon him, if for a time he argues
as a fool before them, who are wise, along with those other wise ones,
as he talks about those external things such as his stock, his
ancestors, and valiant acts.

[2 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 11:20</span></span>

\(8\) For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
\[you\], if a man take \[of you\], if a man exalt himself, if a man
smite you on the face.

\(8\) Before he comes to the matter, he talks directly to the
Corinthians, who persuading themselves to be very wise men, did not mark
in the meanwhile that those false apostles had abused their simplicity
for advantage.

[2 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 11:21</span></span>

I speak as concerning (l) reproach, as though we had been (m) weak.
Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also.

\(l\) As if he said, "In respect of that reproach which they do to you,
which surely is as evil as if they beat you."

\(m\) Paul is called weak, in that he seems to be to the Corinthians a
vile and abject man, a beggarly craftsman, a most wretched and miserable
idiot, whereas in reality God's mighty power was made manifest in that.

[2 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 11:23</span></span>

Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I \[am\] (n) more; in
labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in (o) deaths oft.

\(n\) Paul being honourable indeed, defends his ministry openly, not for
his own sake, but because he saw his doctrine come into danger.

\(o\) In danger of present death.

[2 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 11:24</span></span>

Of the Jews (p) five times received I forty \[stripes\] save one.

\(p\) He alludes to that which is written in ([Deu
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003)). And moreover this place shows
us that Paul suffered many more things which Luke omitted in writing
Acts.

[2 Corinthians 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co2 11:25</span></span>

\(q\) Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I
suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;

\(q\) By the Roman magistrates.

[2 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co2 11:27</span></span>

In weariness and (r) painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

\(r\) Painfulness is a troublesome sickness, as when a man who is weary
and wants rest is forced to begin new labour.

[2 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co2 11:28</span></span>

\(9\) Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me
daily, the care of all the churches.

\(9\) He further adds this in conclusion, that the Corinthians should be
ashamed to despise him upon whose care almost all churches depended, as
it was plainly seen by experience.

[2 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co2 11:30</span></span>

\(10\) If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern
mine infirmities.

\(10\) He turns that against the adversaries which they objected against
him: as if he should say, "They allege my calamities to take away my
authority from me: but if I would boast myself, I could use no better
argument. And God himself is my witness that I am not making up or
forging anything."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 12](co2012)

</div>
