<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2004)  [Next](co2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 5:1</span></span>

For (1) we know that if our earthly house of \[this\] tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.

\(1\) Taking occasion by the former comparison, he compares this
miserable body as it is in this life, to a frail and brittle tabernacle.
And contrasts this with the heavenly tabernacle, which he calls that
sure and everlasting condition of this same body glorified in heaven.
And this is so, he says, in that we are addicted to this tabernacle, but
also with sobs and sighs desire rather that tabernacle. And so this
place concerning the glory to come is put within the treatise of the
dignity of the ministry, just as it also was in the beginning of the
second chapter.

[2 Corinthians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 5:2</span></span>

For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be (a) clothed upon with our
house which is from (b) heaven:

\(a\) He calls the glory of immortality, which we will be as it were
clothed with, a garment.

\(b\) Heavenly, not that the substance of it is heavenly, but rather the
glory of it.

[2 Corinthians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 5:3</span></span>

\(2\) If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.

\(2\) An exposition of the former saying: we do not without reason
desire to be clad with the heavenly house, that is, with that
everlasting and immortal glory, as with a garment. For when we depart
from here we will not remain naked, having cast off the covering of this
body, but we will take our bodies again, which will put on as it were
another garment besides. And therefore we do not sigh because of the
weariness of this life, but because of the desire of a better life.
Neither is this desire in vain, for we are made to that life, the pledge
of which we have, even the Spirit of adoption.

[2 Corinthians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 5:5</span></span>

Now he that hath (c) wrought us for the selfsame thing \[is\] God, who
also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

\(c\) He means that first creation, to show us that our bodies were made
to this end, that they should be clothed with heavenly immortality.

[2 Corinthians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 5:6</span></span>

\(3\) Therefore \[we are\] always (d) confident, knowing that, whilst we
are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord:

\(3\) He concludes something here from verse four, and states it in the
following way: "Therefore, seeing that we know by the Spirit that we are
strangers so long as we are here, we patiently suffer this delay (for we
are now so with God, that we behold him only by faith, and are therefore
now absent from him) but so that we aspire and have a longing always to
him. Therefore also we behave ourselves in such a way that we may be
acceptable to him, both while we live here, and when we go from here to
him." ([Co2 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004))

\(d\) He calls them "confident" who are always resolved with a quiet and
settled mind to suffer any danger at all, not doubting at all that their
end will be happy.

[2 Corinthians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 5:7</span></span>

(For we walk by (e) faith, not by sight:)

\(e\) Faith, of those things which we hope for, not having God presently
in our physical view.

[2 Corinthians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 5:8</span></span>

We are (f) confident, \[I say\], and willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord.

\(f\) And yet we are in such a manner confident and do so pass on our
pilgrimage with a valiant and peaceful mind, that yet nonetheless we had
rather depart from here to the Lord.

[2 Corinthians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 5:9</span></span>

Wherefore we (g) labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him.

\(g\) And seeing that it is so, we strive to live so, that both in this
our pilgrimage here we may please him, and that at length we may be
received home to him.

[2 Corinthians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 5:10</span></span>

\(4\) For we must all (h) appear before the judgment seat of Christ;
that every one may receive the things \[done\] in \[his\] body,
according to that he hath done, whether \[it be\] good or bad.

\(4\) That no man might think that what he spoke of that heavenly glory
pertains to all, he adds that every one will first render an account of
his pilgrimage, after he has departed from here.

\(h\) We must all appear personally, and enquiry will be made of us,
that all may see how we have lived.

[2 Corinthians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 5:11</span></span>

\(5\) Knowing therefore the (i) terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but
we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in
your consciences.

\(5\) Now he moves on, and taking occasion of the former sentence
returns to ([Co2 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)), confirming his
own and his associates sincerity.

\(i\) That terrible judgment.

[2 Corinthians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 5:12</span></span>

\(6\) For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion
to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to \[answer\] them
which glory in (k) appearance, and not in heart.

\(6\) He removes all suspicion of pride by a new reason, because it is a
responsibility, not for his part but for theirs, that his apostleship be
considered sincere compared to the vain display of a few others.

\(k\) In outward disguising, and that pretentious show of man's wisdom
and eloquence, and not in true godliness, which is sealed in the heart.

[2 Corinthians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 5:13</span></span>

\(7\) For whether we be beside ourselves, \[it is\] to God: or whether
we be sober, \[it is\] for your cause.

\(7\) The meaning is: even when I am mad (as some men think of me),
while I seem as a fool to boast about myself, I do it for your profit,
to the same extent that I do when I preach only the Gospel to you.

[2 Corinthians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 5:14</span></span>

\(8\) For the love of Christ (l) constraineth us; because we thus judge,
that if (m) one died for all, then were all dead:

\(8\) He continues dismissing all suspicion of desire of estimation and
boasting. For the love of Christ, he says, compels us to this, that
seeing he died for us all, who were dead when as we lived to ourselves
(that is, while we were yet given to these earthly affections) we in
like sort should consecrate our whole life which we have received from
him, to him. That is, being endued with the Holy Spirit to this end and
purpose, that we should meditate upon nothing but that which is
heavenly.

\(l\) Wholly possesses us.

\(m\) He speaks here of sanctification, by which it comes to pass that
Christ lives in us.

[2 Corinthians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 5:15</span></span>

And \[that\] he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
(n) live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again.

\(n\) See See Romans 6:1-7:25

[2 Corinthians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 5:16</span></span>

\(9\) Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: (10) yea,
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we
\[him\] no more.

\(9\) He shows what it is not to live to ourselves but to Christ, that
is, to know no man according to the flesh. That is to say, to be
conversant among men and yet not to care for those worldly and carnal
things, as those do who have regard for a man's family, his country,
form, glory, riches, and such like, in which men commonly dote and weary
themselves.

\(10\) An amplification: "This is", he says, "so true, that we do not
now think carnally of Christ himself, who has now left the world, and
therefore he must be thought of spiritually by us."

[2 Corinthians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 5:17</span></span>

\(11\) Therefore if any man \[be\] in Christ, \[he is\] a (o) new
creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.

\(11\) An exhortation for every man who is renewed with the Spirit of
Christ to meditate on heavenly things, and not earthly.

\(o\) As a thing made new by God, for though a man is not newly created
when God gives him the spirit of regeneration, but only his qualities
are changed, yet nonetheless it pleased the Holy Spirit to speak so, to
teach us that we must attribute all things to the glory of God. Not that
we are as rocks or stones, but because God creates in us both the will
to will well, and the power to do well.

[2 Corinthians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 5:18</span></span>

\(12\) And all things \[are\] of God, who hath reconciled us to himself
by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation;

\(12\) He commends the excellency of the ministry of the Gospel, both by
the authority of God himself, who is the author of that ministry, and
also by the excellency of the doctrine of it. For it announces atonement
with God by free forgiveness of our sins, and justification offered to
us in Christ, and that so lovingly and freely, that God himself does in
a way beseech men by the mouth of his ministers to have consideration of
themselves, and not to despise so great a benefit. And when he says so,
he plainly reprehends those who falsely attribute to themselves the name
of "pastor", as this calling can only come from God.

[2 Corinthians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 5:19</span></span>

To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath (p) committed unto us the
word of reconciliation.

\(p\) Used our labour and travail.

[2 Corinthians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 5:21</span></span>

For he hath made him \[to be\] (q) sin for us, who (r) knew no sin; that
we might be made the (s) righteousness of God in him.

\(q\) A sinner, not in himself, but by imputation of the guilt of all
our sins to him.

\(r\) Who was completely void of sin.

\(s\) Righteous before God, and that with righteousness which is not
fundamental in us, but being fundamental in Christ, God imputes it to us
through faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 6](co2006)

</div>
