<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col002)  [Next](col004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)

[Colossians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 3:1</span></span>

If (1) ye then (2) be (a) risen with Christ, (3) seek those things which
are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.

\(1\) Another part of this epistle, in which he takes occasion by reason
of those vain exercises, to show the duty of a Christian life: which is
an ordinary thing with him, after he has once set down the doctrine
itself. (2) Our renewing or new birth, which is accomplished in us by
being partakers of the resurrection of Christ, is the source of all
holiness, out of which various streams or rivers afterwards flow.

\(a\) For if we are partakers of Christ, we are carried as it were into
another life, where we will need neither meat nor drink, for we will be
similar to the angels. (3) The end and mark which all the duties of
Christian life aim at is to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and to
give ourselves to those things which lead us there, that is, to true
godliness, and not to those outward and physical things.

[Colossians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 3:2</span></span>

Set your affection on things above, not on things on the (b) earth.

\(b\) So he calls that show of religion which he spoke of in the former
chapter.

[Colossians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 3:3</span></span>

\(4\) For ye are dead, (5) and your life is hid with Christ in God.

\(4\) A reason taken of the efficient causes and others: you are dead
with regard to the flesh, that is, with regard to the old nature which
seeks after all transitory things. And on the other hand, you have begun
to live according to the Spirit; therefore give yourselves to spiritual
and heavenly, and not to carnal and earthly things. (5) The taking away
of an objection: while we are yet in this world, we are subject to many
miseries of this life, so that the life that is in us, is as it were
hidden. Yet nonetheless we have the beginnings of life and glory, the
accomplishment of which lies now in Christ's and in God's hand, and will
assuredly and manifestly be performed in the glorious coming of the
Lord.

[Colossians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 3:5</span></span>

\(6\) Mortify therefore your (c) members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry:

\(6\) Let not your dead nature be effectual in you any more, but let
your living nature be effectual. Now the strength of nature is known by
the desires. Therefore let the affections of the world die in you, and
let the contrary desires which are spiritual, live. And he reckons up a
great long list of vices, and their contrary virtues.

\(c\) The desires and lusts that are in us, are in this passage very
properly called members, because the reason and will of man is
corrupted, and uses them as the body uses its members.

[Colossians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">col 3:6</span></span>

For which things' sake the wrath of God (d) cometh on the children of
disobedience:

\(d\) Used to come.

[Colossians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 3:9</span></span>

Lie not one to another, (7) seeing that ye have put off the old man with
his deeds;

\(7\) A definition of our new birth taken from the parts of it, which
are the putting off of the old man, that is to say, of the wickedness
which is in us by nature, and the restoring and repairing of the new
man, that is to say, of the pureness which is given us by grace.
However, both the putting off and the putting on are only begun in us in
this present life, and by certain degrees finished, the one dying in us
by little and little, and the other coming to the perfection of another
life, by little and little.

[Colossians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 3:10</span></span>

And have put on the new \[man\], (8) which is renewed in (e) knowledge
after the image of him that created him:

\(8\) Newness of life consists in knowledge which transforms man to the
image of God his maker, that is to say to the sincerity and pureness of
the whole soul.

\(e\) He speaks of an effectual knowledge.

[Colossians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">col 3:11</span></span>

\(9\) Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond \[nor\] free: but Christ
\[is\] all, and in all.

\(9\) He tells them again that the Gospel does not refer to those
external things, but true justification and sanctification in Christ
alone, which have many fruits, as he reckons them up here: but he
commends two things especially, that is, godly harmony, and continual
study of God's word.

[Colossians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 3:12</span></span>

\(f\) Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, (g)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
longsuffering;

\(f\) Put on in such a way, that you never put off.

\(g\) Those most tender affections of exceeding compassion.

[Colossians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 3:14</span></span>

And above all these things \[put on\] charity, which is the (h) bond of
perfectness.

\(h\) Which bonds and knits together all the duties that take place
between men.

[Colossians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">col 3:15</span></span>

And let the peace of God (i) rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in (k) one body; and be ye thankful.

\(i\) Rule and govern all things.

\(k\) You are joined together into one body through God's goodness, so
that you might help one another, as fellow members.

[Colossians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 3:16</span></span>

Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one another in (l) psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

\(l\) By "psalms" he means all godly songs which were written upon
various occasions, and by "hymns", all such as contain the praise of
God, and by "spiritual songs", other more special and artful songs which
were also in praise of God, but they were made fuller of music.

[Colossians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">col 3:17</span></span>

And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, \[do\] all in the (m) name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

\(m\) Call upon the name of Christ when you do it, or do it to Christ's
praise and glory.

[Colossians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 3:18</span></span>

\(10\) Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is (n) fit
in the Lord.

\(10\) He goes from precepts which concern the whole civil life of man,
to precepts pertaining to every man's family, and requires of wives
subjection in the Lord.

\(n\) For those wives do poorly, that do not set God in Christ before
them in their love; but this philosophy does not know.

[Colossians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">col 3:19</span></span>

\(11\) Husbands, love \[your\] wives, and be not bitter against them.

\(11\) He requires of husbands that they love their wives, and treat
them gently.

[Colossians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">col 3:20</span></span>

\(12\) Children, obey \[your\] parents in (o) all things: for this is
well pleasing unto the Lord.

\(12\) He requires of children, that according to God's commandment they
are obedient to their parents.

\(o\) In the Lord; and so it is expounded in ([Eph
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)).

[Colossians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">col 3:21</span></span>

\(13\) Fathers, provoke not your children \[to anger\], lest they be
discouraged.

\(13\) Of parents, that they are gentle towards their children.

[Colossians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">col 3:22</span></span>

\(14\) Servants, obey in all things \[your\] masters according to the
flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart,
fearing God:

\(14\) Of servants, that fearing God himself to whom their obedience is
acceptable, they reverently, faithfully, and from the heart, obey their
masters.

[Colossians 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">col 3:24</span></span>

Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the (p) reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.

\(p\) Because you will have duly obeyed your masters, the time will
come, that you will be changed from servants to sons, and you will know
this for certain, which will be when you are made partakers of the
heavenly inheritance.

[Colossians 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">col 3:25</span></span>

\(15\) But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath
done: and there is no respect of persons.

\(15\) He requires of masters, that being mindful how they themselves
also will render an account before that heavenly Lord and Master, who
will avenge wrongful deeds without any respect of masters or servants,
they show themselves just and upright with fairness to their servants.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 4](col004)

</div>
