<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan002)  [Next](dan004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)

[Daniel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 3:1</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar the king made (a) an image of gold, whose height \[was\]
threescore cubits, \[and\] the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up
in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

\(a\) Under pretence of religion, and holiness in making an image to his
idol Bel, he sought his own ambition and vain glory: and this declares
that he was not touched with the true fear of God before, but that he
confessed him on a sudden motion, as the wicked when they are overcome
with the greatness of his works. The Greek interpreters write that this
was done eighteen years after the dream, and as may appear, the King
feared lest the Jews by their religion should have altered the state of
his commonwealth: therefore he meant to bring all to one type of
religion, and so rather sought his own peace than God's glory.

[Daniel 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 3:2</span></span>

Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the
governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come
to the (b) dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the (c) king had
set up.

\(b\) Showing that the idol is not known for an idol as long as he is
with workmen: but when the ceremonies and customs are recited and used,
and the consent of the people is there, then they think they have made a
god out of a block.

\(c\) This was sufficient with the wicked at all times to approve their
religion, if the king's authority were alleged for the establishment of
it, not considering in the meantime what God's word allowed.

[Daniel 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 3:4</span></span>

Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, (d)
nations, and languages,

\(d\) These are the two dangerous weapons, which Satan used to fight
against the children of God, the consent of the multitude, and the
cruelty of the punishment. For even though some feared God, yet the
multitude who consented to the wickedness persuaded them: and here the
King required not an inward consent, but an outward gesture, that the
Jews might by little and little learn to forget their true religion.

[Daniel 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 3:12</span></span>

There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
province of Babylon, (e) Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O
king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the
golden image which thou hast set up.

\(e\) It seems that they named not Daniel, because he was greatly in the
king's favour, thinking if these three had been destroyed, they might
have had better occasion to accuse Daniel. And this declares that this
policy of erecting this image was invented by the malicious flatterers
who sought nothing but the destruction of the Jews, whom they accused of
rebellion and ingratitude.

[Daniel 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 3:15</span></span>

\(f\) Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of
musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; \[well\]:
but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of
a burning fiery furnace; and who \[is\] that God that shall deliver you
out of my hands?

\(f\) Signifying that he would receive them to grace if they would now
obey his decree.

[Daniel 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 3:16</span></span>

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we (g) \[are\] not careful to answer thee in this
matter.

\(g\) For they would have done injury to God, if they would have doubted
in this holy cause, and therefore they say that they are resolved to die
for God's cause.

[Daniel 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 3:17</span></span>

If it be \[so\], our God whom we serve is (h) able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver \[us\] out of thine hand,
O king.

\(h\) They have two points as their foundation: first on the power and
providence of God over them, and second on their cause, which was God's
glory, and the testifying of his true religion with their blood. And so
they make open confession, that they will not so much as outwardly
consent to idolatry.

[Daniel 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 3:19</span></span>

Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was
changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: \[therefore\] he spake,
and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven (i) times more
than it was wont to be heated.

\(i\) This declares that the more that tyrants rage, and the more crafty
they show themselves in inventing strange and cruel punishments, the
more is God glorified by his servants, to whom he gives patience and
constancy to abide the cruelty of their punishment. For either he
delvers them from death, or else for this life gives them better.

[Daniel 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 3:25</span></span>

He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of
the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the
(k) Son of God.

\(k\) For the angels were called the sons of God because of their
excellency. Therefore the king called this angel whom God sent to
comfort his own in these great torments, the son of God.

[Daniel 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 3:26</span></span>

Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace,
\[and\] spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of
the most high God, come forth, and come \[hither\]. Then Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, (l) came forth of the midst of the fire.

\(l\) This commends their obedience to God, that they would not because
of any fear depart out of this furnace until the appointed time, as Noah
remained in the ark, until the Lord called him forth.

[Daniel 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 3:28</span></span>

\[Then\] Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, (m) Blessed \[be\] the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered
his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and
yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god,
except their own God.

\(m\) He was moved by the greatness of the miracle to praise God, but
his heart was not touched. And here we see that miracles are not
sufficient to convert men to God, but that doctrine most chiefly be
joined with them, without which there can be no faith.

[Daniel 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 3:29</span></span>

Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language,
which speak (n) any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this
sort.

\(n\) If this heathen king moved by God's Spirit would punish blasphemy,
and made a law and set a punishment for such transgressors, much more
ought all they that profess religion make sure that such impiety does
not happen, lest according as their knowledge and responsibility is
greater, so they suffer double punishment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 4](dan004)

</div>
