<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan005)  [Next](dan007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

[Daniel 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 6:1</span></span>

It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom (a) an hundred and twenty
princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;

\(a\) Read ([Est 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)).

[Daniel 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 6:3</span></span>

Then this Daniel (b) was preferred above the presidents and princes,
because an excellent spirit \[was\] in him; and the king thought to set
him over the whole realm.

\(b\) This heathen king preferred Daniel a stranger to all his nobles
and those he was familiar with, because the graces of God were more
excellent in him than in others.

[Daniel 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 6:4</span></span>

Then the presidents and princes (c) sought to find occasion against
Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor
fault; forasmuch as he \[was\] faithful, neither was there any error or
fault found in him.

\(c\) Thus the wicked cannot abide the graces of God in others, but seek
by every occasion to deface them: therefore against such assaults there
is no better remedy than to walk upright in the fear of God, and to have
a good conscience.

[Daniel 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 6:9</span></span>

Wherefore king Darius (d) signed the writing and the decree.

\(d\) In this is condemned the wickedness of the king, who would be set
up as a god, and did not care what wicked laws he approved for the
maintenance of it.

[Daniel 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 6:10</span></span>

Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
house; and his (e) windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem,
he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks
before his God, as he did aforetime.

\(e\) Because he would not by his silence show that he consented to this
wicked decree, he set open his windows toward Jerusalem when he prayed:
both to stir up himself with the remembrance of God's promises to his
people, when they should pray toward that temple, and also that others
might see that he would neither consent in heart nor deed for these few
days to anything that was contrary to God's glory.

[Daniel 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 6:15</span></span>

Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O
king, that the law of the Medes and Persians \[is\], That no decree nor
statute which the king establisheth may be (f) changed.

\(f\) Thus the wicked maintain evil laws by constancy and authority,
which is often either weakness, or stubbornness, and the innocent as a
result perish by them: and these governors neither ought to fear, nor be
ashamed to break such laws.

[Daniel 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 6:20</span></span>

And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto
Daniel: \[and\] the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of
the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, (g) able to
deliver thee from the lions?

\(g\) This declares that Darius was not touched with the true knowledge
of God, because he doubted of his power.

[Daniel 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 6:22</span></span>

My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they
have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him (h) innocency was found in me;
and also before thee, O king, have I done (i) no hurt.

\(h\) My just cause and uprightness in this thing in which I was
charged, is approved by God.

\(i\) For he disobeyed the kings's wicked commandment in order to obey
God, and so he did no injury to the king, who ought to command nothing
by which God would be dishonoured.

[Daniel 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 6:23</span></span>

Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they should
take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den,
and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he (k) believed in his
God.

\(k\) Because he committed himself wholly to God whose cause he
defended, he was assured that nothing but good could come to him: and in
this we see the power of faith, as in ([Heb
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033)).

[Daniel 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 6:24</span></span>

And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused
Daniel, and they (l) cast \[them\] into the den of lions, them, their
children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and
brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the
den.

\(l\) This is a terrible example against all the wicked who do against
their conscience make cruel laws to destroy the children of God, and
also admonishes princes how to punish such when their wickedness is come
to light: though not in every point, or with similar circumstances, but
yet to execute true justice upon them.

[Daniel 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 6:26</span></span>

I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and
fear (m) before the God of Daniel: for he \[is\] the (n) living God, and
stedfast for ever, and his kingdom \[that\] which shall not be
destroyed, and his dominion \[shall be even\] unto the end.

\(m\) This does not prove that Darius worshipped God properly, or was
converted: for then he would have destroyed all superstition and
idolatry, and not only given God the chief place, but also have set him
up, and caused him to be honoured according to his word. But this was a
specific confession of God's power, unto which he was compelled by this
wonderful miracle.

\(n\) Who not only has life in himself, but is the only fountain of
life, and quickens all things, so that without him there is no life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 7](dan007)

</div>
