<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan003)  [Next](dan005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

[Daniel 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 4:1</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that
dwell in all the (o) earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

\(o\) Meaning, as far as his dominion extended.

[Daniel 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 4:3</span></span>

How great \[are\] his signs! and how mighty \[are\] his wonders! (p) his
kingdom \[is\] an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion \[is\] from
generation to generation.

\(p\) See [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)

[Daniel 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 4:4</span></span>

I Nebuchadnezzar was at (a) rest in mine house, and flourishing in my
palace:

\(a\) There was no trouble that might cause me to dream, and therefore
it came only from God.

[Daniel 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 4:5</span></span>

I saw a (b) dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and
the visions of my head troubled me.

\(b\) This was another dream besides that which he saw of the four
empires, for Daniel both declared what that dream was, and what it
meant, and here he expounds this dream.

[Daniel 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 4:7</span></span>

Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the
soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but (c) they did not make
known unto me the interpretation thereof.

\(c\) In that he sent abroad to others, whose ignorance in times past he
had experienced, and left Daniel who was ever ready at hand, it declares
the nature of the ungodly, who never seek for the servants of God unless
they absolutely have to, and then they flatter to a great extent.

[Daniel 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 4:8</span></span>

But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name \[was\] (d)
Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom \[is\] the
spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, \[saying\],

\(d\) This no doubt was a great grief to Daniel not only to have his
name changed, but to be called by the name of a vile idol, which thing
Nebuchadnezzar did to make him forget the true religion of God.

[Daniel 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 4:9</span></span>

O Belteshazzar, (e) master of the magicians, because I know that the
spirit of the holy gods \[is\] in thee, and no secret troubleth thee,
tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation
thereof.

\(e\) Which also was a great grief to the Prophet, to be numbered among
the sorcerers and men whose practices were wicked and contrary to God's
word.

[Daniel 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 4:10</span></span>

Thus \[were\] the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a
(f) tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof \[was\]
great.

\(f\) By the tree is signified the dignity of a king whom God ordains to
be a defence for every type of man, and whose state is profitable for
mankind.

[Daniel 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 4:13</span></span>

I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a (g) watcher
and an holy one came down from heaven;

\(g\) Meaning the angel of God, who neither eats nor sleeps, but is
always ready to do God's will, and is not infected with man's
corruption, but is always holy. And in that he commands to cut down this
tree, he knew that it would not be cut down by man, but by God.

[Daniel 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 4:16</span></span>

\(h\) Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be
given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.

\(h\) By this he means that Nebuchadnezzar would not only for a time
lose his kingdom, but be like a beast.

[Daniel 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 4:17</span></span>

\(i\) This matter \[is\] by the decree of the watchers, and the demand
by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know
that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

\(i\) God has decreed this judgment and the whole army of heaven has as
it were joined in being a part of it, just as they also desire the
execution of his decree against all those that lift up themselves
against God.

[Daniel 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 4:19</span></span>

Then Daniel, whose name \[was\] Belteshazzar, was (k) astonied for one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said,
Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble
thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream \[be\] to them
that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

\(k\) He was troubled because of the great judgment of God, which he saw
ordained against the king. And so the Prophets on the one hand used to
make known God's judgments for the zeal they had for his glory, and on
the other hand had compassion upon man. And they also considered that
they would be subject to God's judgments, if he did not regard them with
pity.

[Daniel 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 4:23</span></span>

And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from
heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the
stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and
brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew
of heaven, and \[let\] his portion \[be\] with the beasts of the field,
(l) till seven times pass over him;

\(l\) By which he means a long space, as seven years. Some interpret
seven months, and others seven weeks, but it seems he means seven years.

[Daniel 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 4:25</span></span>

That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as (m) oxen,
and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall
pass over thee, till thou know that (n) the most High ruleth in the
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

\(m\) Not that his shape or form was changed into a beast, but that he
was either stricken mad, and so avoided man's company, or was cast out
because of his tyranny, and so wandered among the beasts, and ate herbs
and grass.

\(n\) Daniel shows the reason why God punished him in this way.

[Daniel 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 4:27</span></span>

Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and (o) break
off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to
the poor; if it may be a (p) lengthening of thy tranquillity.

\(o\) Cease from provoking God to anger any longer by your sins, that he
may reduce the severity of his punishment, if you show by your upright
life that you have true faith and repentance.

\(p\) Allow the errors of your former life to be made up for.

[Daniel 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 4:29</span></span>

At the end of twelve (q) months he walked in the palace of the kingdom
of Babylon.

\(q\) After Daniel had declared this vision: and this pride of his
declares that it is not in man to convert to God, unless his Spirit
moves him, seeing that these terrible threatenings could not move him to
repent.

[Daniel 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">dan 4:34</span></span>

And at the end of the (r) days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto
heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most
High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose
dominion \[is\] an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom \[is\] from
generation to generation:

\(r\) When the term of these seven years was accomplished.

[Daniel 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">dan 4:35</span></span>

And all the inhabitants of the earth \[are\] reputed as nothing: and he
doeth according to his (s) will in the army of heaven, and \[among\] the
inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
What doest thou?

\(s\) He confesses God's will to be the rule of all justice, and a most
perfect law, by which he governs both man and angels and devils, so that
none ought to murmur or ask a reason for his doings, but only to stand
content with them and give him the glory.

[Daniel 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">dan 4:36</span></span>

At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my
kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors
and (t) my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom,
and excellent majesty was added unto me.

\(t\) By whom it seems that he had been put from his kingdom before.

[Daniel 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">dan 4:37</span></span>

Now I Nebuchadnezzar (u) praise and extol and honour the King of heaven,
all whose works \[are\] truth, and his ways judgment: and those that
walk in pride he is able to abase.

\(u\) He not only praises God for his deliverance, but also confesses
his fault, so that God alone may have the glory, and man the shame, and
so that God may be exalted and man cast down.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 5](dan005)

</div>
