<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan004)  [Next](dan006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md)

[Daniel 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 5:1</span></span>

\(a\) Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords,
and drank wine (b) before the thousand.

\(a\) Daniel recites this history of King Belshazzar, Evilmerodach's
son, to show God's judgments against the wicked for the deliverance of
his Church, and how the prophecy of Jeremiah was true, that they would
be delivered after seventy years.

\(b\) The kings of the east part then used to commonly sit alone, and
disdained that any should sit in their company: and now to show his
power, and how little he thought of his enemy, which then besieged
Babylon, made a solemn banquet, and used excess in their company, which
is meant here by drinking wine: thus the wicked are very lax in morals
and negligent, when their destruction is at hand.

[Daniel 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 5:2</span></span>

Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and
silver vessels which his (c) father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the
temple which \[was\] in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his
wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.

\(c\) Meaning his grandfather.

[Daniel 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 5:4</span></span>

They drank wine, and praised the (d) gods of gold, and of silver, of
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

\(d\) In contempt of the true God they praise their idols, not that they
thought that the gold or silver were gods, but that there was a certain
strength and power in them to do them good, which is also the opinion of
all idolaters.

[Daniel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 5:5</span></span>

In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over (e)
against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's
palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

\(e\) That it might the better be seen.

[Daniel 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 5:6</span></span>

Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him,
so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his (f) knees smote one
against another.

\(f\) So he that before condemned God, was moved by this sight to
tremble for fear of God's judgments.

[Daniel 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 5:7</span></span>

The king cried aloud to bring in (g) the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
the soothsayers. \[And\] the king spake, and said to the wise \[men\] of
Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the
interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and \[have\] a
chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the
kingdom.

\(g\) Thus the wicked in their troubles seek many means, which draw them
from God, because they do not seek for him who is the only comfort in
all afflictions.

[Daniel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 5:10</span></span>

\[Now\] the (h) queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords,
came into the banquet house: \[and\] the queen spake and said, O king,
live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy
countenance be changed:

\(h\) That is, his grandmother, Nebuchadnezzar's wife, who because of
her age was not at the feast before, but came there when she heard of
this strange news.

[Daniel 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 5:11</span></span>

There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom \[is\] the spirit of the holy
gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom,
like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, \[I say\], thy father, made master
of the (i) magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, \[and\] soothsayers;

\(i\) Read ([Dan 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#006).md); and this
declares that both this name was odious to him, and also he did not use
these vile practises, because he was not among them when all were
called.

[Daniel 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 5:14</span></span>

I have even heard of thee, that (k) the spirit of the gods \[is\] in
thee, and \[that\] light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found
in thee.

\(k\) For the idolaters thought that the angels had power as God, and
therefore held them in the same estimation that they held God, thinking
that the spirit of prophecy and understanding came from them.

[Daniel 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 5:18</span></span>

O thou king, the most high God gave (l) Nebuchadnezzar thy father a
kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:

\(l\) Before he read the writing, he declares to the king his great
ingratitude toward God, who could not be moved to give him the glory,
considering God's wonderful work toward his grandfather, and so shows
that he does not sin from ignorance but from malice.

[Daniel 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 5:24</span></span>

\(m\) Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was
written.

\(m\) After God had for such a long time deferred his anger, and
patiently waited for your repentance.

[Daniel 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 5:25</span></span>

And this \[is\] the writing that was written, (n) MENE, MENE, TEKEL,
UPHARSIN.

\(n\) This word is written twice because of the certainty of the thing,
showing that God had most surely decided: it signifies also that God has
appointed a term for all kingdoms, and that a miserable end will come on
all that raise themselves against him.

[Daniel 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">dan 5:31</span></span>

And Darius (o) the Median took the kingdom, \[being\] about threescore
and two years old.

\(o\) Cyrus his son-in-law gave him this title of honour, even though
Cyrus in effect had the dominion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 6](dan006.md)

</div>
