<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph003)  [Next](eph005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 4:1</span></span>

I therefore, (1) the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the (a) vocation wherewith ye are called,

\(1\) Another part of the epistle, containing precepts of the Christian
life, the sum of which is this, that every man behave himself as it is
fitting for so excellent a grace of God.

\(a\) By this is meant the general calling of the faithful, which is
this, to be holy as our God is holy.

[Ephesians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 4:2</span></span>

\(2\) With all lowliness and meekness, with (b) longsuffering,
forbearing one another in love;

\(2\) Secondly, he commends the meekness of the mind, which is
demonstrated by bearing with one another.

\(b\) See ([Mat 18:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025).md).

[Ephesians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 4:3</span></span>

\(3\) Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

\(3\) Thirdly he requires perfect agreement, but yet such that is joined
with the band of the Holy Spirit.

[Ephesians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 4:4</span></span>

\(4\) \[There is\] one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling;

\(4\) An argument of great weight for an earnest displaying of brotherly
love and charity with one another, because we are made one body as it
were of one God and Father, by one Spirit, worshipping one Lord with one
faith, and consecrated to him with one baptism, and having hope of one
self same glory, unto which we are called. Therefore, whoever breaks
charity, breaks all of these things apart.

[Ephesians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 4:6</span></span>

One God and Father of all, who \[is\] (c) above all, and (d) through
all, and (e) in you all.

\(c\) Who alone has the chief authority over the Church.

\(d\) Who alone pours forth his providence, through all the members of
the Church.

\(e\) Who alone is joined together with us in Christ.

[Ephesians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 4:7</span></span>

\(5\) But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure
of the (f) gift of Christ.

\(5\) He teaches us that we indeed are all one body, and that all good
gifts proceed from Christ alone, who reigns in heaven having mightily
conquered all his enemies, from where he heaps all gifts upon his
Church. But yet nonetheless these gifts are differently and variously
divided according to his will and pleasure, and therefore every man
ought to be content with that measure that God has given him, and to
bestow it to the common profit of the whole body.

\(f\) Which Christ has given.

[Ephesians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 4:8</span></span>

Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led (g) captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men.

\(g\) A multitude of captives.

[Ephesians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 4:9</span></span>

(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into
the (h) lower parts of the earth?

\(h\) Down to the earth, which is the lowest part of the world.

[Ephesians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 4:10</span></span>

He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might (i) fill (k) all things.)

\(i\) Fill with his gifts.

\(k\) The Church.

[Ephesians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 4:11</span></span>

\(6\) And he gave some, (l) apostles; and some, (m) prophets; and some,
(n) evangelists; and some, (o) pastors and teachers;

\(6\) First of all he lists the ecclesiastical functions, which are
partly extraordinary and for a season, such as apostles, prophets, and
evangelists, and partly ordinary and perpetual, such as pastors and
teachers.

\(l\) The apostles were those twelve to whom Paul was afterward added,
whose office was to plant churches throughout all the world.

\(m\) The prophet's office was one of the chiefest, who were men of
marvellous wisdom, and some of them could foretell things to come.

\(n\) The apostles used these as companions in the execution of their
office, being not able to go to all places by themselves.

\(o\) Pastors are those who govern the Church, and teachers are those
who govern the schools.

[Ephesians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 4:12</span></span>

\(7\) For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
for the edifying of the (p) body of Christ:

\(7\) He shows the aim of ecclesiastical functions, that is, that by the
ministry of men all the saints may so grow up together, that they may
make one mystical body of Christ.

\(p\) The Church.

[Ephesians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 4:13</span></span>

\(8\) Till we all come in the (q) unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
(r) stature of the fulness of Christ:

\(8\) The use of this ministry is perpetual so long as we are in this
world, that is, until that time that having put off the flesh, and
thoroughly and perfectly agreeing between ourselves, we will be joined
with Christ our head. And this thing is done by the knowledge of the Son
of God increasing in us, and he himself by little and little growing up
in us until we come to be a perfect man, which will be in the world to
come, when God will be all in all.

\(q\) In that most near joining which is knit and fastened together by
faith.

\(r\) Christ is said to grow up to full age, not in himself, but in us.

[Ephesians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 4:14</span></span>

\(9\) That we \[henceforth\] be no more children, (10) tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the (s) sleight
of men, \[and\] (t) cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive;

\(9\) Between our childhood (that is to say, a very weak state, when we
are still wavering) and our perfect age, which we will have at length in
another world, there is a mean, that is, our youth, and steady going
forward to perfection.

\(10\) He compares those who do not rest themselves upon the word of
God, to little boats which are tossed here and there with the doctrines
of men as it were with contrary winds, and in addition forewarns them
that it comes to pass not only by the unsteadiness of man's brain, but
also by the craftiness of certain ones, who make as it were an art of
it.

\(s\) With those uncertain events which toss men to and fro.

\(t\) By the deceit of those men who are very well practised in
deceiving others.

[Ephesians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 4:15</span></span>

\(11\) But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, \[even\] Christ:

\(11\) By earnest affection of the truth and love, we grow up into
Christ: for he (being effectual by the ministry of his word, which as
the vital Spirit makes alive the whole body in such a way that it
nourishes all the limbs of it according to the measure and proportion of
each one) quickens and cherishes his Church, which consists of various
functions, as of various members, and preserves the need of every one.
And from this it follows that neither this body can live without Christ,
neither can any man grow up spiritually, who separates himself from the
other members.

[Ephesians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 4:16</span></span>

From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to the (u) effectual working in
the measure of every part, maketh (x) increase of the body unto the
edifying of itself in (y) love.

\(u\) Of Christ, who with regard to the soul, empowers all the members.

\(x\) Such increase as is fit for the body to have.

\(y\) Charity is the knitting of the limbs together.

[Ephesians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 4:17</span></span>

\(12\) This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the (z) vanity of their mind,

\(12\) He descends to the fruits of Christian doctrine, and reasons
first upon the principles of conduct and actions, setting down a most
grave comparison between the children of God, and those who are not
regenerated. For in these men all the powers of the mind are corrupted,
and their mind is given to vanity, and their senses are darkened with
most gross mistiness, and their affections are so accustomed by little
and little to wickedness, that at length they run headlong into all
uncleanness, being utterly destitute of all judgment.

\(z\) If the noblest parts of the soul are corrupted, what is man but
solely corruption?

[Ephesians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 4:18</span></span>

Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the (a) life of
God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart:

\(a\) By which God lives in them.

[Ephesians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 4:19</span></span>

Who being (b) past feeling have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with (c) greediness.

\(b\) Void of all judgment.

\(c\) They strove to surpass one another, as though there were some gain
to be gotten by it.

[Ephesians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 4:20</span></span>

\(13\) But ye have not so learned Christ;

\(13\) Here follows the contrary part concerning men who are regenerated
by the true and living knowledge of Christ, who have other principles by
which they act that are very different, that is, holy and honest
desires, and a mind completely changed by the power of the Holy Spirit,
from which proceeds also like effects, as a just and holy life indeed.

[Ephesians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 4:21</span></span>

If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, (d) as the
truth is in Jesus:

\(d\) As they have learned who acknowledge Christ indeed, and in good
earnest.

[Ephesians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 4:22</span></span>

That ye put off concerning the former conversation (e) the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts;

\(e\) Yourselves.

[Ephesians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 4:23</span></span>

And be renewed in the (f) spirit of your mind;

\(f\) Where there ought to have been the greatest force of reason, there
is the greatest corruption of all, which gradually weakens all things.

[Ephesians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 4:24</span></span>

And that ye put on the new man, which (g) after God is created (h) in
righteousness and (i) true holiness.

\(g\) After the image of God.

\(h\) The effect and end of the new creation.

\(i\) Not fake nor counterfeit.

[Ephesians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eph 4:25</span></span>

\(14\) Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbour: for we are members one of another.

\(14\) He commends separately certain special Christian virtues, and
first of all he requires truth (that is to say, sincere manners),
condemning all deceit and hypocrisy, because we are born one for
another.

[Ephesians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eph 4:26</span></span>

\(15\) Be (k) ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down (l) upon
your wrath:

\(15\) He teaches us how to bridle our anger in such a way that, even
though our anger is fierce, yet it does not break out, and that it is
without delay quenched before we sleep. And this is so that Satan may
not take occasion to give us evil counsel through the wicked counsellor,
and destroy us.

\(k\) If it so happens that you are angry, yet do not sin, that is,
bridle your anger, and do not wickedly do that which you have wickedly
conceived.

\(l\) Let not the night come upon you in your anger, that is, make
atonement quickly, for all matters.

[Ephesians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eph 4:28</span></span>

\(16\) Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour,
working with \[his\] hands the thing which is (m) good, that he may have
to give to him that needeth.

\(16\) He descends from the heart to the hands, condemning theft: and
because the men who give themselves to this wickedness often pretend to
be poor, he shows that labour is a good remedy against poverty, which
God blesses in such a way that those who labour always have some surplus
to help others. And therefore it is far from being the case that they
are forced to steal other men's goods.

\(m\) By labouring in things that are holy, and profitable to his
neighbour.

[Ephesians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eph 4:29</span></span>

\(17\) Let no (n) corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but
that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister (o)
grace unto the hearers.

\(17\) He bridles the tongue as well, teaching us to so temper our talk,
that our hearer's minds are not destroyed, and are rather instructed.

\(n\) Literally, "rotten".

\(o\) By grace he means that by which men most profit with regard to
going forward in godliness and love.

[Ephesians 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eph 4:30</span></span>

\(18\) And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption.

\(18\) A general precept against all excess of affections which dwell in
that part of the mind, which they call "angry", and he sets against them
the contrary means. And he uses a most strong preface, how we ought to
take heed that we grieve not the Holy Spirit of God through our
immoderateness and excessiveness, who dwells in us to the end of
moderating all our affections.

[Ephesians 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eph 4:32</span></span>

And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
(19) even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you.

\(19\) An argument taken from the example of Christ, most grave and
strong, both for the pardoning of those injuries which have been done to
us by our greatest enemies, and much more for having consideration of
the miserable, and using moderation and gentle behaviour towards all
men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 5](eph005.md)

</div>
