<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph005)  [Next](phi001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 6:1</span></span>

Children, (1) obey your parents (2) in the (a) Lord: (3) for this is
right.

\(1\) He comes to another part of a family, and shows that the duty of
the children toward their parents consists in obedience to them. (2) The
first argument: because God has so appointed. And upon this it follows
also that children are obligated to obey their parents, that they may
not swerve from the true worship of God.

\(a\) For the Lord is author of all fatherhood, and therefore we must
yield such obedience as he will have us. (3) The second argument:
because this obedience is most just.

[Ephesians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 6:2</span></span>

\(4\) Honour thy father and mother; (5) (which is the first commandment
with (b) promise;)

\(4\) A proof of the first argument. (5) The third argument taken of the
profit that ensues from it: because the Lord gave this commandment among
all the rest a special blessing.

\(b\) With a special promise: for otherwise the second commandment has a
promise of mercy to a thousand generations, but that promise is general.

[Ephesians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 6:4</span></span>

\(6\) And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring
them up in the nurture and (c) admonition of the Lord.

\(6\) It is the duty of fathers to use their fatherly authority
moderately and to God's glory.

\(c\) Such information and precepts which are taken out of God's book,
and are holy and acceptable to him.

[Ephesians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 6:5</span></span>

\(7\) Servants, be obedient to them that are \[your\] masters (8)
according to the flesh, with (d) fear and trembling, in singleness of
your heart, as unto Christ;

\(7\) Now he descends to the third part of a family, that is, to the
duty both of the masters and of the servants. And he shows that the duty
of servants consists in a hearty love and reverence for their masters.
(8) He moderates the sharpness of service, in that they are spiritually
free even though they are servants, and yet that spiritual freedom does
not take away physical service: insomuch that they cannot be Christ's,
unless they serve their masters willingly and faithfully, as much as
they may with clear conscience.

\(d\) With careful reverence: for slavish fear is not allowable, much
less in Christian servants.

[Ephesians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 6:6</span></span>

Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, (9)
doing the will of God from the heart;

\(9\) To cut off occasion of all pretences, he teaches us that it is
God's will that some are either born or made servants, and therefore
they must respect God's will although their service is ever so hard.

[Ephesians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 6:7</span></span>

With good will doing service, as to the (e) Lord, and not to men:

\(e\) Being moved with a reverence for God, as though you served God
himself.

[Ephesians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 6:8</span></span>

\(10\) Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall
he receive of the Lord, whether \[he be\] bond or free.

\(10\) Although they serve unkind and cruel masters, yet the obedience
of servants is no less acceptable to God, than the obedience of those
that are free.

[Ephesians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 6:9</span></span>

\(11\) And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing
threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is
there (f) respect of persons with him.

\(11\) It is the duty of masters to use the authority that they have
over their servants, modestly and in a holy manner, seeing that they in
another respect have a common master who is in heaven, who will judge
both the servant and the free.

\(f\) Either of freedom or bondage.

[Ephesians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 6:10</span></span>

\(12\) Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might.

\(12\) He concludes the other part of this epistle with a grave
exhortation, that all are ready and fight constantly, trusting in
spiritual weapons, until their enemies are completely put to flight. And
first of all he warns us to take up the armour of God, for with it alone
may our enemy be dispatched.

[Ephesians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 6:12</span></span>

\(13\) For we wrestle not against flesh and (g) blood, but against (h)
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high \[places\].

\(13\) Secondly, he declares that our chiefest and mightiest enemies are
invisible, so that we may not think that our chiefest conflict is with
men.

\(g\) Against men, who are of a frail and brittle nature, against whom
are set spiritual wiles, a thousand times more mighty than the flesh.

\(h\) He gives these names to the evil angels, by reason of the effects
which they work: not that they are able to do the same in and of
themselves, but because God gives them permission.

[Ephesians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 6:13</span></span>

\(14\) Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be
able to withstand in the (i) evil day, and having done all, to stand.

\(14\) He shows that these enemies are put to flight only with the
armour of God, that is, with uprightness of conscience, a godly and holy
life, knowledge of the Gospel, faith, and to be short, with the word of
God. And that daily earnest prayer must be made for the health of the
Church, and especially for the steadfast faithfulness of the true,
godly, and valiant ministers of the word.

\(i\) See ([Eph 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016).md).

[Ephesians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 6:15</span></span>

And your feet shod with the (k) preparation of the gospel of peace;

\(k\) The preparation of the Gospel may be as it were shoes to you: and
it is very fitly called the Gospel of peace, because, seeing we have to
go to God through most dangerous ranks of enemies, this may encourage us
to go on bravely, in that you know by the doctrine of the Gospel, that
we are travelling to God who is at peace with us.

[Ephesians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 6:18</span></span>

Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the (l) Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all
saints;

\(l\) That holy prayers may proceed from the Holy Spirit.

[Ephesians 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 6:21</span></span>

\(15\) But that ye also may know my affairs, \[and\] how I do, Tychicus,
a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to
you all things:

\(15\) A familiar and very amiable declaration of his state, together
with a solemn prayer, with which Paul is accustomed to end his epistles.

[Ephesians 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 6:24</span></span>

Grace \[be\] with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ (m) in
sincerity. Amen. "\[To \[the\] Ephesians written from Rome, by
Tychicus.\]"

\(m\) Or to immortality, to life everlasting.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 1](phi001.md)

</div>
