<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

[Galatians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 6:1</span></span>

Brethren, (1) if a man be (a) overtaken in a fault, ye which are (b)
spiritual, (c) restore such an one in the (d) spirit of meekness; (2)
considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

\(1\) He condemns persistent and pressing harshness, because brotherly
reprehensions ought to be moderated and tempered by the spirit of
meekness.

\(a\) Through the malice of the flesh and the devil.

\(b\) Who are upheld by the power of God's Spirit.

\(c\) Labour to fill up that which is lacking in him.

\(d\) This is a metaphor which the Hebrews use, showing by this that all
good gifts come from God. (2) He touches the problem, for they are
commonly the most severe judges who forget their own weaknesses.

[Galatians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 6:2</span></span>

\(3\) Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the (e) law of
Christ.

\(3\) He shows that this is the end of rebukes, to raise up our brother
who is fallen, and not proudly to oppress him. Therefore every one must
seek to have praise of his own life by approving himself, and not by
rebuking others.

\(e\) Christ, in plain and clear words, calls the commandment of charity
his commandment.

[Galatians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 6:5</span></span>

\(4\) For every man shall bear his own burden.

\(4\) A reason why men ought to carefully watch themselves not others,
because every man will be judged before God according to his own life,
and not by comparing himself with other men.

[Galatians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 6:6</span></span>

\(5\) Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teacheth in (f) all good things.

\(5\) It is fitting that teachers should be helped by their students, as
much as they are able.

\(f\) Of whatever he has according to his ability.

[Galatians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 6:7</span></span>

\(6\) Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap.

\(6\) He commends liberality towards the poor, and first of all chides
those who were not ashamed to pretend this and that, and all because
they would not help their neighbours, as though they could deceive God.
And afterward he compares alms to a spiritual sowing which will have a
most plentiful harvest, so that it will be very profitable: and compares
being a covetous miser to sowing carnally, from which nothing can be
gathered but such things as fade away, and eventually perish.

[Galatians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 6:8</span></span>

For he that soweth to his (g) flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting.

\(g\) To the commodities of this present life.

[Galatians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 6:9</span></span>

\(7\) And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

\(7\) Against those who are generous at the beginning, but do not
continue, because the harvest seems to be deferred a long time, as
though the seed time and the harvest were simultaneous.

[Galatians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 6:10</span></span>

\(8\) As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all \[men\],
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

\(8\) Those that are of the household of faith, that is, those who are
joined with us in the profession of one self same religion, ought to be
preferred before all others, yet in such a way that our generosity
extends to all.

[Galatians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 6:11</span></span>

\(9\) Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own
hand.

\(9\) The fourth and last part of the epistle, in which he returns to
his principal end and purpose: that is, that the Galatians should not
allow themselves to be led out of the way by the false apostles. And he
points out what those false apostles are really like, reproving them of
ambition, as men who do not act because of any affection and zeal they
have for the Law, but only for this purpose, that they may purchase
themselves favour amongst their own sort, by the circumcision of the
Galatians.

[Galatians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 6:12</span></span>

As many as desire to make a (h) fair shew in (i) the flesh, they
constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer
persecution for the (k) cross of Christ.

\(h\) He sets a fair show against the truth.

\(i\) In the keeping of ceremonies.

\(k\) For the preaching of him that was crucified.

[Galatians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 6:13</span></span>

For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but desire
to have you circumcised, that they may glory in (l) your flesh.

\(l\) That they have entangled you in Judaism, and yet he dwells on the
aspect of circumcision.

[Galatians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 6:14</span></span>

\(10\) But God forbid that I should (m) glory, save in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world.

\(10\) He does not dwell in comparing himself with them, showing that on
the other hand he rejoices in those afflictions which he suffers for
Christ's sake, and as he is despised by the world, so does he in the
same way consider the world as wicked. And this is the true circumcision
of a true Israelite.

\(m\) When Paul uses this word in good sense or way, it signifies to
rest a man's self wholly in a thing, and to content himself in it.

[Galatians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 6:16</span></span>

And as many as walk according to this rule, peace \[be\] on them, and
mercy, and upon the (n) Israel of God.

\(n\) Upon the true Israel, whose praise is from God and not from men;
([Rom 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029).md).

[Galatians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 6:17</span></span>

\(11\) From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the
(o) marks of the (p) Lord Jesus.

\(11\) Continuing still in the same metaphor, he opposes his miseries
and the marks of those stripes which he bore for Christ's sake, against
the scar of the outward circumcision, as a true mark of his apostleship.

\(o\) Marks which are burnt into a man's flesh, as they used to do in
ancient times, to mark their servants that had run away from them.

\(p\) For it very important whose marks we bear: for the cause makes the
martyr, and not the punishment.

[Galatians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 6:18</span></span>

\(12\) Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\] with your (q)
spirit. Amen. "\[To \[the\] Galatians written from Rome.\]"

\(12\) Taking his farewell of them, he wishes them grace, and the Spirit
against the deceits of the false apostles, who labour to beat those
outward things into their brains.

\(q\) With your minds and hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001.md)

</div>
