<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal003)  [Next](gal005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

[Galatians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 4:1</span></span>

Now (1) I say, \[That\] the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth
nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all;

\(1\) He declares by another twofold similitude, that which he said
before concerning the keeper and schoolmaster. For, he says, the Law
(that is, the whole government of God's house according to the Law) was
as it were a tutor or overseer appointed for a time. And when that
protection and overseeing which was but for a time is ended, we would at
length come to be at our own liberty, and would live as children, and
not as servants. Moreover, he shows along the way, that the governance
of the Law was as it were the basics, and as certain principles, in
comparison with the doctrine of the Gospel.

[Galatians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 4:2</span></span>

But is under tutors and governors (a) until the time appointed of the
father.

\(a\) This is added because he that is always under a tutor or governor
may hardly be considered a freeman.

[Galatians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 4:3</span></span>

Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the (b)
elements of the world:

\(b\) The Law is called elements, because by the Law God instructed his
Church as it were by elements, and afterward poured out his Holy Spirit
most plentifully in the time of the Gospel.

[Galatians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 4:4</span></span>

\(2\) But when the (c) fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son, made of a (d) woman, made under the law,

\(2\) He utters and declares many things at once, that is, that this
tutorship was ended at his time, in order that curious men may stop
asking why the schoolmastership lasted so long. And moreover, that we
are not sons by nature, but by adoption, and that in the Son of God, who
therefore took upon him our flesh, that we might be made his brethren.

\(c\) The time is said to be full when all parts of it are past and
ended, and therefore Christ could not have come either sooner or later.

\(d\) He calls Mary a woman in respect of the sex, and not as the word
is used in a contrary sense to a virgin, for she remained a virgin
still.

[Galatians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 4:5</span></span>

To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the (e)
adoption of sons.

\(e\) The adoption of the sons of God is from everlasting, but is
revealed and shown in the time appointed for it.

[Galatians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 4:6</span></span>

\(3\) And because ye are sons, God hath (f) sent forth the (g) Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

\(3\) He shows that we are free and set at liberty in such a way that in
the meantime we must be governed by the Spirit of Christ, who while
reigning in our hearts, may teach us the true service of the Father. But
this is not to serve, but rather to enjoy true liberty, as it is fitting
for sons and heirs.

\(f\) By that which follows he gathers that which went before: for if we
have his Spirit, we are his sons, and if we are his sons, then we are
free.

\(g\) The Holy Spirit, who is both of the Father, and of the Son. But
there is a special reason why he is called the Spirit of the Son, that
is, because the Holy Spirit seals up our adoption in Christ, and gives
us a full assurance of it.

[Galatians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 4:7</span></span>

Wherefore thou art no more a (h) servant, but a son; and if a son, then
an (i) heir of God through Christ.

\(h\) The word "servant" is not taken here for one that lives in sin,
which is appropriate for the unfaithful, but for one that is yet under
the ceremonies of the Law, which is proper to the Jews.

\(i\) Partaker of his blessings.

[Galatians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 4:8</span></span>

\(4\) Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which
by nature are no gods.

\(4\) He applies the former doctrine to the Galatians, with a special
rebuke: for in comparison with them, the Jews might have pretended some
excuse as men that were born and brought up in that service of the Law.
But seeing that the Galatians were taken and called out of idolatry to
Christian liberty, what pretence might they have to go back to those
impotent and beggarly elements?

[Galatians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 4:9</span></span>

But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how
turn ye again to the weak and (k) beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire
(l) again to be in bondage?

\(k\) They are called impotent and beggarly ceremonies, being considered
apart by themselves without Christ: and again, by that means they gave
good testimony that they were beggars in Christ, for when men fall back
from Christ to ceremonies, it is nothing else but to cast away riches
and to follow beggary.

\(l\) By going backward.

[Galatians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 4:12</span></span>

\(5\) Brethren, I beseech you, be as I \[am\]; for I \[am\] as ye
\[are\]: ye have not injured me at all.

\(5\) He moderates and qualifies those things in which he might have
seemed to have spoken somewhat sharply, very skilfully and divinely
declaring his good will toward them in such a way, that the Galatians
could not but either be utterly hopeless when they read these things, or
acknowledge their own lack of steadfastness with tears, and desire
pardon.

[Galatians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 4:13</span></span>

Ye know how through (m) infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel
unto you at the first.

\(m\) Many afflictions.

[Galatians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 4:14</span></span>

And my (n) temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor
rejected; but received me as an angel of God, \[even\] as (o) Christ
Jesus.

\(n\) Those daily troubles with which the Lord tried me among you.

\(o\) For the sake of my ministry.

[Galatians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 4:15</span></span>

\(p\) Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record,
that, if \[it had been\] possible, ye would have plucked out your own
eyes, and have given them to me.

\(p\) What a talk was there abroad in the world among men, how happy you
were when you received the gospel?

[Galatians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 4:17</span></span>

They zealously affect you, (q) \[but\] not well; yea, they would exclude
you, (r) that ye might affect them.

\(q\) For they are jealous over you for their own benefit.

\(r\) That they may transfer all your love from me to themselves.

[Galatians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 4:18</span></span>

But \[it is\] good to be (s) zealously affected always in \[a\] good
\[thing\], and not only when I am present with you.

\(s\) He sets his own true and good love, which he earnestly held for
them, against the wicked vicious love of the false apostles.

[Galatians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 4:20</span></span>

I desire to be present with you now, and to (t) change my voice; for I
stand in doubt of you.

\(t\) Use other words among you.

[Galatians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 4:21</span></span>

\(6\) Tell me, ye that (u) desire to be under the law, do ye not hear
the law?

\(6\) The false apostles urged this, that unless the Gentiles were
circumcised Christ could profit them nothing at all, and also this
dissension of those who believed in the circumcision, against those who
believed in the uncircumcision, both these things being full of offence.
Therefore the apostle, after various arguments with which he has refuted
their error, brings forth an allegory, in which he says that the Holy
Spirit did through symbolism let us know all these mysteries: that is,
that it should come to pass that two sorts of sons should have Abraham
as a father common to them both, but not with equal success. For as
Abraham begat Ishmael by the common course of nature, of Hagar his
bondmaid and a stranger, and begat Isaac of Sara a free woman, by the
virtue of the promise, and by grace only, the first was not heir, and
also persecuted the heir. So there are two covenants, and as it were two
sons born to Abraham by those two covenants, as it were by two mothers.
The one was made in Sinai, outside of the land of promise, according to
which covenant Abraham's children according to the flesh were begotten:
that is, the Jews, who seek righteousness by that covenant, that is, by
the Law. But they are not heirs, and they will at length be cast out of
the house, as those that persecute the true heirs. The other was made in
that high Jerusalem, or in Zion (that is, by the sacrifice of Christ)
which begets children of promise, that is, believers, by the power of
the Holy Spirit. And these children (like Abraham) do rest themselves in
the free promise, and they alone by the right of children will be
partakers of the father's inheritance, whereas those servants will be
shut out.

\(u\) That desire so greatly.

[Galatians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 4:23</span></span>

But he \[who was\] of the bondwoman was born after the (x) flesh; but he
of the freewoman \[was\] by (y) promise.

\(x\) As all men are, and by the common course of nature.

\(y\) By virtue of the promise, which Abraham laid hold on for himself
and his true seed, for otherwise Abraham and Sara were past the
begetting and bearing of children.

[Galatians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 4:24</span></span>

Which things are an allegory: for (z) these are the (a) two covenants;
the one from the mount (b) Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is
Agar.

\(z\) These represent and symbolize.

\(a\) They are called two covenants, one of the Old Testament, and
another of the New: which were not two indeed, but in respect of the
times, and the diversity of the manner of ruling.

\(b\) He makes mention of Sinai, because that covenant was made in that
mountain, of which mountain Hagar was a symbol.

[Galatians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 4:25</span></span>

For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and (c) answereth to Jerusalem
which now is, and (d) is in bondage with her children.

\(c\) Look how the case stands between Hagar and her children; even so
stands it between Jerusalem and hers.

\(d\) That is, Sinai.

[Galatians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 4:26</span></span>

But Jerusalem which is (e) above is free, which is the mother of us all.

\(e\) Which is excellent, and of great worth.

[Galatians 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gal 4:27</span></span>

\(7\) For it is written, Rejoice, \[thou\] barren that bearest not;
break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the (f) desolate hath
many more children than she which hath an husband.

\(7\) He shows that in this allegory he has followed the steps of
Isaiah, who foretold that the Church should be made and consist of the
children of barren Sara, that is to say, of those who should be made
Ahraham's children by faith, and this only spiritually, rather than of
fruitful Hagar, even then foretelling the casting off of the Jews, and
the calling of the Gentiles.

\(f\) She that is destroyed and laid waste.

[Galatians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gal 4:28</span></span>

Now we, brethren, (g) as Isaac was, are the children of (h) promise.

\(g\) After the manner of Isaac, who is the first begotten of the
heavenly Jerusalem, as Israel is of the slavish synagogue.

\(h\) That seed to which the promise belongs.

[Galatians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gal 4:29</span></span>

But as then he that was born after the (i) flesh persecuted him \[that
was born\] after the (k) Spirit, even so \[it is\] now.

\(i\) By the common course of nature.

\(k\) By the virtue of God's promise and after a spiritual manner.

[Galatians 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gal 4:31</span></span>

\(8\) So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
the free.

\(8\) The conclusion of the former allegory, that we by no means procure
and call back again the slavery of the Law, seeing that the children of
the bondmaid will not be heirs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 5](gal005)

</div>
