<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal002)  [Next](gal004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

[Galatians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 3:1</span></span>

O (1) foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey
the truth, (a) before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set
forth, crucified among you?

\(1\) The third reason or argument taken of those gifts of the Holy
Spirit, with which they were endued from heaven after they had heard and
believed the gospel by Paul's ministry. And seeing that they were so
evident to all men's eyes, that they were as it were graphic images, in
which they might behold the truth of the doctrine of the Gospel, just as
much as if they had beheld with their eyes Christ himself crucified, in
whose only death they ought to have their trust, he marvels how it could
be that they could be so bewitched by the false apostles.

\(a\) Christ was laid before you so notably and so plainly that you had
a graphic image of him as it were represented before your eyes, as if he
had been crucified before you.

[Galatians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 3:2</span></span>

This only would I learn of you, Received ye the (b) Spirit by the works
of the law, or by the hearing of (c) faith?

\(b\) Those spiritual graces and gifts, which were a seal as it were to
the Galatians that the Gospel which was preached to them was true.

\(c\) Of the doctrine of faith.

[Galatians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 3:3</span></span>

\(2\) Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the (d) flesh?

\(2\) The fourth argument mixed with the former, and it is twofold. If
the Law is to be joined with faith, this were not to go forward, but
backward, seeing that those spiritual gifts which were bestowed upon you
are more excellent than any that could proceed from yourselves. And
moreover, it would follow, that the Law is better than Christ, because
it would perfect and bring complete that which Christ alone began.

\(d\) By the "flesh" he means the ceremonies of the Law, against which
he sets the Spirit, that is, the spiritual working of the Gospel.

[Galatians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 3:4</span></span>

\(3\) Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if \[it be\] yet in vain.

\(3\) An exhortation by manner of reproach, so that they do not in vain
suffer so many conflicts.

[Galatians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 3:5</span></span>

\(4\) He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh
miracles among you, \[doeth he it\] by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith?

\(4\) He repeats the third argument which was taken of the effects,
because he had included certain other arguments along the way.

[Galatians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 3:6</span></span>

\(5\) Even as (e) Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness.

\(5\) The fifth argument which is of great force, and has three grounds.
The first, that Abraham was justified by faith, that is, by free
imputation of righteousness according to the promise apprehended by
faith.

\(e\) See (Rom. 4:1-25).

[Galatians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 3:7</span></span>

\(6\) Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham.

\(6\) The second, that the sons of Abraham must be esteemed and
considered as his sons by faith.

[Galatians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 3:8</span></span>

\(7\) And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen
through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, \[saying\], (8)
In thee shall all nations be (f) blessed.

\(7\) The third, that all the people that believe are without exception
included in the promise of the blessing. (8) A proof of the first and
second grounds, from the words of Moses.

\(f\) Blessing in this place signifies the free promise by faith.

[Galatians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 3:9</span></span>

\(9\) So then they which be of faith are blessed (g) with faithful
Abraham.

\(9\) The conclusion of the fifth argument: therefore as Abraham is
blessed by faith, so are all his children (that is to say, all the
Gentiles that believe) blessed, that is to say, freely justified.

\(g\) With faithful Abraham, and not by faithful Abraham, to show us
that the blessing comes not from Abraham, but from him by whom Abraham
and all his posterity is blessed.

[Galatians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 3:10</span></span>

\(10\) For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse:
(11) for it is written, Cursed \[is\] every one that continueth not in
all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

\(10\) The sixth argument, the conclusion of which is also in the former
verse, taken from opposites, is this: they are accursed who are of the
works of the Law, that is to say, who consider their righteousness to
come from the performance of the Law. Therefore they are blessed who are
of faith, that is, those who have righteousness by faith.

\(11\) A proof of the former sentence or proposition, and the
proposition of this argument is this: cursed is he that does not fulfil
the whole Law.

[Galatians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 3:11</span></span>

\(12\) But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, \[it
is\] evident: for, The just shall live by faith.

\(12\) The second proposition with the conclusion: but no man fulfils
the Law. The conclusion therefore is, that no man is justified by the
Law, or, that all are accursed who seek righteousness by the works of
the Law. And there is added also this manner of proof of the second
proposition, that is, righteousness and life are attributed to faith.
Therefore no man fulfils the Law.

[Galatians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 3:12</span></span>

\(13\) And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shall
live in them.

\(13\) Here is a reason shown of the former conclusion: because the law
promises life to all that keep it, and therefore if it is kept, it
justifies and gives life. But the scripture attributing righteousness
and life to faith takes it from the Law, seeing that faith justifies by
imputation, and the Law by the performing of the work.

[Galatians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 3:13</span></span>

\(14\) Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us: (15) for it is written, (h) Cursed \[is\] every one that
hangeth on a tree:

\(14\) A preventing of an objection: how then can they be blessed whom
the Lord pronounces to be accused? Because Christ suffered the curse
which the Law laid upon us, that we might be acquitted from it.

\(15\) A proof of the answer by the testimony of Moses.

\(h\) Christ was accursed for us, because he bore the curse that was due
to us, to make us partakers of his righteousness.

[Galatians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 3:14</span></span>

\(16\) That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith.

\(16\) A conclusion of all that was said before in the handling of the
fifth and sixth reasons, that is, that both the Gentiles are made
partakers of the free blessing of Abraham in Christ, and also that the
Jews themselves, of whose number the apostle counted himself to be,
cannot obtain that promised grace of the Gospel, which he calls the
Spirit, except by faith. And the apostle applies the conclusion in turn,
both to the one and to the other, preparing himself a way to the next
argument, by which he declares that the one and only seed of Abraham,
which is made of all peoples, cannot be joined and grow up together in
any other way but by faith in Christ.

[Galatians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 3:15</span></span>

\(17\) Brethren, I speak (i) after the manner of men; Though \[it be\]
but a man's covenant, yet \[if it be\] (k) confirmed, no man
disannulleth, or addeth thereto.

\(17\) He puts forth two general rules before the next argument, which
is the seventh in order. The first is, that it is not lawful to break
covenants and contracts which are justly made, and are according to law
among men, neither may anything be added to them. The other is, that God
did so make a covenant with Abraham, that he would gather together his
children who consist both of Jews and Gentiles into one body (as appears
by that which has been said before). For he did not say, that he would
be the God of Abraham and of his "seeds" (which thing nonetheless should
have been said, if he had many and various seeds, such as the Gentiles
on the one hand, and the Jews on the other) but that he would be the God
of Abraham, and of his "seed", as of one.

\(i\) I will use an example which is common among you, that you may be
ashamed that you do not give as much to God's covenant as you do to
man's.

\(k\) Authenticated, as we say.

[Galatians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 3:16</span></span>

Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to
seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, (18) which is (l)
Christ.

\(18\) He puts forth the sum of the seventh argument, that is, that both
the Jews and the Gentiles grow together in one body of the seed of
Abraham, in Christ alone, so that all are one in Christ, as it is
afterward declared in ([Gal 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)).

\(l\) Paul does not speak of Christ's person, but of two peoples, who
grew together in one, in Christ.

[Galatians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 3:17</span></span>

\(19\) And this I say, \[that\] the covenant, that was confirmed before
of God (m) in Christ, the (20) law, which was four hundred and thirty
years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none
effect.

\(19\) The eighth argument take by comparison, in this way: if a man's
covenant (being authenticated) is firm and strong, much more is God's
covenant. Therefore the Law was not given to cancel the promise made to
Abraham with respect of Christ, that is to say, the end of which
depended upon Christ.

\(m\) Which pertained to Christ.

\(20\) An enlarging of that argument in this way: moreover and besides
that the promise is of itself firm and strong, it was also confirmed by
virtue of being in place for a long time, that is, for 430 years, so
that it could in no way be broken.

[Galatians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 3:18</span></span>

\(21\) For if the (n) inheritance \[be\] of the law, \[it is\] no more
of promise: but God gave \[it\] to Abraham by promise.

\(21\) An objection: we grant that the promise was not cancelled by the
covenant of the Law, and therefore we join the Law with the promise. No,
the apostle says, these two cannot stand together, that is, that the
inheritance should both be given by the Law and also by promise, for the
promise is free. And from this it follows that the Law was not given to
justify, for by that means the promise would be broken.

\(n\) By this word "inheritance" is meant the right of the seed, which
is, that God should be our God, that is to say, that by virtue of the
covenant that was made with faithful Abraham, we that are faithful might
by that means be blessed by God as well as Abraham.

[Galatians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 3:19</span></span>

\(22\) Wherefore then \[serveth\] the law? It was added because of (o)
transgressions, (p) till the seed should come to whom the promise was
made; (23) \[and it was\] (q) ordained by (r) angels in the hand of a
mediator.

\(22\) An objection which rises from the former answer: if the
inheritance is not by the Law (in the least way) then why was the Law
given after the promise was made? In order, the apostle says, to reprove
men of sin, and so to teach them to look to Christ, in whom at length
that promise of saving all people together should be fulfilled; the Law
was not given in order to justify men.

\(o\) That men might understand by discovering their sins that they are
only saved by the grace of God, which he revealed to Abraham, and that
in Christ.

\(p\) Until the partition wall was broken down, and that full seed
sprang up, made of two peoples, both of Jews and Gentiles. For by this
word "seed" we may not understand Christ alone by himself, but coupled
and joined together with his body.

\(23\) A confirmation of the former answer taken from the manner and
form of giving the Law: for it was given by angels, striking a great
terror into all, and by Moses a mediator coming between. Now they that
are one need no mediator, but they that are in any way separated, and
that are at variance one with another, do. Therefore the Law itself and
the mediator were witnesses of the wrath of God, and not that God would
by this means reconcile men to himself and abolish the promise, or add
the Law to the promise.

\(q\) Commanded and given, or proclaimed.

\(r\) By the service and ministry.

[Galatians 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 3:20</span></span>

Now a mediator is not \[a mediator\] of one, (24) but God is one.

\(24\) A taking away of an objection, lest any man might say that
sometimes by consent of the parties which have made a covenant,
something is added to the covenant, or the former covenants are broken.
This, the apostle says, does not come to pass in God, who is always one,
and the very same, and like himself.

[Galatians 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 3:21</span></span>

\(25\) \[Is\] the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for
if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law.

\(25\) The conclusion uttered by a manner of asking a question, and it
is the same that was uttered before in ([Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)), but proceeding from another
principle, so that the argument is new, and is this: God is always like
himself: therefore the Law was not given to abolish the promises. But it
would abolish them if it gave life, for by that means it would justify,
and therefore it would abolish that justification which was promised to
Abraham and to his seed by faith. No, it was rather given to bring to
light the guiltiness of all men, to the end that all believers fleeing
to Christ, might be freely justified in him.

[Galatians 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 3:22</span></span>

But the (s) scripture hath concluded (t) all under sin, that the (u)
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

\(s\) By this word "scripture" he means the Law.

\(t\) All mankind, and whatever comes from mankind.

\(u\) In every one of these words, there lies an argument against the
merits of works: for all these words, promise, faith, Christ, might be
given, to believers, are against meritorious works, and not one of them
can be included as a meritorious work.

[Galatians 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 3:23</span></span>

\(26\) But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto
(x) the faith which should afterwards be revealed.

\(26\) Now there follows another handling of the second part of this
epistle, the state of which was this: although the Law (that is, the
whole government of God's house according to the Law) does not justify,
is it therefore to be abolished, seeing that Abraham himself was
circumcised, and his posterity held still the use of Moses' Law? Paul
affirms that it ought to be abolished, because it was instituted for
that end and purpose, that is should be as it were a schoolmaster, and
keeper to the people of God, until the promise indeed appeared, that is
to say, Christ, and the Gospel manifestly published with great efficacy
by the Spirit.

\(x\) The reason why we were kept under the Law, is set down here.

[Galatians 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 3:26</span></span>

\(27\) For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

\(27\) Because age does not change the condition of servants, he adds
that we are free by condition, and therefore, seeing we are out of our
childhood, we have no more need of a keeper and schoolmaster.

[Galatians 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gal 3:27</span></span>

\(28\) For as many of you as have been (y) baptized into Christ have (z)
put on Christ.

\(28\) Using the words "many of you", lest the Jews should think
themselves free from the ordinance of baptism, he pronounces that
baptism is common to all believers, because it is a outward sign of our
delivery in Christ, to the Jews as well as to the Greeks, that by this
means all may be truly one in Christ, that is to say, that promised seed
to Abraham, and inheritors of everlasting life.

\(y\) He sets forth baptism, as opposed to circumcision, which the false
apostles bragged so much of.

\(z\) The Church must put on Christ, as it were a garment, and be
covered with him, that it may be thoroughly holy, and without blame.

[Galatians 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gal 3:28</span></span>

There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all (a) one in Christ Jesus.

\(a\) You are all one: and so is this great union and conjunction
signified.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 4](gal004)

</div>
