<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal004)  [Next](gal006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001.md)

[Galatians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 5:2</span></span>

\(1\) Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be (a) circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing.

\(1\) Another entreaty in which he plainly witnesses that justification
of works, and justification of faith cannot stand together, because no
man can be justified by the Law, but he that does fully and perfectly
fulfil it. And he takes the example of circumcision, because it was the
ground of all the service of the Law, and was chiefly urged by the false
apostles.

\(a\) Circumcision is in other places called the seal of righteousness,
but here we must have consideration of the circumstance of the time, for
now baptism is a sign of the new covenant, just as circumcision was the
sign of the old covenant. And moreover Paul reasons according to the
opinion that his enemies had of it, which made circumcision a essential
to their salvation.

[Galatians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 5:4</span></span>

Christ is (b) become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are (c)
justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.

\(b\) That is, as he himself expounds it afterward, "ye are fallen from
grace."

\(c\) That is, seek to be justified by the Law, for indeed no man is
justified by the Law.

[Galatians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 5:5</span></span>

\(2\) For we through the (d) Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness
by faith.

\(2\) He privately compares the new people with the old: for it is
certain that they also did ground all their hope of justification and
life in faith, and not in circumcision, but in such a way that their
faith was wrapped in the external and ceremonial worship. But our faith
is without such ceremony, and content with spiritual worship.

\(d\) Through the Spirit who brings about faith.

[Galatians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 5:6</span></span>

\(3\) For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor
(4) uncircumcision; (5) but (e) faith which worketh by love.

\(3\) He adds a reason, for now circumcision is abolished, seeing that
Christ is exhibited to us with complete spiritual circumcision. (4) He
makes mention also of uncircumcision, lest the Gentiles should please
themselves in it, as the Jews do in circumcision. (5) The taking away of
an objection: if all that worship of the Law is taken away, in what than
shall we exercise ourselves? In charity, Paul says: for faith of which
we speak cannot be idle; no, it brings forth daily fruits of charity.

\(e\) So is true faith distinguished from counterfeit faith: for charity
is not joined with faith as a fellow cause, to help forward our
justification with faith.

[Galatians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 5:7</span></span>

\(6\) Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the
truth?

\(6\) Again he chides the Galatians, but with both an admiration and a
praise of their former race, so that he may make them more ashamed.

[Galatians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 5:8</span></span>

\(7\) This persuasion \[cometh\] not of (f) him that calleth you.

\(7\) He plays the part of an apostle with them, and uses his authority,
denying that any doctrine can come from God which is contrary to his.

\(f\) Of God.

[Galatians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 5:9</span></span>

\(8\) A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

\(8\) He adds this, that he may not seem to contend upon a trifle,
warning them diligently (by a metaphor which he borrows of leaven, as
Christ himself also did) not to allow the purity of the apostolic
doctrine to be infected with the least corruption at all.

[Galatians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 5:10</span></span>

\(9\) I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye will be none
otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment,
whosoever he be.

\(9\) He moderates the former reprehension, casting the fault upon the
false apostles, against whom he denounces the horrible judgment of God.

[Galatians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 5:11</span></span>

\(10\) And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet
suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased.

\(10\) He wishes them to consider that he seeks not his own profit in
this matter, seeing that he could avoid the hatred of men if he would
join Judaism with Christianity.

[Galatians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 5:12</span></span>

\(11\) I would they were even cut off which (g) trouble you.

\(11\) An example of a true pastor inflamed with the zeal of God's
glory, and love for his flock.

\(g\) For those that preach the Law cause men's consciences to always
tremble.

[Galatians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 5:13</span></span>

For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; (12) only \[use\] not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.

\(12\) The third part of this epistle, showing that the right use of
Christian liberty consists of this, that being delivered and set at
liberty from the slavery of sin and the flesh, and being obedient to the
Spirit, we should through love help each other to mature in their
salvation.

[Galatians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 5:14</span></span>

\(13\) For (h) all the law is fulfilled in one word, \[even\] in this;
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

\(13\) He sets forth the love of our neighbour, as a mark unto which all
Christians ought to refer all their actions, and to that he cites the
testimony of the Law.

\(h\) This particle "all" must be limited to the second table of the ten
commandments.

[Galatians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 5:15</span></span>

\(14\) But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

\(14\) An exhortation to the duties of charity, by the profit that
follows from it, because no men proved worse for themselves than they
that hate one another.

[Galatians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 5:16</span></span>

\(15\) \[This\] I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil
the lust of the flesh.

\(15\) He acknowledges the great weakness of the godly, because they are
but in part regenerated: but he exhorts them to remember that they are
endued with the Spirit of God, who has delivered them from the slavery
of sin, and so from the Law, inasmuch as it is the power of sin, so that
they should not give themselves to lusts.

[Galatians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 5:17</span></span>

For the (i) flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would.

\(i\) For the flesh dwells even in the regenerated man, but the Spirit
reigns, even though not without great strife, as is largely set forth in
(Rom. 7:1-25).

[Galatians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 5:19</span></span>

\(16\) Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are \[these\];
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,

\(16\) He sets out that particularly of which he spoke generally,
reckoning up some principal effects of the flesh, and opposing them to
the fruits of the Spirit, that no man may pretend ignorance.

[Galatians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 5:22</span></span>

But the (k) fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith,

\(k\) Therefore they are not the fruits of free will, but only as far
forth as our will is made free by grace.

[Galatians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 5:23</span></span>

Meekness, temperance: (17) against such there is no law.

\(17\) Lest that any man should object that Paul plays the deceiver, as
one who urging the Spirit urges nothing but that which the Law commands,
he shows that he requires not that literal and outward obedience, but
spiritual, which proceeds not from the Law but from the Spirit of
Christ, who gives us new birth, and must and ought to be the ruler and
guider of our life.

[Galatians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 5:25</span></span>

If we (l) live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

\(l\) If we are indeed endued with the quickening Spirit, who causes us
to die to sin, and live to God, let us show it in our deeds, that is, by
holiness of life.

[Galatians 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 5:26</span></span>

\(18\) Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

\(18\) He adds special exhortations according as he knew the Galatians
to be subject to different vices: and first of all he warns them to take
heed of ambition, which vice has two fellows, backbiting and envy. And
out of these two many contentions necessarily arise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 6](gal006.md)

</div>
