<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](int000)  [Next](gen002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

[Genesis 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 1:1</span></span>

In the (a) beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

The Argument - Moses in effect declares three things, which are in this
book chiefly to be considered: First, that the world and all things in
it were created by God, and to praise his Name for the infinite graces,
with which he had endued him, fell willingly from God through
disobedience, who yet for his own mercies sake restored him to life, and
confirmed him in the same by his promise of Christ to come, by whom he
should overcome Satan, death and hell. Secondly, that the wicked,
unmindful of God's most excellent benefits, remained still in their
wickedness, and so falling most horribly from sin to sin, provoked God
(who by his preachers called them continually to repentance) at length
to destroy the whole world. Thirdly, he assures us by the examples of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the rest of the patriarchs, that his mercies
never fail those whom he chooses to be his Church, and to profess his
Name in earth, but in all their afflictions and persecutions he assists
them, sends comfort, and delivers them, so that the beginning, increase,
preservation and success of it might be attributed to God only. Moses
shows by the examples of Cain, Ishmael, Esau and others, who were noble
in man's judgment, that this Church depends not on the estimation and
nobility of the world: and also by the fewness of those, who have at all
times worshipped him purely according to his word that it stands not in
the multitude, but in the poor and despised, in the small flock and
little number, that man in his wisdom might be confounded, and the name
of God praised forever.

\(a\) First of all, and before any creature was, God made heaven and
earth out of nothing.

[Genesis 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 1:2</span></span>

And the earth was (b) without form, and void; and (c) darkness \[was\]
upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God (d) moved upon the face
of the waters.

\(b\) As an unformed lump and without any creature in it: for the waters
covered everything.

\(c\) Darkness covered the deep waters, for the waters covered
everything.

\(d\) He maintained this disordered mass by his secret power.

[Genesis 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 1:3</span></span>

And God said, Let there be light: and there was (e) light.

\(e\) The light was made before either Sun or Moon was created:
therefore we must not attribute that to the creatures that are God's
instruments, which only belong to God.

[Genesis 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 1:7</span></span>

And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which \[were\] (f)
under the firmament from the waters which \[were\] above the firmament:
and it was so.

\(f\) As the sea and rivers, from those waters that are in the clouds,
which are upheld by God's power, least they should overwhelm the world.

[Genesis 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 1:8</span></span>

And God called the firmament (g) Heaven. And the evening and the morning
were the second day.

\(g\) That is, the region of the air, and all that is above us.

[Genesis 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 1:11</span></span>

And God said, (h) Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, \[and\] the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed
\[is\] in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

\(h\) So that we see it is the only the power of God's word that makes
the earth fruitful, which naturally is barren.

[Genesis 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 1:12</span></span>

And the earth brought forth grass, \[and\] herb yielding seed after his
kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed \[was\] in itself, after
his kind: and God (i) saw that \[it was\] good.

\(i\) This sentence is often repeated, to signify that God made all his
creatures to serve for his glory and for the profit of man: but because
of sin they were cursed, yet the elect, by Christ are restored, and
serve to their wealth.

[Genesis 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 1:14</span></span>

And God said, Let there be (k) lights in the firmament of the heaven to
(l) divide the day from the night; and let them be for (m) signs, and
for seasons, and for days, and years:

\(k\) By the lights be means the sun, the moon, and the stars.

\(l\) Which is the artificial day, from the sun rising, to the going
down.

\(m\) Of things belonging to natural and political orders and seasons.

[Genesis 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 1:16</span></span>

And God made two great (n) lights; the greater light to (o) rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night: \[he made\] the stars also.

\(n\) That is, the sun and the moon, and here he speaks as man judges by
his eye: for else the moon is less than the planet Saturn.

\(o\) To give it sufficient light, as instruments appointed for the
same, to serve man's purposes.

[Genesis 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 1:20</span></span>

And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the (p) moving
creature that hath life, and fowl \[that\] may fly above the earth in
the open firmament of heaven.

\(p\) As fish and worms which slide, swim or creep.

[Genesis 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 1:21</span></span>

And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth,
which the (q) waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and
every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that \[it was\] good.

\(q\) The fish and fowls had both one beginning, in which we see that
nature gives place to God's will, in that the one sort is made to fly
about in the air, and the other to swim beneath in the water.

[Genesis 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 1:22</span></span>

And God (r) blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

\(r\) That is, by the virtue of his word he gave power to his creatures
to reproduce.

[Genesis 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 1:26</span></span>

And God said, (s) Let us make man in our (t) image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

\(s\) God commanded the water and the earth to bring forth other
creatures: but of man he says, "Let us make..." signifying that God
takes counsel with his wisdom and virtue purposing to make an excellent
work above all the rest of his creation.

\(t\) This image and likeness of God in man is expounded in ([Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)) where it is written that man was
created after God in righteousness and true holiness meaning by these
two words, all perfection, as wisdom, truth, innocency, power, etc.

[Genesis 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 1:28</span></span>

And God (u) blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living
thing that moveth upon the earth.

\(u\) The propagation.

[Genesis 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 1:29</span></span>

And God said, Behold, I have given you (x) every herb bearing seed,
which \[is\] upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the
which \[is\] the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for
meat.

\(x\) God's great.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 2](gen002)

</div>
