<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb011)  [Next](heb013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 12:1</span></span>

Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, (1) let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which (a) doth
so easily beset \[us\], and let us run with patience the race that is
set before us,

\(1\) An applying of the former examples, by which we ought to be
stirred up to run the whole race, casting away all hindrances and
impediments.

\(a\) For sin besieges us on all sides, so that we cannot escape.

[Hebrews 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 12:2</span></span>

\(2\) (b) Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of \[our\] faith;
who for the (c) joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

\(2\) He sets before us, as the mark of this race, Jesus himself our
captain, who willingly overcame all the roughness of the same way.

\(b\) As it were upon the mark of our faith.

\(c\) While he had every type of blessedness in his hand and power, yet
suffered willingly the shame of the cross.

[Hebrews 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 12:3</span></span>

\(3\) For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.

\(3\) An amplification, taken from the circumstance of the person and
the things themselves, which he compares between themselves: for how
great is Jesus in comparison of us, and how far more grievous things did
he suffer than we?

[Hebrews 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 12:4</span></span>

\(4\) Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

\(4\) He takes an argument from the profit which comes to us by God's
chastisements, unless we are at fault. First of all because sin, or that
rebellious wickedness of our flesh, is by this means tamed.

[Hebrews 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 12:5</span></span>

\(5\) And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as
unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor
faint when thou art rebuked of him:

\(5\) Secondly, because they are testimonies of his fatherly good will
towards us, in that they show themselves to be illegitimate, if they
cannot abide to be chastened by God.

[Hebrews 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 12:9</span></span>

\(6\) Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected
\[us\], and we gave \[them\] reverence: shall we not much rather be in
subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?

\(6\) Thirdly, if all men yield this right to fathers, to whom next
after God we owe this life, that they may rightfully correct their
children, shall we not be much more subject to our Father, who is the
author of spiritual and everlasting life?

[Hebrews 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 12:10</span></span>

\(7\) For they verily for a few days chastened \[us\] after their own
pleasure; but he for \[our\] profit, that \[we\] might be partakers of
his holiness.

\(7\) An amplification of the same argument: Those fathers have
corrected us after their fancy, for some frail and temporary good: but
God chastens and instructs us for our singular good to make us partakers
of his holiness: which although our senses do not presently perceive it,
yet the end of the matter proves it.

[Hebrews 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 12:12</span></span>

\(8\) Wherefore lift up the hands which (d) hang down, and the feeble
knees;

\(8\) The conclusion: we must go forward courageously and keep always a
right course and (as far forth as we may) without any staggering or
stumbling.

\(d\) The description of a man that is out of heart and completely
discouraged.

[Hebrews 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 12:13</span></span>

And make (e) straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed.

\(e\) Keep a right course, and so, that you show examples of good life
for others to follow.

[Hebrews 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 12:14</span></span>

\(9\) Follow peace with all \[men\], and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord:

\(9\) We must live in peace and holiness with all men.

[Hebrews 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 12:15</span></span>

\(10\) Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest
any (f) root of bitterness springing up trouble \[you\], and thereby
many be defiled;

\(10\) We must study to edify one another both in doctrine and example
of life.

\(f\) That no heresy, or backsliding be an offence.

[Hebrews 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 12:16</span></span>

\(11\) Lest there \[be\] any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who
for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.

\(11\) We must shun immorality, and a profane mind, that is, such a mind
as does not give God his due honour, which wickedness, how severely God
will at length punish, the horrible example of Esau teaches us.

[Hebrews 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 12:17</span></span>

For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: for he found no (g) place of repentance,
though he sought it carefully with tears.

\(g\) There was no room left for his repentance: and it appears by the
effects, what his repentance really was, for when he left his father's
presence, he threatened to kill his brother.

[Hebrews 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 12:18</span></span>

\(12\) For ye are not come unto the mount that might be (h) touched, and
that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,

\(12\) Now he applies the same exhortation to the prophetic and kingly
office of Christ compared with Moses, after this sort. If the majesty of
the law was so great, how great do you think the glory of Christ and the
gospel is? This comparison he declares also particularly.

\(h\) Which might be touched with hands, which was of a gross and
earthly matter.

[Hebrews 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 12:21</span></span>

And so terrible was the (i) sight, \[that\] Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake:)

\(i\) The shape and form which he saw, which was no counterfeit and
forged shape, but a true one.

[Hebrews 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 12:23</span></span>

To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written
in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made (k) perfect,

\(k\) So he calls them that are taken up to heaven, although one part of
them sleeps in the earth.

[Hebrews 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 12:25</span></span>

\(13\) See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not
who refused him that spake on earth, much more \[shall not\] we
\[escape\], if we turn away from him that \[speaketh\] from heaven:

\(13\) The applying of the former comparison: If it were not lawful to
condemn his word which was spoken on the earth, how much less his voice
which is from heaven?

[Hebrews 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 12:26</span></span>

\(14\) Whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised,
saying, (l) Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.

\(14\) He compares the steadfast majesty of the gospel, with which the
whole world was shaken, and even the very frame of heaven was
astonished, with the small and vanishing sound of the governance by the
law.

\(l\) It appears evidently in this that the prophet speaks of the
calling of the Gentiles, that these words must refer to the kingdom of
Christ.

[Hebrews 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 12:28</span></span>

\(15\) Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with (m) reverence and
godly (n) fear:

\(15\) A general exhortation to live reverently and religiously under
the most happy subjection of so mighty a King, who as he blesses his
most mightily, so does he most severely revenge the rebellious. This is
the sum of a Christian life, respecting the first table of the law.

\(m\) By reverence is meant that honest modesty which keeps them in
their duties.

\(n\) Religious and godly fear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 13](heb013.md)

</div>
