<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb006)  [Next](heb008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 7:1</span></span>

For this (1) Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God,
who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and (a)
blessed him;

\(1\) Declaring those words, "According to the order of Melchizedek"
upon which the comparison of the priesthood of Christ with the Levitical
priesthood rests: first, Melchizedek himself is considered to be the
type of Christ and these are the points of that comparison. Melchizedek
was a king and a priest, as is Christ alone. He was a king of peace and
righteousness as is Christ alone.

\(a\) With a solemn and priestly blessing.

[Hebrews 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 7:3</span></span>

\(2\) Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God;
abideth a priest continually.

\(2\) Another type: Melchizedek is set before us to be considered as one
without beginning and without ending, for neither his father, mother,
ancestors, or his death are written of. Such a one is indeed the Son of
God, that is, an everlasting Priest: as he is God, begotten without
mother, and man, conceived without father.

[Hebrews 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 7:4</span></span>

\(3\) Now consider how great this man \[was\], unto whom even the
patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.

\(3\) Another figure: Melchizedek in his priesthood was above Abraham
for he took tithes from him, and blessed him as a priest. Such a one
indeed is Christ, on whom depends even Abraham's sanctification and all
the believers, and whom all men should worship and reverence as the
author of all.

[Hebrews 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 7:5</span></span>

And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of
the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people
according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they (b) come
out of the loins of Abraham:

\(b\) Were begotten by Abraham.

[Hebrews 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 7:7</span></span>

And (c) without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better.

\(c\) He speaks of the public blessing which the priests used.

[Hebrews 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 7:9</span></span>

\(4\) And as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, payed tithes
in Abraham.

\(4\) A twofold amplification: The first, that Melchizedek took the
tithes as one immortal (that is, in respect that he is the figure of
Christ, for his death is not mentioned, and David sets him forth as an
everlasting Priest) but the Levitical priests, took tithes as mortal
men, for they succeed one another: the second, that Levi himself, though
yet in Abraham, was tithed by Melchizedek. Therefore the priesthood of
Melchizedek (that is, Christ's, who is pronounced to be an everlasting
Priest according to this order) is more excellent than the Levitical
priesthood.

[Hebrews 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 7:11</span></span>

\(5\) If therefore (d) perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for
under it the people received the law,) what further need \[was there\]
that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not
be called after the order of Aaron?

\(5\) The third treatise of this Epistle, in which after he has proved
Christ to be a King, Prophet and a Priest, he now handles distinctly the
condition and excellency of all these offices, showing that all these
were shadows, but in Christ they are true and perfect. He begins with
the priesthood that the former treatise ended with, that by this means
all the parts of the debate may better hold together. First of all he
proves that the Levitical priesthood was imperfect because another
priest is promised later according to an other order, that is, of
another rule and fashion.

\(d\) If the priesthood of Levi could have made any man perfect.

[Hebrews 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 7:12</span></span>

\(6\) For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the (e) law.

\(6\) He shows how by the institution of the new priesthood, not only
the imperfection of the priesthood of Levi was declared, but also that
it was changed for this: for these two cannot stand together, because
the first appointment of the tribe of Levi shut out the tribe of Judah
and made it inferior to Levi: and this latter passage places the
priesthood in the tribe of Judah.

\(e\) Of the institution of Aaron.

[Hebrews 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 7:13</span></span>

For he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of
which no man (f) gave attendance at the altar.

\(f\) Had anything to do with the altar.

[Hebrews 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 7:15</span></span>

\(7\) And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of
Melchisedec there ariseth another priest,

\(7\) Lest any man object, the priesthood was indeed translated from
Levi to Judah. Nonetheless the same still remains, he both considers and
explains those words of David "for ever, according to the order of
Melchizedek" by which also a different institution of priesthood is
understood.

[Hebrews 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 7:16</span></span>

\(8\) Who is made, not after the (g) law of a carnal commandment, but
after the power of an endless life.

\(8\) He proves the diversity and excellency of the institution of
Melchizedek's priesthood, by this that the priesthood of the law rested
on an outward and bodily anointing: but the sacrifice of Melchizedek is
set out to be everlasting and more spiritual.

\(g\) Not after the ordination, which commands frail ad temporary
things, as was done in Aaron's consecration, and all of that whole
priesthood.

[Hebrews 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 7:18</span></span>

\(9\) For there is verily a disannulling of the (h) commandment going
before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

\(9\) Again, that no man object that the last priesthood was added to
make a perfect one by joining them both together, he proves that the
first was made void by the later as unprofitable, by the nature of them
both. For how could those material and transitory things sanctify us,
either by themselves, or by being joined with another?

\(h\) The ceremonial law.

[Hebrews 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 7:20</span></span>

\(10\) And inasmuch as not without an oath \[he was made priest\]:

\(10\) Another argument, by which he proves that the priesthood of
Christ is better than the priesthood of Levi, because his was
established with an oath, but theirs was not so.

[Hebrews 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 7:23</span></span>

\(11\) And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered
to continue by reason of death:

\(11\) Another argument for the same purpose. The Levitical priests (as
mortal men) could not be everlasting, but Christ, as he is everlasting,
so has he also an everlasting priesthood, making most effectual
intercession for them who come to God by him.

[Hebrews 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 7:24</span></span>

But this \[man\], because he continueth ever, hath an (i) unchangeable
priesthood.

\(i\) Which cannot pass away.

[Hebrews 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 7:25</span></span>

Wherefore he is (k) able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.

\(k\) He is fit and sufficient.

[Hebrews 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 7:26</span></span>

\(12\) For such an high priest became us, \[who is\] holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;

\(12\) Another argument: There are required in an high priest innocency
and perfect pureness, which may separate him from sinners, for whom he
offers. The Levitical high priests are not found to be such, for they
offer first for their own sins: but only Christ is such a one, and
therefore the only true High Priest.

[Hebrews 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 7:27</span></span>

Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins, and then for the people's: (13) for (l) this he
did (m) once, when he offered up himself.

\(13\) Another argument, which nonetheless he handles afterward: The
Levitical priests offered sacrifice after sacrifice, first for
themselves, and then for the people. Christ offered not for himself, but
for others, not sacrifices, but himself, not repeatedly, but once. This
should not seem strange, he says, for they are weak, but this man is
consecrated as an everlasting Priest, and that by an oath.

\(l\) That sacrifice which he offered.

\(m\) It was done so that it need not be repeated or offered again any
more.

[Hebrews 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 7:28</span></span>

For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the (n)
word of the oath, (14) which (o) was since the law, \[maketh\] the Son,
who is consecrated for evermore.

\(n\) The commandment of God which was bound with an oath.

\(14\) Another argument taken by the time: Former things are taken away
by the later.

\(o\) Exhibited.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 8](heb008.md)

</div>
