<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](sol008)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

The (a) vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw (b) concerning
Judah and Jerusalem in the days of (c) Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, \[and\]
Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

The Argument - God, according to his promise in ([Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)) that he would never leave his
Church destitute of a prophet, has from time to time accomplished the
same: whose office was not only to declare to the people the things to
come, of which they had a special revelation, but also to interpret and
declare the law, and to apply particularly the doctrine contained
briefly in it, for the use and profit of those to whom they thought it
chiefly to belong, and as the time and state of things required.
Principally in the declaration of the law, they had respect to three
things which were the ground of their doctrine: first, to the doctrine
contained briefly in the two tables: secondly to the promises and
threatenings of the law: and thirdly to the covenant of grace and
reconciliation grounded on our Saviour Jesus Christ, who is the end of
the law. To which they neither added nor diminished, but faithfully
expounded the sense and meaning of it. As God gave them understanding of
things, they applied the promises particularly for the comfort of the
Church and the members of it, and also denounced the menaces against the
enemies of the same: not for any care or regard to the enemies, but to
assure the Church of their safeguard by the destruction of their
enemies. Concerning the doctrine of reconciliation, they have more
clearly entreated it than Moses, and set forth more lively Jesus Christ,
in whom this covenant of reconciliation was made. In all these things
Isaiah surpassed all the prophets, and was diligent to set out the same,
with vehement admonitions, reprehensions, and consolations: ever
applying the doctrine as he saw that the disease of the people required.
He declares also many notable prophecies which he had received from God,
concerning the promise of the Messiah, his office and kingdom, the
favour of God toward his Church, the calling of the Gentiles and their
union with the Jews. Which are principal points contained in this book,
and a gathering of his sermons that he preached. Which after certain
days that they had stood upon the temple door (for the manner of the
prophets was to post the sum of their doctrine for certain days, that
the people might the better mark it as in ([Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001); [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002))) the priests took it down and
reserved it among their registers. By God's providence these books were
preserved as a monument to the Church forever. Concerning his person and
time he was of the king's stock (for Amos his father was brother to
Azariah king of Judah, as the best writers agree) and prophesied more
than 64 years, from the time of Uzziah to the reign of Manasseh who was
his son-in-law (as the Hebrews write) and by whom he was put to death.
In reading of the prophets, this one thing among others is to be
observed, that they speak of things to come as though they were now past
because of the certainty of it, and that they could not but come to
pass, because God had ordained them in his secret counsel and so
revealed them to his prophets.

\(a\) That is, a revelation or prophecy, which was one of the two means
by which God declared himself to his servants in old times, as in ([Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)) and therefore the prophets were
called seers, ([Sa1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)).

\(b\) Isaiah was chiefly sent to Judah and Jerusalem, but not only: for
in this book are prophecies concerning other nations also.

\(c\) Called also Azariah, ([Kg2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001))
of these kings read (2Ki. 14:1-21:1; 2Ch. 25:1-33:1).

[Isaiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 1:2</span></span>

Hear, O (d) heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath spoken, I
have nourished and brought up (e) children, and they have rebelled
against me.

\(d\) Because men were obstinate and insensible, he calls to the dumb
creatures, who were more prompt to obey God's word, as in ([Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)).

\(e\) He declares his great mercy toward the Jews as he chose them above
all other nations to be his people and children as in ([Deu
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#015)).

[Isaiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 1:3</span></span>

The (f) ox knoweth his owner, and the donkey his master's crib: \[but\]
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.

\(f\) The most dull and brute beasts acknowledge their duty more toward
their masters, than my people do toward me, of whom they have received
benefits without comparison.

[Isaiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 1:4</span></span>

Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a (g) seed of evildoers,
children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the LORD, they have
provoked the (h) Holy One of Israel to anger, they are gone away
backward.

\(g\) They were not only wicked as were their fathers, but utterly
corrupt and by their evil example infected others.

\(h\) That is, him that sanctifies Israel.

[Isaiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 1:5</span></span>

Why should ye be (i) stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more:
the whole (k) head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

\(i\) What good is it to seek to mend you by punishment, seeing that the
more I correct you, the more you rebel?

\(k\) By naming the chief parts of the body, he signifies that there was
no part of the whole body of the Jews free from his rods.

[Isaiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 1:6</span></span>

From the (l) sole of the foot even to the head \[there is\] no soundness
in it; \[but\] wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not
been closed, (m) neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.

\(l\) Every part of the body, the least as well as the chiefest was
plagued.

\(m\) Their plagues were so grievous that they were incurable, and yet
they would not repent.

[Isaiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 1:7</span></span>

Your country \[is\] desolate, your cities \[are\] burned with fire: your
land, foreigners devour it in your presence, and \[it is\] desolate, as
overthrown by (n) foreigners.

\(n\) Meaning, of them who dwell far off, who because they look for no
advantage of that which remains destroy all before them.

[Isaiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 1:8</span></span>

And the daughter of (o) Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

\(o\) That is, Jerusalem.

[Isaiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 1:9</span></span>

Except the LORD of hosts (p) had left to us a very small remnant, we
should have been (q) as Sodom, we should have been like Gomorrah.

\(p\) Because he will always have a Church to call on his Name.

\(q\) That is, all destroyed.

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

Hear the word of the LORD, ye (r) rulers of Sodom; give ear to the law
of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

\(r\) You who for your vices deserved to be destroyed, as they of Sodom,
save that God from his mercy reserved a little number, ([Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022)).

[Isaiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 1:11</span></span>

To what purpose \[is\] the multitude of your sacrifices to me? saith the
LORD: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
beasts; and I (s) delight not in the blood of bulls, or of lambs, or of
male goats.

\(s\) Although God commanded these sacrifices for a time, as aids and
exercises of their faith, yet because the people did not have faith or
repentance, God detests them, ([Psa
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013); [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020); [Amo
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#022); [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007)).

[Isaiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 1:13</span></span>

\(t\) Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination to me; the
new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot endure; \[it
is\] iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

\(t\) Without faith and repentance.

[Isaiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 1:14</span></span>

Your (u) new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a
trouble to me; I am weary of bearing \[them\].

\(u\) Your sacrifices offered in the new moons and feasts: he condemns
by this hypocrites who think to please God with ceremonies and they
themselves are void of faith and mercy.

[Isaiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 1:15</span></span>

And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide my eyes from you: yea,
when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full (x) of
blood.

\(x\) He shows that where men are given to evil, deceit, cruelty and
extortion, which is meant by blood, there God will show his anger and
not accept them though they seem holy, as in ([Isa
59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

\(y\) Wash ye, make yourselves clean; put away the evil of your doings
from before my eyes; cease to do evil;

\(y\) By this outward washing, he means the spiritual: exhorting the
Jews to repent and amend their lives.

[Isaiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 1:17</span></span>

Learn to (z) do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow.

\(z\) This kind of reasoning by the second table, the scriptures use in
many places against the hypocrites who pretend holiness and religion in
word, but when charity and love for their brethren should appear they
declare that they have neither faith nor religion.

[Isaiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 1:18</span></span>

Come now, (a) and let us reason together, saith the LORD: though your
sins are as scarlet, they shall be (b) white as snow; though they are
red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

\(a\) To know if I accuse you without cause.

\(b\) Lest sinners should pretend any rigour on God's part, he only
wills them to be pure in heart, and he will forgive all their sins, no
matter how many or great.

[Isaiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 1:19</span></span>

If ye (c) are willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:

\(c\) He shows that whatever adversity man endures, it ought to be
attributed to his own incredulity and disobedience.

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

How is the (d) faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment;
righteousness lodged in it; but now (e) murderers.

\(d\) That is, Jerusalem, which had promised happiness to me, as a wife
to her husband.

\(e\) Given to covetousness and extortion, which he signified before by
blood, ([Isa 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)).

[Isaiah 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 1:22</span></span>

Thy (f) silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water:

\(f\) Whatever was pure in you before, is now corrupt, though you have
an outward show.

[Isaiah 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 1:23</span></span>

Thy princes \[are\] rebellious, and companions of (g) thieves: every one
loveth bribes, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the
fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come to them.

\(g\) That is, they maintain the wicked and the extortioners: and not
only do not punish them, but are themselves such.

[Isaiah 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 1:24</span></span>

Therefore saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts, the (h) mighty One of
Israel, Ah, I will (i) rid myself of my adversaries, and avenge me of my
enemies:

\(h\) When God will show himself merciful to his Church, he calls
himself the Holy one of Israel, but when he has to do with his enemies,
he is called Mighty, as against whom no power is able to resist.

\(i\) I will take vengeance of my adversaries the Jews and so satisfy my
desire by punishing them.

[Isaiah 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 1:25</span></span>

And I will turn my hand upon thee, and thoroughly purge away thy dross,
(k) and take away all thy tin:

\(k\) Lest the faithful among them should be overcome with his
threatening he adds this consolation.

[Isaiah 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 1:26</span></span>

\(l\) And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors
as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of
righteousness, the faithful city.

\(l\) It is once the work of God to purify the heart of man, which he
does because of his promise, made concerning the salvation of his
Church.

[Isaiah 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 1:27</span></span>

Zion shall be redeemed with (m) judgment, and her converts with
righteousness.

\(m\) By justice is meant God's faithful promise, which is the reason
for the deliverance of his Church.

[Isaiah 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 1:28</span></span>

And the (n) destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners \[shall
be\] together, and they that forsake the LORD shall be consumed.

\(n\) The wicked will not be partakers of God's promise, ([Psa
92:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#009)).

[Isaiah 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 1:29</span></span>

For they shall be ashamed of the (o) oaks which ye have desired, and ye
shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.

\(o\) That is, the trees and pleasant places where you commit idolatry
which was forbidden ([Deu 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#022)).

[Isaiah 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 1:31</span></span>

And the strong shall be as a (p) wick, and its maker as a spark, and
they shall both burn together, and none shall quench \[them\].

\(p\) The false god's in which you put your confidence will be consumed
as easily as a piece of wick.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
