<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

My (1) brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, \[the
Lord\] of (a) glory, with respect of persons.

\(1\) The first: charity which proceeds from a true faith, cannot exist
with the respecting of people: which he proves plainly by using the
example of those who, while having reproach or disdain for the poor,
honour the rich.

\(a\) For if we knew what Christ's glory is, and esteemed it as we
should, there would not be the respecting of people that there is.

[James 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 2:3</span></span>

And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto
him, Sit thou here in a (b) good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool:

\(b\) In a worshipful and honourable place.

[James 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 2:4</span></span>

Are ye not then partial in (c) yourselves, and are become judges of evil
thoughts?

\(c\) Have you not within yourselves judged one man to be preferred over
another (which you should not do) by means of this?

[James 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 2:5</span></span>

\(2\) Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the (d) poor of
this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath
promised to them that love him?

\(2\) He shows that those who prefer the rich over the poor are wicked
and disobedient judges, since God on the other hand prefers the poor
(whom he has enriched with true riches) over the rich.

\(d\) The needy and wretched, and (if we measure it after the opinion of
the world) the most degraded of all men.

[James 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 2:6</span></span>

But ye have despised the poor. (3) Do not rich men oppress you, and draw
you before the judgment seats?

\(3\) Secondly, he proves them to be fools: since the rich men are
rather to be held detestable and cursed, considering that they persecute
the church, and blaspheme Christ: for he speaks of wicked and profane
rich men, as most of them have always been, beside whom he contrasts the
poor and degraded.

[James 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 2:7</span></span>

Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are (e) called?

\(e\) Literally, "which is called upon of you".

[James 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 2:8</span></span>

\(4\) If ye fulfil the (f) royal law according to the scripture, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well:

\(4\) The conclusion: charity which God prescribes cannot agree with the
respecting of people, seeing that we must walk in the king's highway.

\(f\) The law is said to be royal and like the king's highway, in that
it is simple and without changes, and that the law calls everyone our
neighbour without respect, whom we may help by any kind of duty.

[James 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 2:10</span></span>

\(5\) For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
\[point\], he is guilty of (g) all.

\(5\) A new argument to prove the same conclusion: Those who neglect
some and ambitiously honour others do not love their neighbours. For
they do not obey God if they remove from the commandments of God those
things that are not convenient for them. Rather they are guilty of
breaking the whole law, even though they observe part of it.

\(g\) Not that all sins are equal, but because he who breaks one small
part of the law, offends the majority of the given law.

[James 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 2:11</span></span>

\(6\) For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill.
Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the law.

\(6\) A proof: because the Lawmaker is always one and the same, and the
contents of the law cannot be divided.

[James 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 2:12</span></span>

\(7\) So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty.

\(7\) The conclusion of the whole treatise: we are upon this condition
delivered from the curse of the law by the mercy of God, that in the
same way we should maintain and cherish charity and good will towards
one another, and whoever does not do so, shall not taste of the grace of
God.

[James 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 2:13</span></span>

For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no (h) mercy;
and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.

\(h\) He that is harsh and short with his neighbour, or else does not
help him, he shall find God a hard and rough judge to him.

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

\(8\) What \[doth it\] profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath
faith, and have not works? can faith save him?

\(8\) The fifth place which follows very well with the former treatise,
concerning a true and living faith. The proposition of the place is
this: Faith which does not bring forth works is not that faith by means
of which we are justified, but an false image of that faith, or else
this: they who do not show the effects of faith are not justified by
faith.

[James 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 2:15</span></span>

\(9\) If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,

\(9\) The first reason taken from a comparison: if a man says to one who
is hungry "Fill your belly" and yet gives him nothing, this is not true
charity. If a man says he believes and does not bring forth works of his
faith, this is not true faith, but truly a dead thing called with the
name of faith, of which no man has room to brag, unless he will openly
incur reprehension, since the cause is understood by the effects.

[James 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 2:18</span></span>

Yea, (i) a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy
faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.

\(i\) No, by this every man will be eaten up with pride.

[James 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 2:19</span></span>

\(10\) Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils
also believe, and tremble.

\(10\) Another reason taken from an absurdity: if such a faith were the
true faith by means of which we are justified, the demons would be
justified, for they have that, but nonetheless they tremble and are not
justified, therefore neither is that faith a true faith.

[James 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 2:20</span></span>

\(11\) But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

\(11\) The third reason from the example of Abraham, who no doubt had a
true faith: but he in offering his son, showed himself to have that
faith which was not without works, and therefore he received a true
testimony when it was laid, that faith was imputed to him for
righteousness.

[James 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 2:21</span></span>

Was not Abraham our father (k) justified by works, when he had offered
Isaac his son upon the altar?

\(k\) Was he not by his works known and found to be justified? For he
speaks not here of the causes of justification, but by what effects we
may know that a man is justified.

[James 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 2:22</span></span>

Seest thou how faith (l) wrought with his works, and by works was faith
made (m) perfect?

\(l\) Was effectual and fruitful with good works.

\(m\) That the faith was declared to be a true faith, through works.

[James 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 2:23</span></span>

And the scripture was (n) fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the
Friend of God.

\(n\) Then the Scripture was fulfilled, when it appeared plainly how
truly it was written about Abraham.

[James 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jam 2:24</span></span>

\(12\) Ye see then how that by works a man is (o) justified, and not by
(p) faith only.

\(12\) The conclusion: Only he who has faith that has works following it
is justified.

\(o\) Is proved to be just.

\(p\) Of that dead and fruitless faith which you boast of.

[James 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 2:25</span></span>

\(13\) Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when
she had received the messengers, and had sent \[them\] out another way?

\(13\) A forth reason taken from a similar example of Rahab the harlot,
who was proved by her works that she was justified by a true faith.

[James 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 2:26</span></span>

\(14\) For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also.

\(14\) The conclusion repeated again: faith does not bring forth fruits
and works is not faith, but a dead carcass.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003)

</div>
