<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](isa066)  [Next](jer002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

The (a) words of Jeremiah the son of (b) Hilkiah, of the priests that
\[were\] in (c) Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

The Argument - The prophet Jeremiah born in the city of Anathoth in the
country of Benjamin, was the son of Hilkiah, whom some think to be he
that found the book of the law and gave it to Josiah. This prophet had
excellent gifts from God, and most evident revelations of prophecy, so
that by the commandment of the Lord he began very young to prophecy,
that is, in the thirteenth year of Josiah, and continued eighteen years
under the king, three months under Jehoahaz and under Jehoiakim eleven
years, three months under Jehoiachin, and under Zedekiah eleven years to
the time that they were carried away into Babylon. So that this time
amounts to above forty years, besides the time that he prophesied after
the captivity. In this book he declares with tears and lamentations, the
destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of the people, for their
idolatry, covetousness, deceit, cruelty, excess, rebellion and contempt
of God's word, and for the consolation of the Church reveals the just
time of their deliverance. Here chiefly are to be considered three
things. First the rebellion of the wicked, who wax more stubborn and
obstinate, when the prophets admonish them most plainly of their
destruction. Next how the prophets and ministers of God should not be
discouraged in their vocation, though they are persecuted and rigorously
handled by the wicked, for God's cause. Thirdly though God shows his
just judgment against the wicked, yet will he ever show himself a
preserver of his Church, and when all means seem to men's judgment to be
abolished, then will he declare himself victorious in preserving his.

\(a\) That is, the sermons and prophecies.

\(b\) Who is thought to be he that found the book of the law under king
Josiah, ([Kg2 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)).

\(c\) This was a city about three miles from Jerusalem and belonged to
the priests, the sons of Aaron, ([Jos
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018)).

[Jeremiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 1:2</span></span>

To whom the (d) word of the LORD came in the days of Josiah the son of
Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.

\(d\) This is spoken to confirm his calling and office, as he did not
presume of himself to preach and prophecy, but was called to it by God.

[Jeremiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 1:3</span></span>

It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah,
to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the (e) son of Josiah king
of Judah, to the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth (f)
month.

\(e\) Meaning the nephew of Josiah: for Jehoahaz was his father, who
reigned but three months, and therefore is not mentioned, nor is
Jehoiakim that reigned no longer.

\(f\) Of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, who was also called Mattaniah,
and at this time the Jews were carried away into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar.

[Jeremiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 1:5</span></span>

Before I (g) formed thee in the womb I knew thee; and before thou wast
born I sanctified thee, \[and\] I ordained thee a prophet to the (h)
nations.

\(g\) The scripture uses this manner of speech to declare that God has
appointed his minsters to their offices before they were born, as in
([Isa 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001); [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)).

\(h\) For Jeremiah did not only prophecy against the Jews, but also
against the Egyptians, Babylonians, Moabites and other nations.

[Jeremiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 1:6</span></span>

Then said I, (i) Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot speak: for I \[am\] a
child.

\(i\) Considering the great judgments of God which according to his
threatening would come on the world, he was moved with a certain
compassion on the one hand to pity them that would thus perish, and on
the other hand by the infirmity of man's nature, knowing how hard a
thing it was to enterprise such a charge, as in ([Isa
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011); [Exo
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021), [Exo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)).

[Jeremiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 1:9</span></span>

Then the LORD put forth his hand, and (k) touched my mouth. And the LORD
said to me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.

\(k\) Which declares that God makes them meet and assures them, whom he
calls to set forth his glory, giving them all means necessary for the
same, ([Exo 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012); [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)).

[Jeremiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 1:10</span></span>

See, I have this day set thee over the (l) nations and over the
kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down, to build, and to plant.

\(l\) He shows what is the authority of God's true ministers, who by his
word have power to bear down whatever lifts itself up against God: and
to plant and assure the humble and such as give themselves to the
obedience of God's word, ([Co2 10:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004);
[Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)), and these are the keys
which Christ has left to loose and bind, ([Mat
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)).

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest
thou? And I said, I see a (m) rod of an almond tree.

\(m\) He joins the sign with the word, for a more ample confirmation:
signifying by the rod of the almond tree, which first buds, the hasty
coming of the Babylonians against the Jews.

[Jeremiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 1:13</span></span>

And the word of the LORD came to me the second time, saying, What seest
thou? And I said, I see a boiling (n) pot; and its face \[is\] toward
the north.

\(n\) Signifying that the Chaldeans and Assyrians would be as a pot to
seethe the Jews who boiled in their pleasures and lust.

[Jeremiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 1:14</span></span>

Then the LORD said to me, Out of the (o) north an evil shall break forth
upon all the inhabitants of the land.

\(o\) Syria and Assyria were northward in respect to Jerusalem, which
was the Chaldeans dominion.

[Jeremiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 1:16</span></span>

And I will utter my (p) judgments against them concerning all their
wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods,
and worshipped the works of their own hands.

\(p\) I will give them charge and power to execute my vengeance against
the idolaters who have forsaken me for their idols.

[Jeremiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 1:17</span></span>

Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak to them all that
I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I (q) confound thee
before them.

\(q\) Which declares that God's vengeance is prepared against them who
do not execute their duty faithfully, either for fear of man, or for any
other reason, ([Co1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)).

[Jeremiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 1:18</span></span>

For, behold, I have made thee this day a fortified city, and an (r) iron
pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the kings of
Judah, against her princes, against her priests, and against the people
of the land.

\(r\) Signifying on the one hand that the more that Satan and the world
rage against God's ministers, the more present will he be to help them,
([Jos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005); [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005)) and on the other hand, that they
are utterly unfit to serve God in his Church, who are afraid and do not
resist wickedness, whatever danger depend on it, ([Isa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007); [Eze
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002)

</div>
