<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer043)  [Next](jer045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 44:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews who dwell in the
land of Egypt, who dwell at Migdol, and at (a) Tahpanhes, and at Noph,
and in the country of Pathros, saying,

\(a\) These were all famous and strange cities in Egypt, where the Jews
that fled dwelt for their safety but the prophet declares that there is
no hold so strong that can preserve them from God's vengeance.

[Jeremiah 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 44:4</span></span>

Yet I sent to you all my servants the prophets, (b) rising early and
sending \[them\], saying, O, do not this abominable thing that I hate.

\(b\) Read ([Jer 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025.md), [Jer
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003.md), [Jer
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#019.md), [Jer
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033).md).

[Jeremiah 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 44:6</span></span>

Wherefore (c) my fury and my anger was poured forth, and was kindled in
the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted
\[and\] desolate, as at this day.

\(c\) He sets before their eyes God's judgments against Judah and
Jerusalem for their idolatry that they might beware by their example,
and not with the same wickedness provoke the Lord: for then they would
be double punished.

[Jeremiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 44:9</span></span>

Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of
the (d) kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own
wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed
in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?

\(d\) He shows that we ought to keep in memory God's plagues from the
beginning that considering them, we might live in his fear, and know if
he did not spare our fathers, yea kings, princes, rulers and also whole
countries and nations for their sins that we vile worms cannot look to
escape punishment for ours.

[Jeremiah 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 44:12</span></span>

And I will take the remnant of Judah, that (e) have set their faces to
go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be
consumed, \[and\] fall in the land of Egypt; they shall \[even\] be
consumed by the sword \[and\] by the famine: they shall die, from the
least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they
shall be an execration, \[and\] an horror, and a (f) curse, and a
reproach.

\(e\) Which have fully set their minds and are gone there on purpose. By
which he excepts the innocents as Jeremiah and Baruch that were forces:
therefore the Lord shows that he will set his face against them: that
is, purposely destroy them.

\(f\) Read ([Jer 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#006.md), [Jer
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#018).md).

[Jeremiah 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 44:14</span></span>

So that none of the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of
Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should return
into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return to dwell
there: for none shall return but (g) such as shall escape.

\(g\) Meaning but a few.

[Jeremiah 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 44:16</span></span>

\[As for\] the word that thou hast spoken to us in the name of the LORD,
we will (h) not hearken to thee.

\(h\) This declares how dangerous a thing it is to decline once from God
and to follow our own fantasies: for Satan ever solicits such and does
not leave them till he has brought them to extreme impudency and
madness, even to justify their wickedness against God and his prophets.

[Jeremiah 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 44:17</span></span>

But we will certainly do whatever thing proceedeth from our own mouth,
to burn incense to (i) the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings to her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and
our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem:
for \[then\] we had (k) plenty of food, and were well, and saw no evil.

\(i\) Read ([Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018).md) it seems that
the papists gathered of this place "Salbe Regina" and "Regina caeli
latare" calling the virgin Mary Queen of heaven and so out of the
blessed virgin and mother of our saviour Christ, made an idol; for here
the prophet condemns their idolatry.

\(k\) This is still the argument of idolaters who esteem religion by the
belly and instead of acknowledging God's works who sends both plenty and
famine, health and sickness. They attribute it to their idols and so
dishonour God.

[Jeremiah 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 44:19</span></span>

And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink
offerings to her, did we make for her cakes to worship her, and pour out
drink offerings to her, without (l) our husbands?

\(l\) This teaches us what a great danger it is for the husbands to
permit their wives anything of which they are not assured by God's word:
for by it they take an opportunity to justify their doings and their
husbands will give an account of it before God.

[Jeremiah 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 44:25</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your
wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your (m)
hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to
burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to
her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows.

\(m\) You have committed double evil in making wicked vows, and in
performing the same.

[Jeremiah 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 44:26</span></span>

Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, all Judah that dwell in the land
of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the LORD, that my
name (n) shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all
the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD liveth.

\(n\) This declares a horrible plague toward idolaters, seeing that God
will not vouchsafe to have his Name mentioned by such as have polluted
it.

[Jeremiah 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 44:28</span></span>

Yet a small number that escape the sword (o) shall return from the land
of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah, that have
gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose words
shall stand, mine, or theirs.

\(o\) We see therefore that God has a perpetual care over his, wherever
they are scattered: for though they are but two or three, yet he will
deliver them when he destroys his enemies.

[Jeremiah 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 44:30</span></span>

Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will (p) give Pharaohhophra king of Egypt
into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his
life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.

\(p\) He shows the means by which they would be destroyed to assure them
of the certainty of the plague and yet they remain still in their
obstinacy till they perish: for Josephus writes that five years after
the taking of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar the younger having overcome the
Moabites and the Ammonites went against Egypt and slew the king and so
brought these Jews and others into Babylon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 45](jer045.md)

</div>
