<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1002)  [Next](jo1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)

[1 John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 3:1</span></span>

Behold, (1) (a) what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us,
that we should be (b) called the sons of God: (2) therefore the world
knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

\(1\) He begins to declare this agreement of the Father and the Son, at
the highest cause, that is, at that free love of God towards us, with
which he so loves us, that also he adopts us to be his children.

\(a\) What a gift of how great love.

\(b\) That we should be the sons of God, and so, that all the world may
see that we are so. (2) Before he declares this adoption, he says two
things: the one, that this so great a dignity, is not to be esteemed
according to the judgment of the flesh, because it is unknown to the
world, for the world knows not God the Father himself.

[1 John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 3:2</span></span>

\(3\) Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be
(c) like him; for we shall see him (d) as he is.

\(3\) The other: This dignity is not fully revealed to us ourselves,
much less to strangers, but we are sure of the accomplishment of it, in
as much as we shall be like the Son of God himself and shall enjoy his
sight indeed, such as he is now, but yet this is deferred until his next
coming.

\(c\) Like, but not equal.

\(d\) For now we see as in a glass ([Co1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012))

[1 John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 3:3</span></span>

\(4\) And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even
(e) as he is pure.

\(4\) Now he describes this adoption (the glory which as yet consists in
hope) by the effect that is, because whoever is made the Son of God,
endeavours to resemble the Father in purity.

\(e\) This word signifies a likeness, but not an equality.

[1 John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 3:4</span></span>

\(5\) Whosoever (f) committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for (g)
sin is the transgression of the law.

\(5\) The rule of this purity can from no where else be taken but from
the law of God, the transgression of which is called sin.

\(f\) Does not give himself to pureness.

\(g\) A short definition of sin.

[1 John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 3:5</span></span>

\(6\) And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in
him is no sin.

\(6\) An argument taken from the material cause of our salvation: Christ
in himself is most pure, and he came to take away our sins, by
sanctifying us with the Holy Spirit, therefore whoever is truly a
partaker of Christ, does not give himself to sin, and on the contrary,
he that gives himself to sin does not know Christ.

[1 John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 3:6</span></span>

Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever (h) sinneth hath not
seen him, neither known him.

\(h\) He is said to sin, that does not give himself to purity, and in
him sin reigns: but sin is said to dwell in the faithful, and not to
reign in them.

[1 John 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 3:7</span></span>

\(7\) Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

\(7\) Another argument of things joined together: He that lives justly,
is just, and resembles Christ that is just, and by that is known to be
the Son of God.

[1 John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 3:8</span></span>

\(8\) He that committeth sin is of the (i) devil; for the devil (k)
sinneth from the (l) beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

\(8\) An argument taken by contrast: the devil is the author of sin, and
therefore he is that serves sin is of the devil, or is ruled by the
inspiration of the devil: and if he is the devil's son, then is he not
God's son: for the devil and God are so contrary to one another that the
Son of God was sent to destroy the works of the devil. Therefore on the
other side, whoever resists sin, is the son of God, being born again of
his Spirit as of new seed, in so much, that by necessity he is now
delivered from the slavery of sin.

\(i\) Resembles the devil, as the child does the father, and is governed
by his Spirit.

\(k\) He says not "sinned" but "sins" for he does nothing else but sin.

\(l\) From the very beginning of the world.

[1 John 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 3:9</span></span>

Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his (m) seed remaineth
in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

\(m\) The Holy Spirit is so called by the effect he works, because by
his power and mighty working, as it were by seed, we are made new men.

[1 John 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 3:10</span></span>

\(9\) In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, (10) neither he
that loveth not his brother.

\(9\) The conclusion: by a wicked life they are known who are governed
by the Sprit of the devil: and by a pure life who are God's children.

\(10\) He begins to commend charity towards the brethren as another mark
of the sons of God.

[1 John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 3:11</span></span>

\(11\) For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another.

\(11\) The first reason taken from the authority of God who gives the
commandment.

[1 John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 3:12</span></span>

\(12\) Not as Cain, \[who\] was of that wicked one, and slew his
brother. (13) And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were
evil, and his brother's righteous.

\(12\) An amplification taken from the contrary example of Cain who slew
his brother.

\(13\) A short digression: Let us not marvel that we are hated by the
world for doing our duty, for such was the condition of Abel who was a
just person: and who would not rather be like him than Cain?

[1 John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 3:14</span></span>

\(14\) We (o) know that we have passed from death unto life, because we
love the brethren. He that loveth not \[his\] brother abideth in death.

\(14\) The second reason: Because charity is a testimony that we are
translated from death to life: and therefore hatred towards the brethren
is a testimony of death, and whoever nourishes it fosters death in his
bosom.

\(o\) Love is a token that we are translated from death to life, for by
the effects the cause is known.

[1 John 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 3:15</span></span>

\(15\) Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no
murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.

\(15\) A confirmation: Whoever is a murderer, is in eternal death: he
who hates his brother is a murderer, therefore he is in death. Thereupon
follows the other side: He that loves his brother has passed to life,
for indeed we are born dead.

[1 John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 3:16</span></span>

\(16\) Hereby perceive we the love \[of God\], because he laid down his
life for us: and we ought to lay down \[our\] lives for the brethren.

\(16\) Now he shows how far Christian charity extends, even so far, that
according to the example of Christ every man forgets himself, to provide
for and help his brethren.

[1 John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 3:17</span></span>

\(17\) But whoso hath this (p) world's good, and seeth his brother have
need, and (q) shutteth up his bowels \[of compassion\] from him, how
dwelleth the love of God in him?

\(17\) He reasons by comparisons: for if we are bound even to give our
life for our neighbours, how much more are we bound to help our
brothers' needs with our goods and substance?

\(p\) Wherewith this life is sustained.

\(q\) Opens not his heart to him, nor helps him willingly and
cheerfully.

[1 John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 3:18</span></span>

\(18\) My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue;
but in deed and in truth.

\(18\) Christian charity stands not in word but in deed, and proceeds
from a sincere affection.

[1 John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 3:19</span></span>

\(19\) And hereby we know that we are of the truth, (20) and shall
assure our hearts before him.

\(19\) He commends charity, by three effects: for first of all, by it we
know that we are indeed the sons of God, as he showed before.

\(20\) Therefore it comes that we have a quiet conscience, as on the
opposite side he that thinks that he has God for a judge, because he is
guilty to himself either he is never or else very rarely quiet, for God
has a far sharper sight then we, and judges more severely.

[1 John 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 3:20</span></span>

For (4) if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things.

\(r\) If an evil conscience convicts us, much more ought the judgment of
God condemn us, who knows our hearts better than we ourselves do.

[1 John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 3:21</span></span>

\(21\) Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, \[then\] have we confidence
toward God.

\(21\) A third effect also rises from the former, that in these miseries
we are sure to be heard, because we are the sons of God: as we
understand by the grace of sanctification which is only for the elect.

[1 John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jo1 3:22</span></span>

\(22\) And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

\(22\) The conclusion, that faith in Christ and love one towards another
are things joined together, and therefore the outward testimonies of
sanctification must and do answer that inward testimony of the Spirit
given to us.

[1 John 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jo1 3:24</span></span>

And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And
hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the (f) Spirit which he hath
given us.

\(f\) He means the Spirit of sanctification, whereby we are born again
and live to God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 4](jo1004)

</div>
