<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](pe2003)  [Next](jo1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That (1) which was from the beginning, which we have (a) heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, of the (b) Word of life;

\(1\) He begins with the description of the person of Christ who he
makes one and not two: and him both God from everlasting (for he was
with the Father from the beginning, and is that eternal life) and also
made true man, whom John himself and his companions both heard, beheld,
and handled.

\(a\) I heard him speak, I saw him myself with my eyes, I handled with
my hands him that is true God, being made true man, and not I alone, but
others also that were with me.

\(b\) That same everlasting Word by whom all things are made, and in
whom only is there life.

[1 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 1:2</span></span>

(For the life was manifested, and we have seen \[it\], and bear witness,
and (c) shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us;)

\(c\) Being sent by him: and that doctrine is correctly said to be
shown, for no man could so much as have thought of it, if it had not
been thus shown.

[1 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 1:3</span></span>

That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, (2) that ye also
may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship \[is\] with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

\(2\) The use of this doctrine is this, that all of us being coupled and
joined together with Christ by faith, might become the sons of God: in
which only consists all true happiness.

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

\(3\) This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

\(3\) Now he enters into a question, by which we may understand that we
are joined together with Christ, that is, if we are governed with his
light, which is perceived by the ordering of our life. And thus he
reasons, God is in himself most pure light, therefore he agrees well
with them who are of the light, but with them that are of the darkness
he has no fellowship.

[1 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 1:7</span></span>

But if we walk in the (d) light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, (4) and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanseth us from all sin.

\(d\) God is said to be light by his own nature, and to be in light,
that is to say, in that everlasting infinite blessedness: and we are
said to walk in light in that the beams of that light shine to us in the
Word. (4) A digression the matter at hand, to the remission of sins: for
this our sanctification who walk in the light, is a testimony of our
joining and knitting together with Christ: but because this our light is
very dark, we must obtain another benefit in Christ, that is, that our
sins may be forgiven us being sprinkled with his blood: and this in
conclusion is the support and anchor of our salvation.

[1 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 1:8</span></span>

\(5\) If we say that we have no sin, we (e) deceive ourselves, and the
(f) truth is not in us.

\(5\) There is none but need this benefit, because there is none that is
not a sinner.

\(e\) This fully refutes that perfectness of works of supererogation
(doing more than duty requires, the idea that excess good works can form
a reserve fund of merit that can be drawn on in favour of sinners) which
the papists dream of.

\(f\) So then, John speaks not thus for modesty's sake, as some say but
because it is so indeed.

[1 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 1:9</span></span>

\(6\) If we confess our sins, he is (g) faithful and just to (h) forgive
us \[our\] sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

\(6\) Therefore the beginning of salvation is to acknowledge our
wickedness and to require pardon from him, who freely forgives all sins,
because he has promised to do so and he is faithful and just.

\(g\) So then our salvation depends on the free promise of God, who
because he is faithful and just, will perform that which he hath
promised.

\(h\) Where then are our merits? for this is our true happiness.

[1 John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 1:10</span></span>

\(7\) If we say that we have not sinned, we make him (i) a liar, and his
(k) word is not in us.

\(7\) A repeat of the former verse, in which he condemned all of sin
without exception: so much so that if any man persuade himself
otherwise, he does as much as in him lies, make the word of God himself
useless and to no effect, yes, he makes God a liar: for to why in times
past did we need sacrifices, or now Christ and the gospel, if we are not
sinners?

\(i\) They do not only deceive themselves but are blasphemous against
God.

\(k\) His doctrine shall have no place in us; that is, in our hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002.md)

</div>
