<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1004)  [Next](jo2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md)

[1 John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 5:1</span></span>

Whosoever (1) believeth that Jesus is the (a) Christ is born of God: and
every one that loveth him that begat loveth (b) him also that is
begotten of him.

\(1\) He advances in the same argument, showing how both those loves
come to us, from that love with which God loves us, that is, by Jesus
our mediator laid hold on by faith, in whom we are made the children of
God, and do love the Father from whom we are begotten, and also our
brothers who are begotten with us.

\(a\) Is the true Messiah.

\(b\) By one, he means all the faithful.

[1 John 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 5:2</span></span>

\(2\) By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and keep his (c) commandments.

\(2\) The love of our neighbour depends on the love with which we love
God, that this last must go before the first: of which it follows, that
that is not to be called love, when men agree together to do evil,
neither that, when as in loving our neighbours, we do not respect God's
commandments.

\(c\) There is no love where there is no true doctrine.

[1 John 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 5:3</span></span>

\(3\) For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: (4)
and his commandments are not (d) grievous.

\(3\) The reason: to love God, is to keep his commandments, which being
so, and seeing that both the loves are commanded by the same lawmaker,
(as he taught before) it follows also, that we do not love our
neighbours, when we break God's commandments. (4) Because experience
teaches us that there is no ability in our flesh, neither will to
perform God's commandments, therefore lest the apostle should seem, by
so often putting them in mind of the keeping of the commandments of God,
to require things that are impossible, he pronounces that the
commandments of God are not in any way grievous or burdensome, that we
can be oppressed with the burden of them.

\(d\) To those who are regenerate, that is to say, born again, who are
led by the Spirit of God, and are through grace delivered from the curse
of the law.

[1 John 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 5:4</span></span>

\(5\) For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: (6) and this
is the victory that (e) overcometh the world, \[even\] our (f) faith.

\(5\) A reason: Because by regeneration we have received strength to
overcome the world, that is to say, whatever strives against the
commandments of God. (6) He declares what that strength is, that is,
faith.

\(e\) He uses the time that is past, to give us to understand, that
although we are in the battle, yet undoubtedly we shall be conquerors,
and are most certain of the victory.

\(f\) Which is the instrumental cause, and as a means and hand by which
we lay hold on him, who indeed performs this, that is, has and does
overcome the world, even Christ Jesus.

[1 John 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 5:5</span></span>

\(7\) Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
Jesus is the Son of God?

\(7\) Moreover he declares two things, the one, what true faith is, that
is, that which rests on Jesus Christ the Son of God alone: on which
follows the other, that is, that this strength is not proper to faith,
but by faith as an instrument is drawn from Jesus Christ the Son of God.

[1 John 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 5:6</span></span>

\(8\) This is he that came by water and blood, \[even\] Jesus Christ;
(9) not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the (g) Spirit
that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.

\(8\) He proves the excellency of Christ, in whom only all things are
given us by six witnesses, three heavenly, and three earthly, who wholly
and completely agree together. The heavenly witnesses are, the Father
who sent the Son, the Word itself, which became flesh, and the Holy
Spirit. The earthly witnesses are water, (that is our sanctification)
blood, (that is, our justification) the Spirit, (that is, acknowledging
of God the Father in Christ by faith) through the testimony of the Holy
Spirit. (9) He warns us not to separate water from blood (that is
sanctification from justification, or righteousness, begun from
righteousness imputed) for we do not stand on sanctification, but so far
as it is a witness of Christ's righteousness imputed to us: and although
this imputation of Christ's righteousness is never separated from
sanctification, yet it is the only matter of our salvation.

\(g\) Our spirit which is the third witness, testifies that the holy
Sprit is truth, that is to say, that that is true which he tells us,
that is, that we are the sons of God.

[1 John 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 5:7</span></span>

For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the (h)
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are (i) one.

\(h\) See ([Joh 8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013).md)

\(i\) Agree in one.

[1 John 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 5:9</span></span>

\(10\) If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater:
for (k) this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son.

\(10\) He shows by an argument of comparison, of what great weight the
heavenly testimony is, that the Father has given of the Son, to whom
agrees both the Son himself and the Holy Spirit.

\(k\) I conclude correctly: for the testimony which I said is given in
heaven, comes from God, who sets forth his Son.

[1 John 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 5:10</span></span>

\(11\) He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself:
he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not
the record that God gave of his Son.

\(11\) He proves the sureness of the earthly witness by every man's
conscience having that testimony in itself, whose conscience he says
cannot be deceived because it agrees with the heavenly testimony which
the Father gives of the Son: for otherwise the Father must be a liar, if
the conscience which agrees and assents to the Father, should lie.

[1 John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 5:11</span></span>

\(12\) And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son.

\(12\) Now at length he shows what this testimony is that is confirmed
with so many witnesses: that is, that life or everlasting happiness is
the gift of God, which is the Son, and proceeds from him to us, who by
faith are joined with him, so that without him, life is nowhere to be
found.

[1 John 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 5:13</span></span>

\(13\) These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye
may believe on the name of the Son of God.

\(13\) The conclusion of the epistle, in which he shows first of all,
that even they who already believe, need this doctrine, that they may
grow more and more in faith: that is to say, that they may be daily more
and more certain of their salvation in Christ, through faith.

[1 John 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 5:14</span></span>

\(14\) And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
any thing according to his will, he heareth us:

\(14\) Because we do not yet in effect obtain that which we hope for,
the apostle combines invocation or prayer with faith, which he will have
proceed from faith, and moreover to be conceived in such a way, that
nothing is asked but that which is agreeable to the will of God: and
such prayers cannot be useless.

[1 John 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 5:16</span></span>

\(15\) If any man see his brother sin a sin \[which is\] not unto death,
(l) he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for
it.

\(15\) We have to make prayers not only for ourselves, but also for our
brothers who sin, that their sins be not to death: and yet he excepts
that sin which is never forgiven, or the sin against the Holy Spirit,
that is to say, a universal and wilful falling away from the known truth
of the gospel.

\(l\) This is as if he said, let him ask the Lord to forgive him, and he
will forgive him being so asked.

[1 John 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 5:17</span></span>

\(16\) All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.

\(16\) The taking away of an objection: indeed all iniquity is
comprehended under the name of sin: but yet we must not despair
therefore, because every sin is not deadly, and without hope of remedy.

[1 John 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 5:18</span></span>

\(17\) We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is
begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.

\(17\) A reason why not all, or rather why no sin is mortal to some:
that is, because they are born of God, that is to say, made the sons of
God in Christ, and being ended with his Spirit, they do not serve sin,
nor are they mortally wounded by Satan.

[1 John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 5:19</span></span>

\(18\) \[And\] we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness.

\(18\) Every man must particularly apply to himself the general
promises, that we may certainly persuade ourselves, that whereas all the
world is by nature lost, we are freely made the sons of God, by the
sending of Jesus Christ his son to us, of whom we are enlightened with
the knowledge of the true God and everlasting life.

[1 John 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 5:20</span></span>

And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that
is true, \[even\] in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true (m) God, and
eternal life.

\(m\) The divinity of Christ is most clearly proved by this passage.

[1 John 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 5:21</span></span>

\(19\) Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen.

\(19\) He expresses a plain precept of taking heed of idols: which he
contrasts with the only true God, that with this seal he might seal up
all the former doctrine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John Chapter 1](jo2001.md)

</div>
