<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh003)  [Next](joh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

[John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 4:1</span></span>

When (1) therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
made and baptized more disciples than John,

\(1\) This balance is to be kept in doing our duty, that neither by fear
are we terrified from going forward, and neither by rashness procure or
bring dangers upon ourselves.

[John 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 4:5</span></span>

\(2\) Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near
to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

\(2\) Christ, leaving the proud Pharisees, communicates the treasures of
everlasting life with a poor sinful woman and stranger, refuting the
gross errors of the Samaritans, and defending the true service of God,
which was delivered to the Jews, but yet in such a way that he here
calls both Samaritans and Jews back to himself, as one whom only all the
fathers, and also all the ceremonies of the law, regarded, and had
respect for.

[John 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 4:6</span></span>

Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with \[his\]
journey, sat (a) thus on the well: \[and\] it was about the (b) sixth
hour.

\(a\) Even as he was weary, or because he was weary.

\(b\) It was almost noon.

[John 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 4:9</span></span>

Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a
Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews (c)
have no dealings with the Samaritans.

\(c\) There is no familiarity nor friendship between the Jews and the
Samaritans.

[John 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 4:10</span></span>

Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest (d) the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have
asked of him, and he would have given thee (e) living water.

\(d\) By this word "the" we are shown that Christ speaks of some
excellent gift, that is to say, even about himself, whom his Father
offered to this woman.

\(e\) This everlasting water, that is to say, the exceeding love of God,
is called "living" or "of life", to make a difference between it and the
water that should be drawn out of a well: and these metaphors are
frequently used by the Jews.

[John 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 4:20</span></span>

\(3\) Our fathers worshipped in this (f) mountain; and ye say, that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.

\(3\) All the religion of superstitious people stands for the most part
upon two pillars, but very weak, that is to say, upon the perverted
examples of the fathers, and a foolish opinion of outward things: and to
refute such errors we have to turn to the word and nature of God.

\(f\) The name of this mountain is Gerizim, upon which Sanabaletta the
Cuthite built a temple with the permission of Alexander of Macedonia,
after the victory of Issica: and he made high priest there Manasses his
son in law; Josephus, book 11.

[John 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 4:23</span></span>

But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in (g) spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to
worship him.

\(g\) This word "spirit" is to be taken here as it is set against that
commandment which is called carnal in ([Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)), as the commandment is
considered in itself: and so he speaks of "truth" not as we set it
against a lie, but as we take it in respect of the outward ceremonies of
the law, which only shadowed that which Christ indeed performed.

[John 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 4:24</span></span>

God \[is\] a (h) Spirit: and they that worship him must worship \[him\]
in spirit and in truth.

\(h\) By the word "spirit" he means the nature of the Godhead, and not
the third person in the Trinity.

[John 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 4:32</span></span>

\(4\) But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

\(4\) We may have care of our bodies, but in such a way that we prefer
willingly and freely the occasion which is offered us to enlarge the
kingdom of God before all necessities of this life, whatever else they
may be.

[John 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 4:35</span></span>

\(5\) Say not ye, There are yet four months, and \[then\] cometh
harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the
fields; for they are white already to harvest.

\(5\) When the spiritual corn is ripe, we must not linger, for so the
children of this world would condemn us.

[John 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 4:36</span></span>

\(6\) And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

\(6\) The doctrine of the prophets was as it were a sowing time, and the
doctrine of the gospel, as the harvest: and there is an excellent
agreement between them both, and the ministers of them both.

[John 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 4:37</span></span>

And herein is that (i) saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth.

\(i\) That proverb.

[John 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 4:39</span></span>

\(7\) And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the
saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.

\(7\) The Samaritans most joyfully embrace that which the Jews most
stubbornly rejected.

[John 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 4:43</span></span>

\(8\) Now after two days he departed thence, and went into (k) Galilee.

\(8\) The despisers of Christ deprive themselves of his benefit: yet
Christ prepares a place for himself.

\(k\) Into the towns and villages of Galilee, for he would not live in
his country of Nazareth, because they despised him, and where (as the
other evangelists write) the efficacy of his benefits was hindered
because of their being incredibly stiffnecked.

[John 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 4:46</span></span>

\(9\) So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water
wine. And there was a certain (l) nobleman, whose son was sick at
Capernaum.

\(9\) Although Christ is absent in body, yet he works mightily in the
believers by his word.

\(l\) Some of Herod's royal attendants, for though Herod was not a king,
but a Tetrarch, yet he was a king in all respects (or at least the
people called him a king) except that he lacked the title of king.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 5](joh005)

</div>
