<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh013)  [Next](joh015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001.md)

[John 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 14:1</span></span>

Let (1) not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in
me.

\(1\) He believes in God who believes in Christ, and there is no other
way to strengthen and encourage our minds during the greatest
distresses.

[John 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 14:2</span></span>

In my Father's house are many mansions: if \[it were\] not \[so\], (a) I
would have told you. I go to (b) prepare a place for you.

\(a\) That is, if it were not as I am telling you, that is, unless there
was room enough not only for me, but also for you in my Father's house,
I would not deceive you in this way with a vain hope, but I would have
plainly told you so.

\(b\) This whole speech is an allegory, by which the Lord comforts his
own, declaring to them his departure into heaven; and he departs not to
reign there alone, but to go before and prepare a place for them.

[John 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 14:3</span></span>

\(2\) And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will (c) come again,
and receive you unto myself; that where I am, \[there\] ye may be also.

\(2\) Christ did not go away from us with the intent of forsaking us,
but rather that he might eventually take us up with him into heaven.

\(c\) These words are to be understood as being said to the whole
Church, and therefore the angels said to the disciples when they were
astonished, "Why do you stand gazing up into heaven? This Jesus will so
come as you saw him go up", ([Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011).md). And in all places of the
Scripture the full comfort of the Church is considered to be that day
when God will be all in all, and is therefore called the day of
redemption.

[John 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 14:4</span></span>

\(3\) And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.

\(3\) Christ alone is the way to true and everlasting life, for it is he
in whom the Father has revealed himself.

[John 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 14:6</span></span>

Jesus saith unto him, I am (d) the way, the truth, and the life: no man
cometh unto the Father, but by me.

\(d\) This saying shows unto us the nature, the will, and office of
Christ.

[John 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 14:7</span></span>

\(e\) If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

\(e\) It is plain by this verse that to know God and to see God is the
same thing. Now whereas he said before that no man saw God at any time,
it is to be understood in this way: without Christ, or were it not
through Christ, no man could ever see God, nor ever saw God, at any
time: for as Chrysostom says, the Son is a very concise and plain
setting forth of the Father's nature to us.

[John 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 14:10</span></span>

\(4\) Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me?
the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father
that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

\(4\) The majesty of God shows itself most evidently both in Christ's
doctrine and in his deeds.

[John 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 14:12</span></span>

\(5\) Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works
that I do shall he do also; and (f) greater \[works\] than these shall
he do; because I go unto my Father.

\(5\) Christ's power is not only shown within his own person, but it is
spread through the body of his entire Church.

\(f\) That is, not only do them, but I can also give other men power to
do greater.

[John 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 14:15</span></span>

\(6\) If ye love me, keep my commandments.

\(6\) He loves Christ rightly who obeys his commandment: and because
obedience to Christ is accompanied with an infinite type and amount of
miseries, although he is absent in body, yet he comforts his own with
the present power of the Holy Spirit, whom the world despises, because
it does not know him.

[John 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 14:17</span></span>

\[Even\] the (g) Spirit of truth; whom the (h) world cannot receive,
because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he
dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

\(g\) The Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of truth by reason of that
which he does, because he inspires the truth into us, because he has the
truth in himself.

\(h\) Worldly men.

[John 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 14:20</span></span>

At that day ye shall know that I \[am\] (i) in my Father, and ye in me,
and I in you.

\(i\) The Son is in the Father in such a way that he is of one selfsame
substance with the Father, but he is in his disciples in a different
way, as an aider and helper of them.

[John 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 14:21</span></span>

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me:
and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will (k) manifest myself to him.

\(k\) I will show myself to him, and be known by him, as if he saw me
with his eyes: but this showing of himself is not bodily, but spiritual,
yet so plain that no other showing could be more evident.

[John 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 14:22</span></span>

\(7\) Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt
manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?

\(7\) We must not ask why the gospel is revealed to some rather than to
others, but we must rather take heed that we embrace Christ who is
offered unto us, and that we truly love him, that is to say, that we
give ourselves wholly to obeying him.

[John 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 14:25</span></span>

\(8\) These things have I spoken unto you, being \[yet\] present with
you.

\(8\) It is the duty and responsibility of the Holy Spirit to imprint in
the minds of the elect, in their times and seasons, that which Christ
once said.

[John 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 14:27</span></span>

\(9\) Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world
giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid.

\(9\) All true comfort and peace comes to us by Christ alone.

[John 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 14:28</span></span>

\(10\) Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come \[again\]
unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto
the Father: for my Father is (l) greater than I.

\(10\) We should in no way be sorry for the departing of Christ from us
according to the flesh, but rather we should rejoice in it, seeing that
all the blessing of the body depends upon the glorifying of the head.

\(l\) This is spoken in that Christ is mediator, for in this regard the
Father is greater than he, in as much as the person to whom request is
made is greater than he that makes the request.

[John 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 14:30</span></span>

\(11\) Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this
world cometh, and hath (m) nothing in me.

\(11\) Christ goes to death not unwillingly, but willingly, not that he
is yielding to the devil, but rather that he is obeying his Father's
decree.

\(m\) As one would say, "Satan will eventually set upon me with all the
might he can, but he has no power over me, neither will he find any such
thing in me as he thinks he will."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 15](joh015.md)

</div>
