<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh002)  [Next](joh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

[John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 3:1</span></span>

There (1) was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a (a) ruler of
the Jews:

\(1\) There are none sometimes more unlearned than the learned, but the
learned as well as the unlearned must desire wisdom from Christ only.

\(a\) A man of great estimation and a ruler amongst the Jews.

[John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 3:2</span></span>

The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a (b) teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles
that thou doest, (c) except God be with him.

\(b\) We know that you are sent from God to teach us.

\(c\) But he in whom some part of the excellency of God appears. And if
Nicodemus had rightly known Christ, he would not only have said that God
was with him, but in him, as Paul does in ([Co2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019)).

[John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 3:3</span></span>

\(2\) Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again, he cannot (d) see the (e) kingdom of God.

\(2\) The beginning of Christianity consists in this, that we know
ourselves not only to be corrupt in part, but to be wholly dead in sin:
so that our nature has need to be created anew, with regard to its
qualities, which can be done by no other power, but by the divine and
heavenly, by which we were first created.

\(d\) That is, "go in", or "enter", as he expounds himself below in
([Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)).

\(e\) The Church: for Christ shows here how we come to be citizens and
to have anything to do in the city of God.

[John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 3:4</span></span>

Nicodemus saith unto him, How (f) can a man be born when he is old? can
he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?

\(f\) How can I who am old be born again? For Nicodemus answers as if
Christ's words were only addressed to himself.

[John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 3:6</span></span>

That which is born of the flesh is (g) flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit.

\(g\) That is, fleshly, namely, wholly unclean and under the wrath of
God: and therefore this word "flesh" signifies the corrupt nature of
man: contrary to which is the Spirit, that is, the man ingrafted into
Christ through the grace of the Holy Spirit, whose nature is everlasting
and immortal, though the strife of the flesh remains.

[John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 3:8</span></span>

The wind bloweth where it (h) listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so
is every one that is born of the Spirit.

\(h\) With free and wandering blasts as it wishes.

[John 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 3:9</span></span>

\(3\) Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?

\(3\) The secret mystery of our regeneration which cannot be
comprehended by man's capacity, is perceived by faith, and that in
Christ only, because he is both God on earth, and man in heaven, that is
to say, man in such a way that he is God also, and therefore almighty:
and God in such a way that he is man also, and therefore his power is
made manifest to us.

[John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 3:11</span></span>

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify
that we have seen; and ye receive not our (i) witness.

\(i\) You handle doubtful things even though you have no solid basis for
believing them, and yet men believe you: but I teach those things that
are of a truth and well known, and you do not believe me.

[John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 3:13</span></span>

And no (k) man (l) hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down
from heaven, \[even\] (m) the Son of man which (n) is in heaven.

\(k\) Only Christ can teach us heavenly things, for no man ascends, etc.

\(l\) That is, has any spiritual light and understanding, or ever had
any, but only the Son of God who came down to us.

\(m\) Whereas he is said to have come down from heaven, this must be
understood as referring to his Godhead, and of the manner of his
conception: for Christ's birth upon the earth was heavenly and not
earthly, for he was conceived by the Holy Spirit.

\(n\) That which is proper to the divinity of Christ, is here spoken of
the whole Christ, to show us that he is but one person in which two
natures are united.

[John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 3:16</span></span>

\(5\) For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth (o) in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

\(5\) Nothing else but the free love of the Father is the beginning of
our salvation, and Christ is he in whom our righteousness and salvation
dwells: and faith is the instrument or means by which we apprehend it,
and everlasting life is that which is set before us to apprehend.

\(o\) It is not the same to believe in a thing, and to believe about a
thing, for we may not believe in anything except in God alone, but we
may believe about anything whatever, says Nazianzene in his Oration of
the Spirit.

[John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 3:17</span></span>

\(6\) For God sent not his Son into the world (p) to condemn the world;
but that the (q) world through him might be saved.

\(6\) Christ does not condemn, but rather despising Christ condemns.

\(p\) That is, to be the cause of the condemning of the world, for
indeed sins are the cause of death; however, Christ will still judge the
living and the dead.

\(q\) Not only the people of the Jews, but whoever will believe in him.

[John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 3:19</span></span>

\(7\) And this is the (r) condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil.

\(7\) The only reason why men refuse the light that is offered to them
is wickedness.

\(r\) That is, the cause of condemnation, which remains in men, unless
through God's great benefit they are delivered from it.

[John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 3:21</span></span>

But he that (s) doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest, that they are wrought (t) in God.

\(s\) That is, he that leads an honest life, and is void of all cunning
and deceit.

\(t\) That is, with God, God as it were going before.

[John 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 3:25</span></span>

\(8\) Then there arose a question between \[some\] of John's disciples
and the Jews about purifying.

\(8\) Satan inflames the disciples of John with a fond emulation of
their master in order to hinder the course of the gospel: but John,
being mindful of his office, not only puts a stop to their endeavours,
but also takes occasion by that means to give testimony of Christ, that
in him alone the Father has set forth everlasting life.

[John 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 3:27</span></span>

John answered and said, A man (u) can receive nothing, except it be
given him from heaven.

\(u\) Why are you trying to better my state? This is every man's lot and
portion, that he cannot better himself in the slightest way.

[John 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 3:31</span></span>

He that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth is (x)
earthly, and (y) speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is
above all.

\(x\) Is nothing else but man, a piece of work made of the slime of the
earth.

\(y\) Is characterized by nothing but corruption, ignorance, dulness,
etc.

[John 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 3:32</span></span>

And what he hath (z) seen and heard, that he testifieth; and (a) no man
receiveth his testimony.

\(z\) What he knows fully and perfectly.

\(a\) That is, very few.

[John 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 3:35</span></span>

The Father loveth the Son, and hath (b) given all things into his hand.

\(b\) Committed them to his power and will.

[John 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 3:36</span></span>

He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that
believeth not the Son shall not (c) see life; but the wrath of God
abideth on him.

\(c\) Shall not enjoy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 4](joh004)

</div>
