<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk007)  [Next](luk009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001.md)

[Luke 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 8:4</span></span>

\(1\) And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him
out of every city, he spake by a parable:

\(1\) The same gospel is sown everywhere, but does not everywhere yield
the same fruit, and this is only due to the fault of men themselves.

[Luke 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 8:10</span></span>

And he said, Unto you it is given to know the (a) mysteries of the
kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand.

\(a\) Those things are called secret which may not be uttered: for the
word used here is equivalent to our saying, "to hold a man's peace".

[Luke 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 8:14</span></span>

And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard,
(b) go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of
\[this\] life, and (c) bring no fruit to perfection.

\(b\) That is, as soon as they have heard the word, they go about their
business.

\(c\) They do not bring forth perfect and full fruit to the ripening:
or, they begin, but they do not bring to an end.

[Luke 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 8:15</span></span>

But that on the good ground are they, which in an (d) honest and good
heart, having heard the word, (e) keep \[it\], and bring forth fruit
with patience.

\(d\) Who seek not only to seem to be such, but are indeed so: so that
this word "honest" refers to the outward life, and the word "good"
refers to the good gifts of the mind.

\(e\) With much difficulty, for the devil and the flesh fight against
the Spirit of God, who is a new guest.

[Luke 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 8:16</span></span>

\(2\) No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth \[it\] under a bed; but setteth \[it\] on a candlestick, that
they which enter in may see the light.

\(2\) That which every man has received in private he ought to bestow to
the use and profit of all men.

[Luke 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 8:18</span></span>

\(3\) Take (f) heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him
shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even
that (g) which he seemeth to have.

\(3\) Heavenly gifts are lost when one is sparing with them, and
increase when one is liberal with them.

\(f\) That is, with what minds you come to hear the word, and how you
behave yourselves when you have heard it.

\(g\) Either to himself, or to others, or to both: for there are none so
proud as these fellows, if it were possible to see those things which
they disguise: neither are there those that deceive the simple more than
they do.

[Luke 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 8:19</span></span>

\(4\) Then came to him \[his\] mother and his brethren, and could not
come at him for the press.

\(4\) There is no relationship of flesh and blood among men so intimate
and upright as the band which is between Christ and those who embrace
him with a true faith.

[Luke 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 8:22</span></span>

\(5\) Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with his disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other
side of the lake. And they launched forth.

\(5\) It is expedient for us sometimes to come into extreme danger, as
though Christ was not with us, that we may have a better test, both of
his power, and also of our weakness.

[Luke 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 8:23</span></span>

But as they sailed he fell (h) asleep: and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake; and (i) they were filled \[with water\], and were in
jeopardy.

\(h\) Jesus fell asleep, and it appears that he was very fast asleep,
because they called him twice before he awoke.

\(i\) Not the disciples, but the ship.

[Luke 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 8:27</span></span>

\(6\) And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a
certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abode in \[any\] house, but in the tombs.

\(6\) Christ shows by casting out a legion of demons by his word alone
that his heavenly power was appointed to deliver men from the slavery of
the devil: but foolish men for the most part will not redeem this so
excellent grace freely offered unto them if it means the loss of even
the least of their wealth.

[Luke 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 8:29</span></span>

(For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For
oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains and in
fetters; and he brake the bands, (k) and was driven of the devil into
the wilderness.)

\(k\) By force and violence, as a horse when he is spurred.

[Luke 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 8:39</span></span>

Return to thine own house, and shew how great things God hath done unto
thee. And he went his way, and published (l) throughout the whole city
how great things Jesus had done unto him.

\(l\) That is, the city of the Gadarenes: and though Mark says that he
preached it in Decapolis, these accounts do not differ, for Pliny
records in lib. 5, chap. 18, that Gadara is a town of Decapolis: so that
Decapolis was partly on this side of Jordan, and partly on the other
side.

[Luke 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 8:40</span></span>

And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people (m)
\[gladly\] received him: for they were all waiting for him.

\(m\) The multitude was glad he had come again, and greatly rejoiced.

[Luke 8:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 8:41</span></span>

\(7\) And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of
the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus' feet, and besought him that he
would come into his house:

\(7\) Christ shows by a double miracle that he is Lord both of life and
death.

[Luke 8:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 8:43</span></span>

And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all
her (n) living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,

\(n\) All that she had to live upon.

[Luke 8:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 8:52</span></span>

And all wept, and (o) bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth.

\(o\) The word signifies to beat and strike, and is used in the
mournings and lamentations that are at burials, at which times men used
this type of behaviour.

[Luke 8:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#055.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">luk 8:55</span></span>

And her spirit came again, and she (p) arose straightway: and he
commanded to give her meat.

\(p\) The corpse was lying there, and then the young girl received life,
and rose out of the bed, that all the world might see that she was not
only restored to life, but also void of all sickness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 9](luk009.md)

</div>
