<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Malachi Index](mal.md)  
  [Previous](mal001)  [Next](mal003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001.md)

[Malachi 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 2:1</span></span>

And now, O ye (a) priests, this commandment \[is\] for you.

\(a\) He speaks mainly to them, but under them he includes the people
also.

[Malachi 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 2:2</span></span>

If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay \[it\] to heart, to give
glory (b) unto my name, saith the LORD of hosts, I will even send a
curse upon you, and I will curse your (c) blessings: yea, I have cursed
them already, because ye do not lay \[it\] to heart.

\(b\) To serve me according to my word.

\(c\) That is, the abundance of God's benefits.

[Malachi 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 2:3</span></span>

Behold, I will corrupt (d) your seed, and spread dung upon your faces,
\[even\] the (e) dung of your solemn feasts; and \[one\] shall take you
away with it.

\(d\) The seed you sow will come to no profit.

\(e\) You boast of your holiness, sacrifices, and feasts, but they will
turn to your shame and be as vile as dung.

[Malachi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 2:4</span></span>

And ye shall know that I have (f) sent this commandment unto you, that
my covenant might be with Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.

\(f\) The Priests objected against the Prophet that he could not remove
them without speaking against the priesthood, and the office established
by God by promise. But he shows that the office is nothing slandered,
when these villains and dung are called by their own names.

[Malachi 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 2:5</span></span>

My (g) covenant was with him of life and peace; and I (h) gave them to
him \[for\] the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before (i)
my name.

\(g\) He shows what were the two conditions of the covenant made with
the tribe of Levi on God's part, that he would give them long life and
felicity, and on their part, that they should faithfully serve him
according to his word.

\(h\) I commanded Levi a certain law to serve me.

\(i\) He served me and set forth my glory with all humility and
submission.

[Malachi 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 2:6</span></span>

The law of (k) truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his
lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity.

\(k\) He shows that the priests ought to have knowledge to instruct
others in the word of the Lord.

[Malachi 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 2:7</span></span>

For the priest's (l) lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth: for he \[is\] the (m) messenger of the LORD of
hosts.

\(l\) He is as the treasure house of God's word, and ought to give to
everyone according to their need, and not to reserve it for himself.

\(m\) Showing that whoever does not declare God's will, is not his
messenger, and priest.

[Malachi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 2:10</span></span>

Have we not all one (n) father? hath not one God created us? why do we
deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the
covenant of (o) our fathers?

\(n\) The Prophet accuses the ingratitude of the Jews toward God and
man: for seeing they were all born of one father Abraham, as God had
elected them to be his holy people, they ought neither to offend God nor
their brethren.

\(o\) By which they had bound themselves to God to be a holy people.

[Malachi 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 2:11</span></span>

Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in
Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the
LORD which he loved, and hath married the (p) daughter of a strange god.

\(p\) They have united themselves in marriage with those that are of
another religion.

[Malachi 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 2:12</span></span>

The LORD will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the
scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that (q) offereth an
offering unto the LORD of hosts.

\(q\) That is, the priest.

[Malachi 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 2:13</span></span>

And this have ye done again, (r) covering the altar of the LORD with
tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not
the offering any more, or receiveth \[it\] with good will at your hand.

\(r\) Yet cause the people to lament, because God does not regard their
sacrifices, so that they seem to sacrifice in vain.

[Malachi 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 2:14</span></span>

Yet ye say, (s) Wherefore? Because the LORD hath been witness between
thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt
treacherously: yet \[is\] she thy (t) companion, and the wife of thy (u)
covenant.

\(s\) This is another fault, of which he accuses them, that is, that
they broke the laws of marriage.

\(t\) As the one half of yourself.

\(u\) She that was united to you by a solemn covenant, and by the
invocation of God's name.

[Malachi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mal 2:15</span></span>

And did not (x) he make one? Yet had he the (y) residue of the spirit.
And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly (z) seed. Therefore take
heed to your (a) spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the
wife of his youth.

\(x\) Did not God make man and woman as one flesh and not many?

\(y\) By his power and strength he could have made many women for one
man.

\(z\) Those who should be born in lawful and moderate marriage, in which
is no excess of lusts.

\(a\) Contain yourselves within your bounds, and be sober in mind, and
bridle your affections.

[Malachi 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mal 2:16</span></span>

For the LORD, the God of Israel, saith that he (b) hateth putting away:
for \[one\] covereth (c) violence with his garment, saith the LORD of
hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not
treacherously.

\(b\) Not that he allows divorce, but of two faults he shows which is
the less.

\(c\) He thinks it sufficient to keep his wife still, even though he
takes others, and so as it were covers his fault.

[Malachi 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mal 2:17</span></span>

Ye have (d) wearied the LORD with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have
we wearied \[him\]? When ye say, Every one that doeth (e) evil \[is\]
good in the sight of the LORD, and he delighteth in them; or, Where
\[is\] the God of (f) judgment?

\(d\) You murmur against God, because he did not hear you as soon as you
called.

\(e\) In thinking that God favoured the wicked, and had no respect for
those that serve him.

\(f\) Thus they blasphemed God in condemning his power and justice,
because he did not judge according to their imaginings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 3](mal003.md)

</div>
