<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](lev027)  [Next](num002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

[Numbers 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 1:1</span></span>

And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of (a) Sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first \[day\] of the (b) second
month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
saying,

The Argument - In that as God has appointed that his Church in this
world shall be under the cross, both so they could learn not to put
their trust in worldly things, and also feel his comfort, when all other
help fails: he did not immediately bring his people, after their
departure out of Egypt, into the land which he had promised them: but
led them to and fro for the space of forty years, and kept them in
continual exercises before they enjoyed it, to try their faith, teach
them to forget the world, and to depend on him. Which trial greatly
profited, to discern the wicked and the hypocrites from the faithful and
true servants of God, who served him with pure heart, while the other,
preferring their earthly lusts to God's glory, and making religion to
serve their purpose, complained when they lacked enough to satisfy their
lusts, and despised those who God had appointed as rulers over them. By
reason of which they provoked God's terrible judgments against them, and
are set forth as a notable example for all ages, to beware how they
abuse God's word, prefer their own lusts to his will, or despise his
ministers. Nonetheless, God is always true to his promise, and governs
his by his Holy Spirit, that either they fall not to such
inconveniences, or else return to him quickly in true repentance: and
therefore he continues his graces toward them, he gives them ordinances
and instructions, as well for religion, as outward policy: he preserves
them against all deceit and conspiracy, and gives them many victories
against their enemies. To avoid all controversies that might arise, he
takes away the occasions, by dividing among all the tribes, both the
land which they had won, and that also which he had promised, as seemed
best to his godly wisdom.

\(a\) In the place in the wilderness that was near mount Sinai.

\(b\) Which is part of April and part of May.

[Numbers 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 1:4</span></span>

And with you there shall be a (c) man of every tribe; every one head of
the house of his fathers.

\(c\) That is, the chiefest man of every tribe.

[Numbers 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 1:5</span></span>

And these \[are\] the names of the men that shall (d) stand with you: of
\[the tribe of\] Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.

\(d\) And afflict you when you number the people.

[Numbers 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 1:16</span></span>

These \[were\] the renowned of the congregation, (e) princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.

\(e\) Or captains, and governors.

[Numbers 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 1:18</span></span>

And they assembled all the congregation together on the first \[day\] of
the second month, and they declared (f) their pedigrees after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

\(f\) In showing every man his tribe and his ancestors.

[Numbers 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">num 1:47</span></span>

But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among
(g) them.

\(g\) Which were warriors, but were appointed to the use of the
Tabernacle.

[Numbers 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 1:51</span></span>

And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down:
and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up:
and the (h) stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

\(h\) Whoever is not of the tribe of Levi.

[Numbers 1:53](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 1:53</span></span>

But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony,
that there be no wrath (i) upon the congregation of the children of
Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of
testimony.

\(i\) By not having due regard to the tabernacle of the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 2](num002)

</div>
