<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md)

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

But (1) there were false prophets also among the (a) people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction.

\(1\) As in times past there were two kinds of prophets, the one true
and the other false, so Peter tells them that there will be true and
false teachers in the Church, so much so that Christ himself will be
denied by some, who nonetheless will call him redeemer.

\(a\) Under the law, while the state and policy of the Jews was yet
standing.

[2 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 2:2</span></span>

\(2\) And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

\(2\) There shall not only be heresies, but also many followers of them.

[2 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 2:3</span></span>

\(3\) And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make (b)
merchandise of you: (4) whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not.

\(3\) Covetousness for the most part is a companion of heresy, and makes
trade in souls.

\(b\) They will abuse you, and sell you as they sell cattle in an
auction. (4) Comfort for the godly: God who cast the angels that fell
away from him, headlong into the darkness of hell, to eventually be
judged; and who burned Sodom, and saved Lot, will deliver his elect from
these errors, and will utterly destroy those unrighteous.

[2 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 2:4</span></span>

For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast \[them\] down to
(c) hell, and delivered \[them\] into (d) chains of darkness, to be
reserved unto judgment;

\(c\) So the Greeks called the deep dungeons under the earth, which
should be appointed to torment the souls of the wicked in.

\(d\) Bound them with darkness as with chains: and by darkness he means
that most miserable state of life that is full of horror.

[2 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 2:5</span></span>

And spared not the (e) old world, but saved Noah the eighth \[person\],
a (f) preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of
the ungodly;

\(e\) Which was before the flood: not that God made a new world, but
because the world seemed new.

\(f\) For one hundred and twenty years, he did not cease to warn the
wicked both by word and deed, of the wrath of God hanging over their
heads.

[2 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 2:8</span></span>

(For that righteous man dwelling among them, in (g) seeing and hearing,
(h) vexed \[his\] righteous soul from day to day with \[their\] unlawful
deeds;)

\(g\) Whatever way he looked, and turned his ears.

\(h\) He had a troubled soul, and being vehemently grieved, lived a
painful life.

[2 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 2:9</span></span>

The Lord (i) knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:

\(i\) Has been long practised in saving and delivering the righteous.

[2 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 2:10</span></span>

\(5\) But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise government. Presumptuous \[are they\],
selfwilled, they are not afraid to speak evil of (k) dignities.

\(5\) He goes to another type of corrupt men, who nonetheless are within
the bosom of the Church, who are wickedly given, and do seditiously
speak evil of the authority of magistrates (which the angels themselves
that minister before God, do not discredit.) A true and accurate
description of the Romish clergy (as they call it.)

\(k\) Princes and great men, be they ever so high in authority.

[2 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 2:12</span></span>

\(6\) But these, as natural brute beasts, (l) made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall
utterly perish in their (m) own corruption;

\(6\) An accurate description of the same persons, in which they are
compared to beasts who are made for destruction, while they give
themselves to fill their bellies: For there is no greater ignorance than
is in these men: although they most impudently find fault with those
things of which they know not: and it shall come to pass that they shall
destroy themselves as beasts with those pleasures with which they are
delighted, and dishonour and defile the company of the godly.

\(l\) Made to this end to be a prey to others: So do these men willingly
cast themselves into Satan's snares.

\(m\) Their own wicked conduct shall bring them to destruction.

[2 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 2:13</span></span>

And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, \[as\] they that count
it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots \[they are\] and blemishes,
sporting themselves with their own deceivings (n) while they feast with
you;

\(n\) When by being among the Christians in the holy banquets which the
Church keeps, they would seem by that to be true members of the Church,
yet they are indeed but blots on the Church.

[2 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 2:14</span></span>

\(7\) Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin;
beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous
practices; cursed children:

\(7\) He condemns those men, showing even in their behaviour and
countenance an unmeasurable lust, making trade of the souls of vain
persons, as men exercised in all the crafts of covetousness, to be
short, as men that sell themselves for money to curse the sons of God in
the same way Balaam did, whom the dumb beast reproved.

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

\(8\) These are (o) wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest; to whom the mist of (p) darkness is reserved for ever.

\(8\) Another note by which it may be known what manner of men they are,
because they have inwardly nothing but that which is utterly vain or
very harmful, although they make a show of some great goodness, yet they
shall not escape unpunished for it, because under pretence of false
freedom, they draw men into the most miserable slavery of sin.

\(o\) Who boast of knowledge and have nothing in them.

\(p\) Most gross darkness.

[2 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 2:18</span></span>

For when they speak great (q) swelling \[words\] of vanity, they (r)
allure through the lusts of the flesh, \[through much\] wantonness,
those that were (s) clean escaped from them who live in error.

\(q\) They deceive with vain and swelling words.

\(r\) They take them, as fish are taken with the hook.

\(s\) Unfeignedly and indeed, clean departed from idolatry.

[2 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 2:20</span></span>

\(9\) For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning.

\(9\) It is better to have never known the way of righteousness, than to
turn back from it to the old filthiness: and men that do so, are
compared to dogs and swine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003.md)

</div>
