<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001.md)

[Philippians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 4:1</span></span>

Therefore, (1) my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and (a)
crown, so stand fast in the (b) Lord, \[my\] dearly beloved.

\(1\) A rehearsal of the conclusion: that they bravely continue until
they have gotten the victory, trusting in the Lord's strength.

\(a\) My honour.

\(b\) In that unification of which the Lord is the bond.

[Philippians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 4:2</span></span>

\(2\) I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same
mind in the Lord.

\(2\) He also calls on some by name, partly because they needed private
exhortation, and partly also to stir up others to be more prompt and
ready.

[Philippians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 4:3</span></span>

And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which
laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and \[with\] other my
fellowlabourers, whose names \[are\] in the (c) book of life.

\(c\) God is said, after the manner of men, to have a book, in which the
names of his elect are written, to whom he will give everlasting life.
Ezekiel calls it the writing of the house of Israel, and the secret of
the Lord; ([Eze 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009).md).

[Philippians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">phi 4:4</span></span>

\(3\) Rejoice in the (d) Lord alway: \[and\] again I say, Rejoice.

\(3\) He adds particular exhortations: and the first is, that the joy of
the Philippians should not be hindered by any afflictions that the
wicked imagine and work against them.

\(d\) So is the joy of the world distinguished from our joy.

[Philippians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 4:5</span></span>

\(4\) Let your (e) moderation be known unto all men. (5) The Lord \[is\]
at hand.

\(4\) The second is, that taking all things in good part, they behave
themselves moderately with all men.

\(e\) Your quiet and settled mind. (5) The taking away of an objection:
we must not be anxious because of impatience, seeing that God is at hand
to give us help in time for all our miseries.

[Philippians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 4:6</span></span>

\(6\) Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with (f) thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto
God.

\(6\) The third is, that we are not too anxious for anything, but with
sure confidence give God thanks, and desire from him whatever we have
need of, that with a quiet conscience we may wholly and with all our
hearts submit ourselves to him.

\(f\) So David began very often with tears, but ended with thanksgiving.

[Philippians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 4:7</span></span>

And the (g) peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep
your (h) hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

\(g\) That great quietness of mind, which God alone gives in Christ.

\(h\) He divides the mind into the heart, that is, into that part which
is the seat of the will and affections, and into the higher part, by
which we understand and reason about matters.

[Philippians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 4:8</span></span>

\(7\) Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
(i) \[are\] honest, whatsoever things \[are\] just, whatsoever things
\[are\] pure, whatsoever things \[are\] lovely, whatsoever things
\[are\] of good report; if \[there be\] any virtue, and if \[there be\]
any praise, think on these things.

\(7\) A general conclusion, that as they have been taught both in word
and example, so they build their lives to the rule of all holiness and
righteousness.

\(i\) Whatever things are such that they beautify and set you apart with
a holy gravity.

[Philippians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 4:10</span></span>

\(8\) But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care
of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked
opportunity.

\(8\) He witnesses that their liberality was acceptable to him, with
which they helped him in his extreme poverty: but yet so moderating his
words, that he might declare himself void of all suspicion of
dishonesty, and that he has a mind content both with prosperity and
adversity, and to be short, that he rests himself only in the will of
God.

[Philippians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 4:11</span></span>

Not that I speak in respect of (k) want: for I have learned, in
whatsoever state I am, \[therewith\] to be content.

\(k\) As though I am speaking concerning my want.

[Philippians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 4:12</span></span>

I know both how to be (l) abased, and I know how to abound: every where
and in all things I am (m) instructed both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need.

\(l\) He uses a general word, and yet he speaks but of one type of
cross, which is poverty, for poverty commonly brings all types of
discomforts with it.

\(m\) This is a metaphor taken from holy things or sacrifices, for our
life is like a sacrifice.

[Philippians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 4:15</span></span>

\(9\) Now ye Philippians know also, that in the (n) beginning of the
gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me
as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.

\(9\) He witnesses that he remembers also their former benefits, and
again puts away sinister suspicion of greedy desire, in that that he
received nothing from anyone else.

\(n\) At the beginning, when I preached the Gospel among you.

[Philippians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 4:17</span></span>

\(10\) Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound
to your account.

\(10\) He witnesses again that he admits well of their benefit, not so
much for his own sake as for theirs, because they gave it not so much to
him, as they offered it to God as a sacrifice, of which the Lord himself
will not be forgetful.

[Philippians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 4:18</span></span>

But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus
the things \[which were sent\] from you, an (o) odour of a sweet smell,
a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God.

\(o\) He alludes to the sweet smelling savours that were offered under
the old Law.

[Philippians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 4:22</span></span>

All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of (p) Caesar's
household.

\(p\) Those who belong to the emperor Nero.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 1](col001.md)

</div>
