<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md)

[Revelation 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 14:1</span></span>

And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb (1) stood on the mount Sion, and with him
(2) an hundred forty \[and\] four thousand, having his Father's (3) name
written in their foreheads.

\(1\) The history of the Church of Christ being finished for more than a
1300 years at which time Boniface the eighth lived as has been said:
there remains the rest of the history of the conflicting or militant
church, from there to the time of the last victory in three chapters.
For first of all, as the foundation of the whole history, is described
the standing of the Lamb with his army and retinue in five verses, after
his worthy acts which he has done and yet does in most mighty manner,
while he overthrows Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, in the rest
of this chapter and in the two following. To the description of the
Lamb, are propounded three things: his situation, place and attendance:
for the rest are expounded in the former visions, especially in the
fifth chapter. (2) Prepared to do his office see ([Act
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056).md), in the midst of the church,
which mount Zion pictured before. (3) This retinue of the Lamb is
described first by divine mark (as before in) ([Rev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002).md) in this verse. Then by divine
occupation, in that every one in his retinue most earnestly and sweetly
([Rev 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002).md) glorify the Lamb with a
special song before God and his elect angels. Flesh and blood cannot
hear this song, nor understand, ([Rev
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003).md). Lastly by their deeds done
before, and their sanctification in that they were virgins, pure from
spiritual and bodily fornication, that is, from impiety and
unrighteousness. They followed the Lamb as a guide to all goodness,
cleaved to him and are holy to him, as by grace redeemed by him. In
truth and simplicity of Christ they have exercised all these things,
sanctimony of life, the guidance of the Lamb, a thankful remembrance of
redemption by him and finally (to conclude in a word) they are blameless
before the Lord, ([Rev 14:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004).md).

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

\(4\) And I saw (5) another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

\(4\) The other part (as I said in the first verse) See [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md) is of the acts of the Lamb, the
manner of which is delivered in two sorts, of his speech and of his
facts. His speeches are set forth to ([Rev
14:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007).md), and his facts to the
sixteenth chapter. In the speech of the Lamb, which is the word of the
Gospel, are taught in this place these things: The service of the godly
consisting inwardly of reverence towards God, and outwardly of the
glorifying of him: the visible sign of which is adoration ([Rev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007).md). The overthrowing of wicked
Babylon, ([Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).md) and the fall of
every one of the ungodly who worship the beast, ([Rev
14:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009).md). Finally the state of the
holy servants of God both present, ([Rev
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012).md) and to come, most blessed,
according to the promise of God in ([Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)). (5.md) This angel is a type or
figure of the good and faithful servants of God, whom God especially
from the time of Boniface the eighth has raised up to the proclaiming of
the gospel of Christ, both by preaching and by writing. So God first,
near the time of the same Boniface, used Peter Cassiodorus an Italian:
after, Arnold "de villa nova", a Frenchman, then Occam, dante, Petrarch,
after the "Johannes de rupe casa", a Franciscan: after again, John
Wycliff an Englishman, and so continually one or another to the
restoring of the truth, and enlarging of his Church.

[Revelation 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 14:7</span></span>

\(6\) Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the
hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

\(6\) That is, Babylon is destroyed by the sentence and judgment of God:
the execution of which John describes in chapter 18. This voice of the
ministers of Christ has continued since the time that Babylon (which is
Rome) has by deliberate counsel and malice questioned the light of the
gospel offered from God.

[Revelation 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 14:8</span></span>

And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the
(a) wrath of her fornication.

\(a\) Of her fornication, by which God was provoked to wrath.

[Revelation 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 14:9</span></span>

And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, (7) If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive \[his\] mark in his
forehead, or in his hand,

\(7\) That is, will not worship God alone, but will transfer his divine
honour to this beast, whether he do it with his heart, or counterfeiting
in show. "For he (says Christ) that denies me before men, him will I
deny before my Father and his angels" ([Mat
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032).md). This is the voice of the holy
ministry, which at this time is used of the holy and faithful servants
of God. For having now sufficiently found out the public obstinacy of
Babylon, they no longer work to speak out against the same: but to save
some particular members by terror (as Jude speaks) and to pluck them out
of the flame: or else lead them away by vehement commiseration of their
state, they set before them eternal death into which they rush unaware,
unless they return to God in time, but the godly who are of their own
flock, they exhort to patience, obedience and faith to others.

[Revelation 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 14:12</span></span>

\(8\) Here is the patience of the saints: here \[are\] they that keep
the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

\(8\) The patience, sanctification and justification by faith: the
results of which are rest, happiness and eternal glory in the heavenly
fellowship of God and his angels.

[Revelation 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 14:13</span></span>

And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed \[are\]
the dead which die (b) in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their (c) works do
follow them.

\(b\) That is, for the Lord.

\(c\) By works, is meant the reward which follows good works.

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

\(9\) And I looked, and behold a (10) white cloud, and upon the cloud
\[one\] sat like unto the Son of man, (11) having on his head a golden
crown, and in his hand a (12) sharp sickle.

\(9\) The second part of this chapter as I said See [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md), of the actions of Christ in
overthrowing Antichrist and his church by the Spirit of his divine
mouth. Seeing that having been called back by word both publicly and
privately to his duty and admonished of his certain ruin, he does not
cease to maintain and protect his own adherents, that they may serve
him: and to afflict the godly with most barbarous persecutions. Of those
things which Christ does, there are two forms: one common or general in
the rest of this chapter another specific against that savage and
rebellious beast and his worshippers in chapter fifteen and sixteen. The
common form is the calamity of wars, spread abroad through the whole
earth, and filling all things with blood and without respect of any
person. This is figured or shadowed in two types, of the harvest and
vintage. Have you seen how since the time that the light of the gospel
began to shine out, and since prophecy or preaching by the grace of God
was raised up again, horrible wars have been kindled in the world? how
much human flesh has been thrown to the earth by this divine reaping?
how much blood (alas for woe) has overflown for these 100 years almost?
all history cries out, and our age (if ever before) is now in horror by
reason of the rage of the sickle which Antichrist calls for. In this
place is the first type, that is of the harvest.

\(10\) Declaring his fierceness by his colour, like that which is in the
white or milk circle of heaven

\(11\) As one that shall reign from God, and occupy the place of Christ
in this miserable execution.

\(12\) That is, a most fit and convenient instrument of execution,
destroying all by showing and thrusting through: for who may stand
against God?

[Revelation 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 14:15</span></span>

\(13\) And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for
the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

\(13\) Christ gives a commandment in this verse, and the angel executes
it in ([Rev 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#016).md).

[Revelation 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 14:17</span></span>

\(14\) And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he
also having a sharp sickle.

\(14\) The other type (as I said in) See [Rev
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014.md) is the vintage: the manner of
which is the same as that which went before, except for this, that the
grape gathering is more exact in seeking out everything, then is the
harvest labour. This is therefore a more grievous judgment, both because
it succeeds the other, and because it is executed with great diligence.

[Revelation 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 14:20</span></span>

And the winepress was trodden without the city, (15) and blood came out
of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a
thousand \[and\] six hundred furlongs.

\(15\) That is, overflowed very deep, and very far and wide: the speech
is exaggeration to signify the greatness of the slaughter. These are
those pleasant fruits truly, of the contempt of Christ, and desiring of
Antichrist rather than him, which the miserable, mad and blind world
reaps at this time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015.md)

</div>
