<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev004)  [Next](rev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

[Revelation 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 5:1</span></span>

And (1) I saw in the (2) right hand of him that sat on the throne (3) a
book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

\(1\) A passing to the second principal cause, which is the Son of God,
God and man, the mediator of all, as the eternal word of God the Father,
manifest in the flesh. This chapter has two parts: one that prepares the
way to the revelation, by rehearsal of the occasions that occurred in
the first four verses ([Rev 5:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#002)).
Another, the history of the revelation of Christ, from there to the end
of the chapter ([Rev 5:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)). (2) That
is, in the very right hand of God. (3) Here are shown the occasions for
which the principal cause, and this revelation was also necessary: the
same are three, the first a present vision of the book of the counsels
of God, concerning the government of this whole world, which book is
said to be laid up with the Father as it were in his hand: but shut up
and unknown to all creature, in this verse. The second is a religious
desire of the angels of God to understand the mysteries of this book
([Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)) ([Rev
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#002)). The third is a lamentation of
John and all the godly, moved by the same desire ([Rev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004)) when they saw that it was an
impossible thing for any creature to do: which is declared in ([Rev
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#003)).

[Revelation 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 5:3</span></span>

\(4\) And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was
able to open the book, neither to look thereon.

\(4\) Thus neither of them that are in heaven, nor of them who are in
the earth. Now this counting of parts, is sufficient to the denying of
the whole; For of the creatures, one sort is in heaven, above the earth:
another in the earth, and another under the earth in the sea, as is
later declared in ([Rev 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013)).

[Revelation 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 5:5</span></span>

\(5\) And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the (6)
Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.

\(5\) The second part of this chapter, in which is set down the
revelation of the Son, as was said before. This part contains first a
history of the way God prepared John to understand this revelation, in
this verse. Secondly, the revelation of the Son himself, to ([Rev
5:6,7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)). Thirdly, the events of this
revelation in the rest of the chapter. The manner now, is here described
in two parts: one from outside him, by speech, in this verse: another
within, by opening the eyes of John (which before were shut) that he
might see, in the verse following. (6) That is, most mighty and most
approved Prince: according to the use of the Hebrew speech.

[Revelation 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 5:6</span></span>

And I beheld, and, lo, (7) in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of
God sent forth into all the earth.

\(7\) The sum of this revelation: Christ the mediator takes and opens
the book ([Rev 5:6,7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)). Therefore this
revelation describes the person of Christ. The person is described this
way: Christ the mediator between God, angels and men, as the eternal
word of God, and our redeemer: as the Lamb of God, standing as slain and
making intercession for us by the power and merit of his everlasting
sacrifice, is armed with the Spirit of God, that is, with the power and
wisdom of God effectually to the government of this whole world.

[Revelation 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 5:7</span></span>

\(8\) And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the throne.

\(8\) The fact of Christ the Mediator: that he comes to open it. That he
opened it is first expressed ([Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)).

[Revelation 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 5:8</span></span>

\(9\) And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four \[and\]
twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them (10)
harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the (a) prayers of
saints.

\(9\) Now follows the end, the events of the revelation previously
spoken of: that all the holy angels and men sang to him: both the chief
([Rev 5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009)) and common order of
angels ([Rev 5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011)) and of all
things created ([Rev 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013)) the princes
of both sorts agreeing to it, ([Rev
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014)).

\(10\) The symbols or signs of praise, sweet in savour and acceptable to
God;

\(a\) See ([Rev 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)).

[Revelation 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 5:9</span></span>

And they sung a (b) new (11) song, saying, (12) Thou art worthy to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation;

\(b\) No common song.

\(11\) That is, composed according to the present matter, the Lamb
having received the book as it were with his feet and opened it with his
horns, as it is said in the Song of Solomon

\(12\) The song of the nobles or princes standing by the throne,
consisting of a publication of the praise of Christ and a confirmation
of the same from his blessings, both which we have received from him (as
are the suffering of his death, our redemption upon the cross by his
blood, in this verse: and our communion with him in kingdom and
priesthood which long ago he has granted to us with himself and which we
hereafter hope to obtain, as our kingdom to come, in Christ, ([Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)).

[Revelation 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 5:11</span></span>

\(13\) And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about
the throne and the beasts and the elders: (14) and the number of them
was (c) ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;

\(13\) The consent of the common order of angels, answering in melody to
their princes that stood by the throne.

\(14\) A finite number, but almost infinite, as in ([Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)).

\(c\) This means a great number.

[Revelation 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 5:12</span></span>

Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to (d)
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and
glory, and blessing.

\(d\) To have all praise given to him, as to the mightest and wisest

[Revelation 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 5:13</span></span>

\(15\) And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them,
heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, \[be\] unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

\(15\) The consent of all the common multitude of the creatures.

[Revelation 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 5:14</span></span>

\(16\) And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four \[and\] twenty
elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.

\(16\) A confirmation of the praise given before, from the consent of
the nobles, expressed in word and signs, as once or twice before this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 6](rev006)

</div>
