<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev007)  [Next](rev009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001.md)

[Revelation 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 8:1</span></span>

And (1) when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven
about the space of half an hour.

\(1\) He returns to the history of the seals of the book, which the Lamb
opens. The seventh seal is the next sign, a precise commandment for the
execution of the most severe judgment of God on this wicked world, and
being understood by the seal, all things in heaven are silent, and in
horror through admiration, until the command to act is given by God to
the ministers of his wrath. So he moves to the third part which I spoke
of before in ([Rev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001).md) which is the
enacting of those evils with which God most justly determined to afflict
the world.

[Revelation 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 8:2</span></span>

\(2\) And I saw the seven angels which (a) stood before God; and to them
were given seven trumpets.

\(2\) Now follows the third branch of the common history, as even now I
said: which is the execution of the judgments of God on the world. This
is first generally prepared, down to ([Rev
8:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003).md). The administers of the
execution are seven angels: their instruments, trumpets, by which they
sound the alarm at the commandment of God. They are seven in number,
because it did not please God to deliver all his wrath on the rebellious
world at once, but at various times, in segments, and in slow order, and
as if unwilling to exercise his judgments on his creatures, so long
called on both by word and signs, if perhaps they should decide to
repent.

\(a\) Who appear before him as his ministers.

[Revelation 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 8:3</span></span>

\(3\) And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden
censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer
\[it\] with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was
before the throne.

\(3\) This is the great emperor, the Lord Jesus Christ, our King and
Saviour, who both makes intercession to God the Father for the saints,
filling the heavenly sanctuary with most sweet odour, and offering up
their prayers, as the calves and burnt sacrifices of their lips, in this
verse: in such manner as every one of them (so powerful is that sweet
savour of Christ, and the reliability of his sacrifice) are reconciled
with God and made most acceptable to him, ([Rev
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004).md). Then also out of his treasury
and from the same sanctuary, the fire of his wrath descends on the
world, adding also divine signs to it: and by that means (as of old the
heralds of Rome did) he proclaims war against the rebellious world.

[Revelation 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 8:4</span></span>

And the smoke of the incense, \[which came\] with the prayers of the
saints, (b) ascended up before God out of the angel's hand.

\(b\) Our prayers are worth nothing, unless the true and sweet savour of
that only sacrifice be especially and before all things with them, that
is to say, unless we are first of all justified through faith in his
Son, acceptable to him.

[Revelation 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 8:6</span></span>

\(4\) And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.

\(4\) This is the work of the administers. The angels, the administers
of Christ, by sounding trumpet and voice (for they are heralds)
effectually call forth the instruments of the wrath of God, through his
power. Until now, things have been general. Now the narration of
specific things follows, which the angels fix in number wrought in their
order, set out in ([Rev 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007).md) and is
concluded with the declaration of the event which followed these things
done in the world, and in chapters ten and eleven.

[Revelation 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 8:7</span></span>

\(5\) The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of
trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

\(5\) The first execution at the sound of the first angel, on the earth,
that is, the inhabitants of the earth (by metonymy) and on all the
fruits of it: as comparing this verse with the second part of ([Rev
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009).md) does plainly declare.

[Revelation 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 8:8</span></span>

\(6\) And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea
became blood;

\(6\) The second execution on the sea, in this verse and all things that
are in ([Rev 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009).md).

[Revelation 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 8:10</span></span>

\(7\) And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters;

\(7\) The third execution on the floods and fountains, that is, on all
fresh water, in this verse: the effect of which is, that many are
destroyed by the bitterness of the water, in the verse following.

[Revelation 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 8:11</span></span>

And the name of the star is called (8) Wormwood: and the third part of
the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because
they were made bitter.

\(8\) This is spoken by metaphor of a commonly known bitter herb: unless
perhaps a man following those that note the derivation of words would
rather explain it as an adjective for that which cannot be drunk because
of its bitterness, causing the liquid it is made into to be more bitter
than any man can drink.

[Revelation 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 8:12</span></span>

\(9\) And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not
for a third part of it, and the night likewise.

\(9\) The fourth execution on the lights of heaven, which give light to
this world.

[Revelation 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 8:13</span></span>

\(10\) And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of
the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three
angels, which are yet to sound!

\(10\) A lamentable prediction or foretelling of those parts of the
divine execution which yet are behind: which also is a passage to the
argument of the next chapter. Of all these things in a manner Christ
himself expressly foretold in ([Luk
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024).md) and they are common plagues
generally denounced, without particular note of time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 9](rev009.md)

</div>
