<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

[Revelation 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 6:1</span></span>

And (1) I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it
were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see.

\(1\) This is the second part of this first history (which I said was
common and of the whole world) of the works of God in the government of
all things. There are generally three parts to this: the forewarning,
the caution, and the execution of all the evils which God sends on this
world, which was scarcely postponed by him. The forewarning is set down
in this chapter, the caution for preserving the Church is in the next
chapter, and the execution is described in ([Rev
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009)) In each part of the forewarning,
there are three points: the distinct and express calling of John to
prepare himself to take knowledge of the things that are to be showed to
him in the opening of the seals, the sign, and the word expounding the
sign. Though the express calling of John is used in only four of the
signs, yet the same is also to be understood in the rest that follow.
The author of the forewarnings is the Lamb as that word of the Father
made the Mediator, opening the seals of the book. The instruments are
the angels in most of the visions, who explain the sign and the words of
it. Now this first verse contains an express calling of John to record
the opening of the first seal.

[Revelation 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 6:2</span></span>

And (2) I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a
bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and
to conquer.

\(2\) The first sign, joined with a declaration, is that because of the
sins and horrible rebellion of the world, God will invade the world: and
first of all will suddenly, mightily, and gloriously, as if with arrows
of pestilence from a distance, beat down the same as Judge, and triumph
over it as conqueror.

[Revelation 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 6:3</span></span>

And (3) when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast
say, Come and see.

\(3\) The second sign joined with words of declaration (after the
express calling of John as before) is, that God being provoked to wrath
by the obstinacy and hard heartedness of the world, not repenting for
the former plague: as setting on the same at hand, will cause disputes
among men, and will destroy the inhabitants of this world, by the swords
of one another.

[Revelation 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 6:5</span></span>

\(4\) And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast
say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat
on him had a pair of balances in his hand.

\(4\) The third sign with declaration is that God will destroy the world
with famine, removing all food: which is by Synecdoche comprehended in
wheat, barley, wine and oil.

[Revelation 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 6:6</span></span>

And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A (a) measure
of wheat for a penny, (5) and three measures of barley for a penny; and
\[see\] thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

\(a\) It is here signified how little grain there was, for the word used
here is a unit of measure for dry things, about an eighth of a bushel,
which was a typical daily ration given to servants. (5) I would rather
interpret and read the words this way, "And the wine and the oil you
will not distribute unjustly." In this sense likewise the wine and the
oil will be sold a very little for a penny. You will not distribute
unjustly, namely, when you measure out a very little for a great price:
so are the times evident: otherwise it would be true, as the wise man
says, that whoever withholds the grain will be cursed by the people;
([Pro 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)).

[Revelation 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 6:7</span></span>

\(6\) And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
fourth beast say, Come and see.

\(6\) The fourth sign joined with words of declaration is, that God will
devote a quarter of the world to death and hell, or the grave, by all
those methods at once, who individually and in order he had summoned to
change their minds. To these are also added the wild and cruel beasts of
the earth ([Lev 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#022)). Thus according
to his wisdom, God dispenses the treasures of his power, justly towards
all, mercifully towards the good, and with patience or longsuffering
towards his enemies.

[Revelation 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 6:9</span></span>

\(7\) And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they held:

\(7\) The sixth sign is that the holy martyrs who are under the altar,
by which they are sanctified, that is, received into the trust and
teaching of Christ (into whose hands they are committed) shall cry out
for the justice of God, in a holy zeal to advance his kingdom, and not
from any private disturbance of the mind, in this and the next verse,
and that God will comfort them in deed, sign and word; ([Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010)).

[Revelation 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 6:11</span></span>

And (8) white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said
unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they
\[were\], should be (b) fulfilled.

\(8\) As before ([Rev 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004)).

\(b\) Until their number is completed

[Revelation 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 6:12</span></span>

\(9\) And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was
a great earthquake; and the sun became black as (c) sackcloth of hair,
and the moon became as blood;

\(9\) The sixth sign, a narration, has two parts: the sign and the
event. The sign is that the earth, heaven, and the things that are in
them, for the horror of the sins of the world after those most heavy
warnings from God, and complaints of the saints shall be shaken most
severely, trembling in horrible manner, and losing their light, in this
verse: things falling from heaven ([Rev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013)) withdrawing themselves and
fleeing from the greatness of the trouble ([Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014)). So completely do all creatures
depend on the will of God, and content themselves in his glory.

\(c\) So they called in old time those woven works that were of hair.

[Revelation 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 6:15</span></span>

\(10\) And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every
free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains;

\(10\) The event of the sign before: that there is no man who will not
be amazed at that worldwide upheaval, fly away in fear and hide himself
in this verse, and wish to die, because of the exceeding horror of the
wrath of God, and of the Lamb, at which before he was amazed. Now this
confusion is not on the part of the godly but of the wicked, whose
portion is in this life; ([Psa 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)).
Not that sorrow which is according to God, which works repentance to
salvation, of which a man shall never repent him, but that worldly
sorrow that brings death; ([Co2 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009))
as their wishes declare: for this history of the whole world, is
separated from the history of the Church, as I have showed before. See
[Rev 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

[Revelation 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 6:16</span></span>

And said to the mountains and rocks, (11) Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb:

\(11\) These are words of those who despair of escape: of the cause of
this despair there are two arguments, the presence of God and the Lamb
provoked to wrath against the world, in this verse: and the awareness of
their own weakness, feeling that they are not able to survive the day of
the wrath of God ([Rev 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017)) as it is
said in ([Isa 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#027)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007)

</div>
