<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

What (1) shall we say then? Shall we continue in (a) sin, that grace may
abound?

\(1\) He passes now to another benefit of Christ, which is called
sanctification or regeneration.

\(a\) In that corruption, for though the guiltiness of sin, is not
imputed to us, yet the corruption still remains in us: and this is
killed little by little by the sanctification that follows
justification.

[Romans 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 6:2</span></span>

God forbid. (2) How shall we, that are (b) dead to sin, live any longer
therein?

\(2\) The benefits of justification and sanctification are always
inseparable joined together, and both of them proceed from Christ by the
grace of God: now sanctification is the abolishing of sin, that is, of
our natural corruption, whose place is taken by the cleanness and
pureness of a reformed nature.

\(b\) They are said by Paul to be dead to sin, who are made partakers of
the power of Christ, so that the natural corruption is dead in them,
that is, the power of it is removed, and it does not bring forth its
bitter fruits: and on the other hand, they are said to live to sin, who
are in the flesh, that is, whom the Spirit of God has not delivered from
the slavery of the corruption of nature.

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

\(3\) Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into (c) Jesus
Christ were baptized into his death?

\(3\) There are three parts of this sanctification: that is, the death
of the old man or sin, his burial, and the resurrection of the new man,
descending into us from the virtue of the death, burial, and
resurrection of Christ, of which benefit our baptism is a sign and
pledge.

\(c\) To the end that growing up as one with him, we should receive his
strength to extinguish sin in us, and to make us new men.

[Romans 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 6:4</span></span>

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead (d) by the glory of the Father, even
so (e) we also should walk in newness of life.

\(d\) So that Christ himself, being released of his infirmity and
weakness, might live in glory with God forever.

\(e\) And we who are his members rise for this purpose, that being made
partakers of the very same power, we should begin to lead a new life, as
though we were already in heaven.

[Romans 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 6:5</span></span>

\(4\) For if we have been planted together in the (f) likeness of his
death, we shall (g) be also \[in the likeness\] of \[his\] resurrection:

\(4\) The death of sin and the life of righteousness, or our ingrafting
into Christ, and growing up into one with him, cannot be separated by
any means, neither in death nor life: by which it follows that no man is
sanctified who lives still to sin, and therefore is no man made partaker
of Christ by faith, who does not repent and turn from his wickedness:
for as he said before, the law is not overturned but established by
faith.

\(f\) And by means of the strength which comes from him to us, so we die
to sin, as he is dead.

\(g\) For every day we become more perfect: for we will never be
perfectly sanctified, as long as we live here.

[Romans 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 6:6</span></span>

Knowing this, that our (h) old man is crucified with (i) \[him\], that
the (k) body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
(l) serve sin.

\(h\) Our entire nature, as we are conceived and born into this world
with sin, is called "old", partly by comparing that old Adam with
Christ, and partly also in respect of the deformed state of our corrupt
nature, which we change with a new.

\(i\) Our corrupt nature is regarded as belonging to Christ, not because
of what he has done, but by imputation.

\(k\) That wickedness which remains in us.

\(l\) The end of sanctification which we aim at, and will at length come
to, that is, when God will be all in all.

[Romans 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 6:7</span></span>

\(5\) For he that is dead is freed from sin.

\(5\) He proves it by the effects of death, comparing Christ the head
with his members.

[Romans 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 6:10</span></span>

For in that he died, he died unto sin (m) once: but in that he liveth,
he liveth unto (n) God.

\(m\) Once for all.

\(n\) With God.

[Romans 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 6:12</span></span>

\(6\) Let not sin therefore (o) reign in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.

\(6\) An exhortation to contend and strive with corruption and all the
effects of it.

\(o\) By reigning Paul means that principal and high rule which no man
strives against, and even if anyone does, it is in vain.

[Romans 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 6:13</span></span>

Neither (p) yield ye your (q) members \[as\] (r) instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that
are alive from the dead, and your members \[as\] instruments of
righteousness unto God.

\(p\) To sin, as to a Lord or tyrant.

\(q\) Your mind and all the powers of it.

\(r\) As instruments to commit wickedness with them.

[Romans 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 6:14</span></span>

\(7\) For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the
law, but under grace.

\(7\) He grants that sin is not yet so dead in us that it is utterly
extinct: but he promises victory to those that contend bravely, because
we have the grace of God given to us which works so that the law is not
now in us the power and instrument of sin.

[Romans 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 6:15</span></span>

\(8\) What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but
under grace? God forbid.

\(8\) To be under the law and under sin signifies the same thing, with
respect to whose who are not sanctified, and on the other hand to be
under grace and righteousness is in harmony with those that are
regenerated. Now these are contraries, so that one cannot agree with the
other: therefore let righteousness expel sin.

[Romans 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 6:17</span></span>

\(9\) But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have
obeyed from the heart that (s) form of doctrine which was delivered you.

\(9\) By nature we are slaves to sin and free from righteousness, but by
the grace of God we are made servants to righteousness, and therefore
free from sin.

\(s\) This type of speech has a special meaning in it: for he means by
this that the doctrine of the gospel is like a certain mould in which we
are cast, to be shaped and fashioned like it.

[Romans 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 6:20</span></span>

For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were (t) free from
righteousness.

\(t\) Righteousness had no rule over you.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

\(10\) What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the (u) end of those things \[is\] death.

\(10\) An exhortation to the study of righteousness and hatred of sin,
the contrary results of both being set down before us.

\(u\) The reward or payment.

[Romans 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 6:23</span></span>

\(11\) For the wages of sin \[is\] death; but the gift of God \[is\]
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

\(11\) Death is the punishment due to sin, but we are sanctified freely,
to everlasting life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
