<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom012)  [Next](rom014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)

[Romans 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 13:1</span></span>

Let (1) every (a) soul be subject unto the higher (2) powers. (3) For
there is no power but of God: the powers that be are (b) ordained of
God.

\(1\) Now he distinctly shows what subjects owe to their magistrates,
that is, obedience: from which he shows that no man is free: and the
obedience we owe is such that it is not only due to the highest
magistrate himself, but also even to the lowest, who has any office
under him.

\(a\) Indeed, though an apostle, though an evangelist, though a prophet;
Chrysostom. Therefore the tyranny of the pope over all kingdoms must be
thrown down to the ground. (2) A reason taken from the nature of the
thing itself: for to what purpose are they placed in higher degree, but
in order that the inferiors should be subject to them? (3) Another
argument of great force: because God is author of this order: so that
those who are rebels ought to know that they make war with God himself:
and because of this they purchase for themselves great misery and
calamity.

\(b\) Be distributed: for some are greater, some smaller.

[Romans 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 13:3</span></span>

\(4\) For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. (5)
Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shalt have praise of the same:

\(4\) The third argument, taken from the reason for which they were
made, which is that they are to be most profitable: because God by this
means preserves the good and bridles the wicked: by which words the
magistrates themselves are put in mind of that duty which they owe to
their subjects. (5) An excellent way to bear this yoke, not only without
grief, but also with great profit.

[Romans 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 13:4</span></span>

For he is the minister of God to thee for good. (6) But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he
is the minister of God, a (c) revenger to \[execute\] wrath upon him
that doeth evil.

\(6\) God has armed the magistrate even with an avenging sword.

\(c\) By whom God avenges the wicked.

[Romans 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 13:5</span></span>

\(7\) Wherefore \[ye\] must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
(d) also for conscience sake.

\(7\) The conclusion: we must obey the magistrate, not only for fear of
punishment, but much more because (although the magistrate has no power
over the conscience of man, yet seeing he is God's minister) he cannot
be resisted by any good conscience.

\(d\) So far as we lawfully may: for if unlawful things are commanded to
us, we must answer as Peter teaches us, "It is better to obey God than
men."

[Romans 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 13:6</span></span>

\(8\) For this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

\(8\) He sums up the main thing, in which consists the obedience of
subjects.

[Romans 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 13:7</span></span>

Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute \[is due\];
custom to whom custom; fear to whom (e) fear; honour to whom (f) honour.

\(e\) Obedience, and that from the heart.

\(f\) Reverence, which (as we have reason) we must give to the
magistrate.

[Romans 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 13:8</span></span>

\(9\) Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: (10) for he that
loveth another hath fulfilled the (g) law.

\(9\) He shows how very few judgments need to be executed, that is, if
we so order our life as no man may justly require anything from us,
besides only that which we owe one to another, by the perpetual law of
charity.

\(10\) He commends charity as a concise statement of the whole law.

\(g\) Has not only done one commandment, but performed generally that
which the law commands.

[Romans 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 13:9</span></span>

For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not
covet; and if \[there be\] any other commandment, it is (h) briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

\(h\) For the whole law commands nothing else but that we love God and
our neighbour. But seeing that Paul speaks here of the duties we owe one
to another, we must restrain this word "law" to the second table of the
ten commandments.

[Romans 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 13:11</span></span>

\(11\) And that, knowing the time, that now \[it is\] high time to awake
out of sleep: for now \[is\] our salvation nearer than when we believed.

\(11\) An application taken from the circumstances of the time: which
also itself puts us in mind of our duty, seeing that this remains, after
which the darkness of ignorance and wicked affections by the knowledge
of God's truth is driven out of us, that we order our life according to
that certain and sure rule of all righteousness and honesty, being fully
grounded upon the power of the Spirit of Christ.

[Romans 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 13:12</span></span>

The night is far spent, the day is (i) at hand: let us therefore cast
off the works (k) of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.

\(i\) In other places we are said to be in the light, but yet so that it
does not yet appear what we are, for as yet we see but as it were in the
twilight.

\(k\) That kind of life which those lead that flee the light.

[Romans 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 13:14</span></span>

But (l) put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to \[fulfil\] the lusts \[thereof\].

\(l\) To put on Christ is to possess Christ, to have him in us, and us
in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 14](rom014.md)

</div>
