<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

[Romans 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 12:1</span></span>

I beseech (1) you therefore, brethren, (a) by the mercies of God, that
ye (b) present your (c) bodies a (d) living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
unto God, \[which is\] your (e) reasonable service.

\(1\) The fourth part of this epistle, which after the finishing of the
principal points of Christian doctrine, consists in the declaring of
precepts of the Christian life. And first of all he gives general
precepts and grounds: the principal of which is this, that every man
consecrate himself wholly to the spiritual service of God, and do as it
were sacrifice himself, trusting the grace of God.

\(a\) By this preface he shows that God's glory is the utmost goal of
everything we do.

\(b\) In times past the sacrifices were presented before the altar: but
now the altar is everywhere.

\(c\) Yourselves: in times past other bodies besides our own, but now
our own must be offered.

\(d\) In times past, dead sacrifices were offered, but now we must offer
those which have the spirit of life in them.

\(e\) Spiritual.

[Romans 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 12:2</span></span>

\(2\) And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your (f) mind, that ye may prove what \[is\] that good, and
acceptable, and perfect, will of God.

\(2\) The second precept is this, that we do not take other men's
opinions or conduct as a rule for life, but that we wholly renounce this
world, and set before us as our mark the will of God as is manifested
and revealed to us in his word.

\(f\) This is the reason that there is no room left for reason, which
the heathen philosophers place as a queen in a castle, nor for man's
free will, which the popish scholars dream of, because the mind must be
renewed; ([Eph 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018); [Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003); [Eph
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017); [Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021))

[Romans 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 12:3</span></span>

\(3\) For I (g) say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that
is among you, not (h) to think \[of himself\] more highly than he ought
to think; but to think (i) soberly, according as God hath dealt to every
man the measure of (k) faith.

\(3\) Thirdly, he admonishes us very earnestly that every man keep
himself within the bounds of his calling, and that every man be wise
according to the measure of grace that God has given him.

\(g\) I charge.

\(h\) That he does not please himself too much, as those do who persuade
themselves they know more than they actually do.

\(i\) We will be sober if we do not take that upon us which we do not
have, and if we do not brag of that which we do have.

\(k\) By faith he means the knowledge of God in Christ, and the gifts
which the Holy Spirit pours upon the faithful.

[Romans 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 12:4</span></span>

\(4\) For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not
the same office:

\(4\) There are two reasons for the previous precept: the first is
because God has not committed everything to be done by every man: and
therefore he does backwardly, and unprofitably, and also to the great
disservice of others, wearying himself and others, who passes the bounds
of his calling: the second is because this diversity and inequality of
vocations and gifts results in our being benefitted: seeing that this is
therefore instituted and appointed, so that we should be bound one to
another. From which it follows that no man ought to be grieved at this,
seeing that the use of every private gift is common.

[Romans 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 12:6</span></span>

\(5\) Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given
to us, whether prophecy, \[let us prophesy\] according to the (l)
proportion of faith;

\(5\) That which he spoke before in general, he applies particularly to
the holy functions, in which men are in greater danger if they sin. And
he divides them into two types: that is, into prophets and deacons: and
again he divides the prophets into teachers and pastors. And of deacons
he makes three types: that is, those who are to be (as it were)
treasurers of the Church, whom he calls deacons in the most proper
sense: the others to be the governors of discipline, who are called
seniors or elders: the third, those who properly serve in the help of
the poor, such as the widows.

\(l\) That every man observe the measure of that which is revealed to
him.

[Romans 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 12:7</span></span>

Or ministry, \[let us wait\] on \[our\] ministering: or he that (m)
teacheth, on teaching;

\(m\) Whose office is only to expound the scriptures.

[Romans 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 12:8</span></span>

Or he that (n) exhorteth, on exhortation: he that (o) giveth, \[let him
do it\] with simplicity; he that (p) ruleth, with diligence; he that (q)
sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

\(n\) Who in other passages is called the "pastor".

\(o\) That is, the alms, that he distributes them faithfully, and
without any favouritism.

\(p\) The elders of the church.

\(q\) Those that are occupied with the care of the poor must do it with
cheerfulness, lest they add sorrow upon sorrow.

[Romans 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 12:9</span></span>

\(6\) \[Let\] love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil;
cleave to that which is good.

\(6\) Now he comes to the duties of the second table of the ten
commandments, which he derives from charity, which is as it were the
fountain of them all. And he defines Christian charity as sincerity,
hatred of evil, earnest study of good things, good affection to help our
neighbour, and whose final goal is the glory of God.

[Romans 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 12:11</span></span>

Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; (r) serving the Lord;

\(r\) This verse is well put, for it makes a distinction between
Christian duties, and philosophical duties.

[Romans 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 12:12</span></span>

\(7\) Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in
prayer;

\(7\) He reckons up different virtues together with their effects, that
is, hope, patience in tribulation, evenness of mind, continuance in
prayer, liberality towards the saints, hospitality, moderation of mind
even in helping our enemies, feeling the same as others in their
adversity as well as their prosperity, modesty, endeavouring to maintain
honest agreement as much as we are able with all men, which cannot be
extinguished by any man injuring us.

[Romans 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 12:13</span></span>

\(s\) Distributing to the (t) necessity of saints; given to hospitality.

\(s\) A true rule of charity, that we feel for other men's wants as we
do for our own, and having that feeling, to help them as much as we can.

\(t\) Not upon pleasures and needless duties, but upon necessary uses.

[Romans 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 12:16</span></span>

\[Be\] of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of (u) low estate. Be not (x) wise in your own
conceits.

\(u\) There is nothing that disrupts harmony as much as seeking glory,
when every man detests a base estate, and ambitiously seeks to be
exalted.

\(x\) Do not be puffed up with an opinion of your own wisdom.

[Romans 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 12:20</span></span>

Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink:
for in so doing thou shalt heap (y) coals of fire on his head.

\(y\) In this manner Solomon points out the wrath of God which hangs
over a man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
