<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom001)  [Next](rom003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)

[Romans 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 2:1</span></span>

Therefore (1) thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for
thou that judgest doest the same things.

\(1\) He convicts those who would seem to be exempt from the rest of men
(because they reprehend other men's faults), and says that they are
least of all to be excused, for if they were searched well and carefully
(as God surely does) they themselves would be found guilty in those
things which they reprehend and punish in others: so that in condemning
others, they pronounce sentence against themselves.

[Romans 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 2:2</span></span>

But we (a) are sure that the judgment of God is according to (b) truth
against them which commit such things.

\(a\) Paul alleges no places of scripture, for he reasons generally
against all men: but he brings reasons such that every man is persuaded
by them in his mind, so that the devil himself is not able to completely
pluck them out.

\(b\) Considering and judging things correctly, and not by any outward
show.

[Romans 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 2:4</span></span>

\(2\) Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and
longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
repentance?

\(2\) A vehement and grievous crying out against those that please
themselves because they see more than others do, and yet are in no way
better than others are.

[Romans 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 2:5</span></span>

But after thy hardness and impenitent heart (c) treasurest up unto
thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God;

\(c\) While you are giving yourself to pleasures, thinking to increase
your goods, you will find God's wrath.

[Romans 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 2:6</span></span>

\(3\) Who will render to every man according to his deeds:

\(3\) The foundation of the former disputation, that both the Jews and
Gentiles together have need of righteousness.

[Romans 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 2:7</span></span>

To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for (d) glory and
honour and immortality, eternal life:

\(d\) Glory which follows good works, which he does not lay out before
us as though there were any that could attain to salvation by his own
strength, but, he lays this condition of salvation before us, which no
man can perform, to bring men to Christ, who alone justifies the
believers, as he himself concludes; see ([Rom
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)).

[Romans 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 2:8</span></span>

But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the (e) truth, but
obey unrighteousness, (f) indignation and wrath,

\(e\) By "truth" he means the knowledge which we naturally have.

\(f\) God's indignation against sinners, which will quickly be kindled.

[Romans 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 2:11</span></span>

For there is no (g) respect of persons with God.

\(g\) God does not judge men either by their blood or by their country,
either to receive them or to cast them away.

[Romans 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 2:12</span></span>

\(4\) For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without
law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law;

\(4\) He applies that general accusation against mankind particularly
both to the Gentiles and to the Jews.

[Romans 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 2:13</span></span>

\(5\) (For not the hearers of the law \[are\] just before God, but the
doers of the law shall be (h) justified.

\(5\) He prevents an objection which might be made by the Jews whom the
law does not excuse, but condemn, because it is not the hearing of the
law that justifies, but rather the keeping of it.

\(h\) Will be pronounced just before God's judgment seat: which is true
indeed if any one could be found that had fulfilled the law: but seeing
that Abraham was not justified by the law, but by faith, it follows that
no man can be justified by works.

[Romans 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 2:14</span></span>

\(6\) For when the Gentiles, which have (i) not the law, do by (k)
nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a
law unto themselves:

\(6\) He prevents an objection which might be made by the Gentiles, who
even though they do not have the law of Moses, yet they have no reason
why they may excuse their wickedness, in that they have something
written in their hearts instead of a law, as men do who forbid and
punish some things as wicked, and command and commend other things as
good.

\(i\) Not that they are without any law, but rather the law of the Jews.

\(k\) Command honest things, and forbid dishonest.

[Romans 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 2:15</span></span>

Which shew the work of the law (l) written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and \[their\] thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another;)

\(l\) This knowledge is a natural knowledge.

[Romans 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 2:16</span></span>

\(7\) In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to (m) my gospel.

\(7\) God defers many judgments, which he will nonetheless execute at
their convenient time by Jesus Christ, with a most candid examination,
not only of words and deeds, but of thoughts also, be they ever so
hidden or secret.

\(m\) As my doctrine witnesses, which I am appointed to preach.

[Romans 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 2:17</span></span>

\(8\) Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest
thy boast of God,

\(8\) He proves by the testimony of David, and the other prophets, that
God bestows greatest benefits upon the Jews, in giving them also the
law, but that they are the most unthankful and unkind of all men.

[Romans 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 2:18</span></span>

And knowest \[his\] will, and (n) approvest the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the law;

\(n\) Can test and discern what things swerve from God's will.

[Romans 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 2:20</span></span>

An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the (o)
form of knowledge and of the truth in the (p) law.

\(o\) The way to teach and to form others in the knowledge of the truth.

\(p\) As though he said that the Jews under a pretence of an outward
serving of God, attributed all to themselves, when in reality they did
nothing less than observe the Law.

[Romans 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 2:25</span></span>

\(9\) For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if
thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.

\(9\) He precisely prevents their objection, who set a holiness in
circumcision, and the outward observation of the law: so that he shows
that the outward circumcision, if it is separated from the inward, does
not justify, and also condemns those who are indeed circumcised, of whom
it is required that they fulfil that which circumcision signifies, that
is to say, cleanness of the heart and the whole life according to the
commandment of the law, so that if there is a man uncircumcised
according to the flesh, who is circumcised in heart, he is far better
and to be more regarded than any Jew that is circumcised according to
the flesh only.

[Romans 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 2:26</span></span>

Therefore if the (q) uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law,
shall not his (r) uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?

\(q\) This is the figure of speech metonymy, and means "uncircumcised".

\(r\) The state and condition of the uncircumcised.

[Romans 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 2:27</span></span>

And shall not (s) uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the
law, judge thee, who by the (t) letter and circumcision dost transgress
the law?

\(s\) He who is uncircumcised by nature and race.

\(t\) Paul often contrasts the letter against the Spirit: but in this
place, the circumcision which is according to the letter is the cutting
off of the foreskin, but the circumcision of the Spirit is the
circumcision of the heart, that is to say, the spiritual result of the
ceremony is true holiness and righteousness, by which the people of God
are known from profane and heathen men.

[Romans 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 2:28</span></span>

For he is not a Jew, which is one (u) outwardly; neither \[is that\]
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh:

\(u\) By the outward ceremony only.

[Romans 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 2:29</span></span>

But he \[is\] a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision \[is that\]
of the heart, in the (x) spirit, \[and\] not in the letter; whose praise
\[is\] not of men, but of God.

\(x\) Whose power is inward, and in the heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 3](rom003)

</div>
