<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom009)  [Next](rom011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

[Romans 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 10:1</span></span>

Brethren, (1) my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved.

\(1\) Purposing to set forth in the Jews an example of marvellous
obstinacy, he uses this declaration.

[Romans 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 10:3</span></span>

\(2\) For they (a) being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going
about to (b) establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.

\(2\) The first entrance into the calling to salvation, is to renounce
our own righteousness by faith, which God freely offers us in the
Gospel.

\(a\) The ignorance of the law (which we ought to know) does not excuse
anyone before God, especially those that are of his household.

\(b\) Ignorance always has pride associated with it.

[Romans 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 10:4</span></span>

\(3\) For Christ \[is\] the (c) end of the law for righteousness to (d)
every one that believeth.

\(3\) The proof: the law itself points to Christ, that those who believe
in him should be saved. Therefore the calling to salvation by the works
of the law, is vain and foolish: but Christ is offered for salvation to
every believer.

\(c\) The end of the law is to justify those that keep the law: but
seeing that we do not observe the law through the fault of our flesh, we
do not attain this end: but Christ heals this disease, for he fulfils
the law for us.

\(d\) Not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles.

[Romans 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 10:5</span></span>

\(4\) For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, That
the man which doeth those things shall live by them.

\(4\) That the law is points to Christ and is inclined to him is
manifestly proved, because it propounds such a condition as can be and
is fulfilled, by none but Christ alone: which being imputed to us by
faith, our conscience is quieted, so that now no man can ask, "Who can
ascend up into heaven, or bring us from hell?", seeing that the gospel
teaches that both of these is done by Christ and that for their sake's,
who with true faith embrace him who calls them.

[Romans 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 10:6</span></span>

But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, (e) Say
not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring
Christ down \[from above\]:)

\(e\) Do not think to yourself, as men that are doubting do.

[Romans 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 10:8</span></span>

\(5\) But what saith it? The (f) word is nigh thee, \[even\] in thy
mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach;

\(5\) Calling comes by the word preached.

\(f\) By "word", Moses understood the law which the Lord proclaimed with
his own voice: and Paul applied it to the preaching of the Gospel, which
was the perfection of the law.

[Romans 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 10:9</span></span>

\(6\) That if thou shalt (g) confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shalt believe in thine heart that (h) God hath raised him from the dead,
thou shalt be saved.

\(6\) That is indeed true faith which is settled not only in the head,
but also in the heart of man, of which we also give testimony by our
outward life, and which serves Christ as our one and only Saviour, even
as he sets forth himself in his word.

\(g\) If you profess plainly, sincerely, and openly, that you take Jesus
alone to be thy Lord and Saviour.

\(h\) The Father, who is said to have raised the Son from the dead: and
this is not spoken to exclude the divinity of the Son, but to set forth
the Father's plan, with regard to our redemption in the resurrection of
the Son.

[Romans 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 10:10</span></span>

For with the heart man (i) believeth unto righteousness; and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation.

\(i\) Faith is said to justify, and furthermore seeing the confession of
the mouth is an effect of faith, and confession in the way to come to
salvation, it follows that faith is also said to save.

[Romans 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 10:11</span></span>

\(7\) For the scripture saith, Whosoever (k) believeth on him shall not
be ashamed.

\(7\) Now he proves the other part which he propounded before in the
fourth verse, that is, that Christ calls whoever he wishes without any
difference, and this confirms by a twofold testimony, ([Rom
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)).

\(k\) To believe in God is to yield and consent to God's promise of our
salvation by Christ, and that not only in general, but when we know that
the promises pertain to us, from which arises a sure trust.

[Romans 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 10:13</span></span>

\(8\) For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

\(8\) True calling upon the name of God is the testimony of true faith,
and true faith of true vocation or calling, and true calling of true
election.

[Romans 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 10:14</span></span>

How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? (9) and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher?

\(9\) That is, true faith, which seeks God in his word, and that
preached: and this preaching God has appointed in the Church.

[Romans 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 10:16</span></span>

\(10\) But they have not (l) all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith,
Lord, who hath believed our report?

\(10\) Wherever faith is, there is also the word, but not the opposite,
namely, wherever the word is, there may not necessarily be faith: for
many refuse and reject the word.

\(l\) He says this because of the Jews.

[Romans 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 10:17</span></span>

\(11\) So then faith \[cometh\] by hearing, and hearing by the (m) word
of God.

\(11\) A conclusion of the former discussion: we must ascend from faith
to our calling, for by our calling we came to the testimony of our
election.

\(m\) By God's commandment.

[Romans 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 10:18</span></span>

\(12\) But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

\(12\) An objection: if calling is a testimony of election, were not the
Jews called? Why should I not grant that, says the apostle, seeing that
there is no nation which has not been called? Much less can I say that
the Jews were not called.

[Romans 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 10:19</span></span>

\(13\) But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, I will provoke
you to jealousy by (n) \[them that are\] no people, \[and\] by a foolish
nation I will anger you.

\(13\) The defender and maintainer of the Jew's cause goes on still to
ask whether the Jews also did not know God, the one who called them.
Isaiah, says the apostle, denies it: and witnesses that the Gospel was
taken from them and given to the Gentiles, because the Jews rejected it.
In addition the apostle teaches that the outward and universal calling,
which is set forth by the creation of the world, is not sufficient for
the knowledge of God: indeed, and that the particular calling also which
is by the preaching of the word of God, is of itself of little or no
efficacy, unless it is apprehended or laid hold of by faith, which is
the gift of God: otherwise by unbelief it is made unprofitable, and that
by the only fault of man, who can pretend no ignorance.

\(n\) He calls all profane people "\[them that are\] no people", as they
are not said to live but to die, who are appointed for everlasting
condemnation.

[Romans 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 10:20</span></span>

But Esaias is very (o) bold, and saith, I was found of them that sought
me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.

\(o\) Speaks without fear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 11](rom011)

</div>
