<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

[1 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 2:1</span></span>

I (1) exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, \[and\] giving of thanks, be made for all men;

\(1\) Having dispatched those things which pertain to doctrine, he
speaks now in the second place of the other part of the ministry of the
word, that is, of public prayers. And first of all, answering the
question for whom we ought to pray, he teaches that we must pray for all
men, and especially for every type of magistrate. And this thing was at
that time somewhat doubted of, seeing that kings, indeed, and most of
the magistrates, were at that time enemies of the Church.

[1 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 2:2</span></span>

For kings, and \[for\] all that are in authority; (2) that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and (a) honesty.

\(2\) An argument taken of the end: that is, because magistrates are
appointed to this end, that men might peaceably and quietly live in all
godliness and honesty: and therefore we must commend them especially to
God, that they may faithfully execute so necessary an office.

\(a\) This word includes every type of duty, which is to be used by men
in all their affairs.

[1 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 2:3</span></span>

\(3\) For this \[is\] good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Saviour;

\(3\) Another argument, why churches or congregations ought to pray for
all men, without any difference of nation, type, age, or order: that is,
because the Lord by calling of all types, indeed sometimes those that
are the greatest enemies to the Gospel, will have his Church gathered
together after this manner, and therefore prayer is to be made for all.

[1 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 2:5</span></span>

\(4\) For \[there is\] one God, and one mediator between God and men,
the (b) man Christ Jesus;

\(4\) God should not otherwise be manifested to be the only God of all
men, unless he should show his goodness in saving all types of men.
Neither should Christ be seen to be the only mediator between God and
all types of men, by having taken upon him that nature of man which is
common to all men, unless he had satisfied for all types of men, and
made intercession for all.

\(b\) Christ Jesus who was made man.

[1 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 2:6</span></span>

Who gave himself a ransom for all, (5) to be testified in due time.

\(5\) A confirmation, because even to the Gentiles is the secret of
salvation now revealed and made manifest, the apostle himself being
appointed for this office, which he faithfully and sincerely executes.

[1 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 2:7</span></span>

Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth
in Christ, \[and\] lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in (c) faith and
verity.

\(c\) Faithfully and sincerely: and by faith he means wholesome and
sound doctrine, and by truth, an upright and sincere handling of it.

[1 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 2:8</span></span>

\(6\) I will therefore that men pray every where, (d) lifting up holy
hands, without (e) wrath and (f) doubting.

\(6\) He has spoken of the persons for whom we must pray: and now he
teaches that the difference of places is taken away: for in times past,
only one nation, and in one certain place, came together to public
service. But now churches or congregations are gathered together
everywhere, (orderly and decently), and men come together to serve God
publicly with common prayer. Neither must we strive for the nation, or
for the purification of the body, or for the place, but for the mind, to
have it clear from all offence, and full of sure trust and confidence.

\(d\) He talks of the sign for the thing itself, the lifting up of hands
for the calling upon God.

\(e\) Without the griefs and offences of the mind, which hinder us from
calling upon God with a good conscience.

\(f\) Doubting, which is against faith; ([Jam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006)).

[1 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 2:9</span></span>

\(7\) In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array;

\(7\) Thirdly, he appoints women to learn in the public assemblies with
silence and modesty, being dressed pleasantly, without any
overindulgence or excess in their clothing.

[1 Timothy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 2:12</span></span>

But I suffer not a woman to teach, (8) nor to usurp authority over the
man, but to be in silence.

\(8\) The first argument, why it is not lawful for women to teach in the
congregation, because by this means they would be placed above men, for
they would be their masters: and this is against God's ordinance.

[1 Timothy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 2:13</span></span>

\(9\) For Adam was first formed, then Eve.

\(9\) He proves this ordinance of God, by which the woman is subject to
man, first because God made the woman after man, for man's sake.

[1 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 2:14</span></span>

\(10\) And Adam was not (g) deceived, but the woman being deceived was
in the transgression.

\(10\) Then, because after sin, God gave the woman this punishment,
because the man was deceived by her.

\(g\) Adam was deceived, but through his wife's means, and therefore she
is worthily for this reason subject to her husband, and ought to be.

[1 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 2:15</span></span>

\(11\) Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.

\(11\) He adds a comfort by the way, that their subjection does not
hinder women from being saved as well as men, if they behave themselves
in those duties of marriage in a holy and modest manner, with faith and
charity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003)

</div>
