<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

The burden of the word of the LORD in the land of (a) Hadrach, and
Damascus \[shall be\] the (b) rest of it: when the (c) eyes of man, as
of all the tribes of Israel, \[shall be\] toward the LORD.

\(a\) By which he means Syria.

\(b\) God's anger will remain upon their chief city, and not spare even
as much as that.

\(c\) When the Jews will convert and repent, then God will destroy their
enemies.

[Zechariah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 9:2</span></span>

And Hamath also shall border (d) by it; Tyre, and Zidon, though it be
(e) very wise.

\(d\) That is, by Damascus: meaning, that Harnath or Antiochia would be
under the same rod and plague.

\(e\) He secretly shows the cause of their destruction, because they
deceived all others by their craft and subtilty, which they cloaked with
this name of wisdom.

[Zechariah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 9:4</span></span>

Behold, the LORD will cast her out, and he will smite her (f) power in
the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.

\(f\) Though those of Tyre think themselves invincible by reason of the
sea that surrounds them, yet they will not escape God's judgments.

[Zechariah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 9:6</span></span>

And a (g) bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of
the Philistines.

\(g\) Meaning, that all would be destroyed, save a very few, that would
remain as strangers.

[Zechariah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 9:7</span></span>

And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations
from between his (h) teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, \[shall be\]
for our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and (i) Ekron as a
Jebusite.

\(h\) He promises to deliver the Jews when he will take vengeance on
their enemies for their cruelty, and the wrongs they did to them.

\(i\) As the Jebusites had been destroyed, so would Ekron and all the
Philistines.

[Zechariah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 9:8</span></span>

And I will encamp about (k) my house because of the army, because of him
that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oppressor
shall pass through them any more: for now (l) have I seen with my eyes.

\(k\) He shows that God's power alone will be sufficient to defend his
Church against all adversaries, be they ever so cruel, or assert their
power ever so often.

\(l\) That is, God has now seen the great injuries and afflictions with
which they have been afflicted by their enemies.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem:
behold, thy King cometh to thee: (m) he \[is\] just, and having
salvation; lowly, and riding upon a (n) donkey, and upon a colt the foal
of a donkey.

\(m\) That is, he has righteousness and salvation in himself for the use
and benefit of his Church.

\(n\) Which declares that they should not look for such a king as would
be glorious in the eyes of man, but should be poor, and yet in himself
have all power to deliver his own: and this is meant of Christ, as in
([Mat 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005)).

[Zechariah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 9:10</span></span>

And I will cut off the (o) chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from
Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak peace
to the nations: and his dominion \[shall be\] from (p) sea to sea, and
from the (q) river to the ends of the earth.

\(o\) No power of man or creature will be able to stop this kingdom of
Christ, and he will peaceably govern them by his word.

\(p\) That is, from the Red Sea, to the Sea called Syriacum: and by
these places which the Jews knew, he meant an infinite space and area
over the whole world.

\(q\) That is, from the Euphrates.

[Zechariah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 9:11</span></span>

\(r\) As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth
thy (s) prisoners out of the pit in which \[is\] no water.

\(r\) Meaning Jerusalem, or the Church which is saved by the blood of
Christ, of which the blood of the sacrifices was a figure. And it is
here called the covenant of the Church, because God made it with his
Church: and left it with them because of the love that he had for them.

\(s\) God shows that he will deliver his Church out of all dangers, no
matter how great they may seem.

[Zechariah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 9:12</span></span>

Turn ye to the (t) strong hold, ye (u) prisoners of hope: even to day do
I declare \[that\] I will render (x) double to thee;

\(t\) That is, into the holy land where the city and the temple are,
where God will defend you.

\(u\) Meaning the faithful, who seemed to be in danger of their enemies
on every side, and yet lived in hope that God would restore them to
liberty.

\(x\) That is, double benefits and prosperity, in respect of that which
your fathers enjoyed from David's time to the captivity.

[Zechariah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 9:13</span></span>

When I have bent Judah for me, filled the (y) bow with Ephraim, and
raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as
the sword of a mighty man.

\(y\) I will make Judah and Ephraim, that is, my whole Church,
victorious against all enemies, which he here means by the Greeks.

[Zechariah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 9:15</span></span>

The LORD of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, (z) and
subdue the sling stones; and they shall drink, \[and\] make a noise as
through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, \[and\] as the
corners of the altar.

\(z\) He promises that the Jews will destroy their enemies, and have
abundance and excess of all things, as there is abundance on the altar
when the sacrifice is offered. And these things are not to move them to
excess, but to sobriety, and a thankful remembrance of God's great
liberality.

[Zechariah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 9:16</span></span>

And the LORD their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his
people: for they \[shall be as\] the (a) stones of a crown, lifted up as
an ensign upon his land.

\(a\) The faithful will be preserved, and reverenced by all, that their
very enemies will be compelled to esteem them: for God's glory will
shine in them, as Josephus declares of Alexander the great when he met
Jadi the high priest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010)

</div>
