<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 1:1</span></span>

In the eighth month, in the second year of (a) Darius, came the word of
the LORD unto (b) Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the
prophet, saying,

The Argument - Two months after Haggai had begun to prophesy, Zechariah
was also sent of the Lord to help him in the labour, and to confirm the
same doctrine. First therefore, he puts them in remembrance for what
reason God had so severely punished their fathers: and yet comforts them
if they will truly repent, and not abuse this great benefit of God in
their deliverance which was a figure of that true deliverance, that all
the faithful should have from death and sin, by Christ. But because they
remained still in their wickedness, and lack of desire to set forth
God's glory, and were not yet made better by their long banishment, he
rebukes them most sharply: yet for the comfort of the repentant, he ever
mixes the promise of grace, that they might by this means be prepared to
receive Christ, in whom all should be sanctified to the Lord.

\(a\) Who was the son of Histaspis.

\(b\) This was not the Zechariah, of which mention is made in ([Ch2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020).md), but he had the same name, and
is called the son of Berechiah, as he was, because he came of those
progenitors, as of Joiada or Berechiah, and Iddo.

[Zechariah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 1:2</span></span>

The LORD hath been (c) sore displeased with your fathers.

\(c\) He speaks this to make them afraid of God's judgments, so that
they should not provoke him as their fathers had done, whom he so
grievously punished.

[Zechariah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 1:3</span></span>

Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; (d) Turn ye
unto me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the
LORD of hosts.

\(d\) Let your fruits declare that you are God's people, and that he has
wrought in you by his Spirit, and mortified you: for otherwise man has
no power to return to God, but God must convert him; ([Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md); [Lam
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#021).md) See [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006.md)

[Zechariah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 1:5</span></span>

Your fathers, where (e) \[are\] they? and the prophets, do they live for
ever?

\(e\) Though your fathers are dead, yet God's judgments in punishing
them ought still to be before your eyes: and though the prophets are
dead, yet their doctrine remains for ever; ([Pe2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015).md).

[Zechariah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 1:6</span></span>

But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the
prophets, did they not take hold of (f) your fathers? and (g) they
returned and said, Like as the LORD of hosts thought to do unto us,
according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt
with us.

\(f\) Seeing you saw the force of my doctrine in punishing your fathers,
why do you not fear the threatenings contained in the same, and declared
by my Prophets?

\(g\) As men astonished with my judgments, and not that they were
touched with true repentance.

[Zechariah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 1:7</span></span>

Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which \[is\] the
month (h) Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD
unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet,
saying,

\(h\) Which includes part of January and part of February.

[Zechariah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 1:8</span></span>

I (i) saw by night, and behold (k) a man riding upon a red horse, and he
stood among the myrtle trees that \[were\] in the bottom; and behind him
\[were there\] (l) red horses, speckled, and white.

\(i\) This vision signifies the restoration of the Church: but as yet it
would not appear to man's eyes, which is here meant by the night, by the
bottom, and by the myrtle trees, which are black, and give a dark
shadow. Yet he compares God to a King who has his posts and messengers
abroad, by whom he still works his purpose and brings his matters to
pass.

\(k\) Who was the chief among the rest of the horsemen.

\(l\) These signify the various offices of God's angels, by whom God
sometimes punishes, and sometimes comforts, and brings forth his works
in various ways.

[Zechariah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 1:12</span></span>

Then the (m) angel of the LORD answered and said, O LORD of hosts, how
long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah,
against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?

\(m\) That is, Christ the mediator prayed for the salvation of his
Church, which was now troubled, when all the countries about them were
at rest.

[Zechariah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 1:14</span></span>

So the angel that talked with me said to me, Cry thou, saying, Thus
saith the LORD of hosts; I am (n) jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion
with a great jealousy.

\(n\) Though for a time God defers his help and comfort from his Church,
yet this declares that he still loves them most dearly, as a most
merciful father his children, or a husband his wife, and when it is
expedient for them, his help is ever ready.

[Zechariah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 1:15</span></span>

And I am very greatly displeased with the nations \[that are\] at ease:
for I was but (o) a little displeased, and they helped forward the
affliction.

\(o\) In destroying the reprobate, I showed myself but a little angry
toward my Church, but the enemy would have destroyed them also, and did
not consider the goal of my chastisements.

[Zechariah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 1:16</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the LORD; I have returned to Jerusalem with
mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the LORD of hosts, and a
line (p) shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

\(p\) To measure out the buildings.

[Zechariah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 1:17</span></span>

Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; My cities through
prosperity shall yet (q) be spread abroad; and the LORD shall yet
comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

\(q\) The abundance will be so great, that the places of storage will
not be able to contain these blessings that God will send, but will even
break because of fullness.

[Zechariah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 1:18</span></span>

Then I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and behold (r) four horns.

\(r\) Which signifies all the enemies of the Church: east, west, north,
and south.

[Zechariah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zac 1:20</span></span>

And the LORD showed me four (s) craftsmen.

\(s\) These craftsmen or smiths are God's instruments, who with their
mallets and hammers break these hard and strong horns which would
overthrow the Church, and declare that no enemies' horn is so strong,
but God has a hammer to break it in pieces.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 2](zac002.md)

</div>
