<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac003)  [Next](zac005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Geneva Bible Translation Notes*, \[1599\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 4:2</span></span>

And said to me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a
(a) lamp stand all \[of\] gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and its
seven lamps, and seven (b) pipes to the seven lamps, which \[were\] upon
the top of it:

\(a\) Which was ever in the midst of the temple, signifying that the
graces of God's Spirit would shine, here in most abundance, and in all
perfection.

\(b\) Which conveyed the oil that dropped from the trees into the lamps,
so that the light never went out: and this vision was to strengthen and
encourage the faithful that God had sufficient power in himself to
continue his graces, and to bring his promise to pass even though he had
no help from man.

[Zechariah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 4:6</span></span>

Then he answered and spoke to me, saying, This \[is\] the word of the
LORD to (c) Zerubbabel, saying, Not by (d) might, nor by power, but by
my spirit, saith the LORD of hosts.

\(c\) Who was a figure of Christ, and therefore this doctrine was
directed to all the Church who are his body and members.

\(d\) He shows that God's power alone is sufficient to preserve his
Church, even though he does not use man's help to do it.

[Zechariah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 4:7</span></span>

Who \[art\] thou, O (e) great mountain? before Zerubbabel \[thou shalt
become\] a plain: and (f) he shall bring forth its headstone \[with\]
shoutings, \[crying\], Grace, grace to it.

\(e\) He compares the power of the adversaries to a great mountain, who
thought the Jews were nothing with regard to them, and would have
hindered Zerubbabel, who represented Christ, whom the enemies daily
labour to stop in the building of his spiritual Temple, but all in vain.

\(f\) Though the enemies think to stop this building, yet Zerubbabel
will lay the highest stone of it, and bring it to perfection, so that
all the godly will rejoice, and pray to God that he would continue his
grace and favour toward the Temple.

[Zechariah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 4:9</span></span>

The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his
hands shall also finish it; and (g) thou shalt know that the LORD of
hosts hath sent me to you.

\(g\) Meaning, the Prophet, that I am Christ sent from my Father for the
building and preservation of my spiritual temple.

[Zechariah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 4:10</span></span>

For who hath despised the day of (h) small things? for they shall
rejoice, and shall see the (i) plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel
\[with\] those seven; (k) they \[are\] the eyes of the LORD, which run
to and fro through the whole earth.

\(h\) Signifying that all were discouraged at the small and poor
beginnings of the temple.

\(i\) By which he signifies the plummet and line, that is, that
Zerubbabel who represented Christ, would go forward with his building to
the joy and comfort of the godly, though the world was against him, and
though his own for a while were discouraged, because they do not see
things pleasant to the eye.

\(k\) That is, God has seven eyes: meaning, a continual providence, so
that neither Satan nor any power in the world, can go about to bring
anything to pass to hinder his work; ([Zac
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#009).md).

[Zechariah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 4:14</span></span>

Then said he, These \[are\] the two (l) anointed ones, that stand by the
Lord of the whole earth.

\(l\) Which were always green and full of oil, so that still they poured
forth oil into the lamps: signifying, that God will continually maintain
and preserve his Church, and endue it still with abundance and
perfection of grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 5](zac005.md)

</div>
