[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130078)  [Next](1130080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.v.viii-p2.2"></span>[1 Thessalonians iv.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p3"></span>“For this we say unto you by the word of
the Lord, that we that are alive, that are left unto the coming of the
Lord, shall in nowise precede them that are fallen asleep. For the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise
first: then we that are alive, that are left, shall together with them
be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we
ever be with the Lord.”

<span id="iv.v.viii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.v.viii-p4.1"></span>The</span> Prophets indeed, wishing to show
the credibility of the things said by them, before all other things say
this, “The vision which Isaiah saw” ([Isa. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.viii-p4.2"></span>.);
and again, “The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah” ([Jer. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.viii-p4.3"></span>,
Sept); and again, “Thus saith the Lord”; with many such expressions. And
many of them even saw God sitting, as far as it was possible for them to
see Him. But Paul not having seen Him sitting, but having Christ
speaking in himself, instead of Thus saith the Lord, said, “Do ye seek a
proof of Christ speaking in me?” ([2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="iv.v.viii-p4.4"></span>.)
And again, “Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ.” For the “Apostle” speaks
the things of Him who sent him; showing that nothing is of himself. And
again, “I think that I also have the Spirit of God.” ([1 Cor. vii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#040)<span id="iv.v.viii-p4.5"></span>.)
All those things therefore he spake by the Spirit, but this, which he
now says, he heard even expressly from God. As also that which he had
said discoursing to the Elders of Ephesus, “It is more blessed to give
than to receive,” he heard among things not recorded. <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) ([Acts xx.
35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="iv.v.viii-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.viii-p6"></span>Let us then see what he now also says.
“For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we that are
alive, that are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall in nowise
precede them that are fallen asleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend
from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
last trump.” For then, he saith, “The powers of the heavens shall be
shaken.” ([Matt. xxiv. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p6.1"></span>.) But wherefore with the trumpet? For we see
this on Mount Sinai too, and Angels there also. But what means the voice
of the Archangel? As he said in the parable of the Virgins, Arise! “The
Bridegroom cometh.” (From [Matt. xxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.viii-p6.2"></span>.)
Either it means this, or that as in the case of a king, so also shall it
then be, Angels ministering at the Resurrection. For He says, let the
dead rise, and the work is done, the Angels not having power to do this,
but His word. As if upon a king’s commanding and saying it, those who
were shut up should go forth, and the servants should lead them out, yet
they do this not from their own power, but from that Voice. This also
Christ says in another place: “He shall send forth his Angels with a
great trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four
winds, from one end of heaven to the other.” ([Matt. xxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)<span id="iv.v.viii-p6.3"></span>.)
And everywhere you see the Angels running to and fro. The Archangel
therefore I think is he, who is set over those who are sent forth, and
who shouts thus: “Make all men ready, for the Judge <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span id="iv.v.viii-Page_356"></span>is at
hand.” And what is “at the last trumpet”? <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) Here he implies that there are many
trumpets, and that at the last the Judge descends. “And the dead,” he
says, “in Christ shall rise first. Then we that are alive, that are
left, shall together with them be caught up in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.”

<span id="iv.v.viii-p8"></span>[1 Thess.
4.18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#018)<span id="iv.v.viii-p8.1"></span>.
“Wherefore comfort one another with these words.”

<span id="iv.v.viii-p9"></span>If He is about to descend, on what
account shall we be caught up? For the sake of honor. For when a king
drives into a city, those who are in honor go out to meet him; but the
condemned await the judge within. And upon the coming of an affectionate
father, his children indeed, and those who are worthy to be his
children, are taken out in a chariot, that they may see and kiss him;
but those of the domestics who have offended remain within. We are
carried upon the chariot of our Father. For He received Him up in the
clouds, and “we shall be caught up in the clouds.” ([Acts i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span id="iv.v.viii-p9.1"></span>.)
Seest thou how great is the honor? and as He descends, we go forth to
meet Him, and, what is more blessed than all, so we shall be with Him.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p10"></span>“Who shall speak of the mightinesses of
the Lord, and make all His praises to be heard?” ([Ps. cvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="iv.v.viii-p10.1"></span>,
Sept.) How many blessings has He vouchsafed to the human race! Those who
are dead are raised first, and thus the meeting takes place together.
Abel who died before all shall then meet Him together with those who are
alive. So that they in this respect will have no advantage, but he who
is corrupted, and has been so many years in the earth, shall meet Him
with them, and so all the others. For if they awaited us, that we might
be crowned, as elsewhere he says in an Epistle, “God having provided
some better thing concerning us, that apart from us they should not be
made perfect” ([Heb. xi. 40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p10.2"></span>.), much more shall we also await them; or
rather, they indeed awaited, but we not at all. For the Resurrection
takes place “in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.”

<span id="iv.v.viii-p11"></span>But as to the saying, that they are
gathered together; they arise indeed everywhere, but are gathered
together by the Angels. The former therefore is the work of the power of
God commanding the earth to give up its deposit, and there is no one who
ministers in it, as He then called Lazarus, “Lazarus, come forth” ([John
xi. 43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p11.1"></span>.); but the gathering is the work of
ministers. But if Angels gather them together, and run to and fro, how
are they <span id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) caught up here? They
are caught up after the descent, <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) after that they are gathered
together.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p14"></span>For this is also done without any one
being aware. <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018) For when they
see the earth agitated, the dust mingling, the bodies rising
perchance <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) on every side, no
one ministering to this, but the “shout” being sufficient, the whole
earth filled (for consider how great a thing it is that all the men from
Adam unto His coming shall then stand with wives and children),—when
they see so great a tumult upon the earth,—then they shall know. As
therefore in the Dispensation that was in the Flesh, they had foreseen
nothing of it, so also will it then be.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p17"></span>When these things then are done, then
also will be the voice of the Archangel shouting and commanding the
Angels, and the trumpets, or rather the sound of the trumpet. What
trembling then, what fear will possess those that remain upon the earth.
For one woman is caught up and another is left behind, and one man is
taken, and another is passed over. ([Matt.
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041), [Luke
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#035)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p17.1"></span>.) What will be the state of their souls,
when they see some indeed taken up, but themselves left behind? Will not
these things be able to shake their souls more terribly than any hell?
Let us represent then in word that this is now present. For if sudden
death, or earthquakes in cities, and threatenings thus terrify our
souls; when we see the earth breaking up, and crowded with all these,
when we hear the trumpets, and the voice of the Archangel louder than
any trumpet, when we perceive the heaven shriveled up, and God the King
of all himself coming nigh—what then will be our souls? Let us shudder,
I beseech you, and be frightened as if these things were now taking
place. Let us not comfort ourselves by the delay. For when it must
certainly happen, the delay profits us nothing.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p18"></span>How great will then be the fear and
trembling! Have you ever seen men led away to death? What do you think
is the state of their souls, as they are going on the way to the gate?
is it not worse than many deaths? What would they not choose both to do
and to suffer, so that they might be delivered from that cloud of
darkness? I have heard many say, who have been recalled by the mercy of
the king (Emperor), after having been led away, that they did not even
see men as men, their souls being so troubled, so horror-struck, and
beside themselves. If then the death of the body thus frightens us, when
eternal death approaches, what will be our feelings? And why do I speak
of those who are <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii-Page_357"></span>led away? A crowd then stands around, the
greater part not even knowing them. If any one looked into their souls,
no one is so cruel, no one so hard-hearted, no one so firm, as not to
have his soul dejected, and relaxed with fear and despair. And if when
others are taken off by this death, which differs nothing from sleep,
those who are not concerned in it are thus affected; when we ourselves
fall into greater evils, what then will be our state? It is not, believe
me, it is not possible to represent the suffering by words.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p19"></span>Nay, you say, but God is full of love to
man, and none of these things will happen! Then it is written in vain!
No, you say, but only as a threat, that we may become wise! If then we
are not wise, but continue evil, will He not, tell me, inflict the
punishment? Will He not then recompense the good either with rewards?
Yes, you say, for that is becoming to Him, to do good even beyond
desert. So that those things indeed are true and will certainly be,
while the punishments will not be at all, but are only for the purpose
of a threat, and of terror! By what means I shall persuade you, I know
not. If I say, that “the worm will not die, and the fire will not be
quenched” ([Mark ix. 44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p19.1"></span>.); if I say, that “they shall go away into
everlasting fire” ([Matt. 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p19.2"></span>.); if I set before you the rich man already
suffering punishment, you will say that it is all a matter of
threatening. Whence then shall I persuade you? For this is a Satanic
reasoning, indulging you with a favor that will not profit, and causing
you to be slothful.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p20"></span>How then can we banish it? Whatever
things we say from Scripture, you will say, are for the purpose of
threatening. But with respect to future things this indeed might be
said, but not so concerning things that have happened, and have had an
end. You have heard of the deluge. And were those things also said by
way of threat? Did they not actually happen? Those men too said many
such things, and for a hundred years while the ark was building, and the
wood was being wrought, and the righteous man was calling aloud, there
was no one who believed. But because they did not believe the threat in
words, they suffered the punishment in very deed. And this will be our
fate too, if we shall not have believed. On this account it is that He
compares His coming with the days of Noah, because as some disbelieved
in that deluge, so will they in the deluge of hell. Were these things a
threat? were they not a fact? Then will not He, who then brought
punishment upon them so suddenly, much more inflict it now also? For the
things that are committed now are not less than the offenses of that
time. How?—because then, it says, “the sons of God went in unto the
daughters of men” ([Gen. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p20.1"></span>.), and those mixtures were the great
offense. But now there is no form of wickedness, which is unattempted.
Do you then believe that the deluge took place? Or does it seem to you a
fable? And yet even the mountains where the ark rested, bear witness; I
speak of those in Armenia.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p21"></span>But, even superabundantly, I will turn
my discourse to another thing more evident than that. Has any one of you
ever traveled in Palestine? For I will no longer mention report, but
facts, and yet the other were clearer than facts. For whatever things
the Scripture says, are more to be trusted than things we see. Has any
one of you then ever traveled in Palestine? I suppose so. What then?
Bear witness then for me, ye who have seen the places, to those who have
not been there. For above Ascalon and Gaza up to the very end of the
river Jordan there is a country wide and fruitful—or rather there
was—for it is not now. This then is that which was as a garden. For it
is said, “Lot beheld all the plain <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) of Jordan—and it was well watered
everywhere, like the garden of the Lord.” ([Gen. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.viii-p22.1"></span>.)
This, therefore, that was so flourishing, and that rivaled all
countries, which for thrivingness exceeded the Paradise of God, is now
more desolate than any wilderness. And there stand trees, indeed, and
they bear fruit. But the fruit is a monument of the wrath of God. For
there stand pomegranates, I speak both of the tree and the fruit, having
a very fine appearance, and to the ignorant man holding out great hopes.
But if they are taken into the hand, being broken open they display no
fruit indeed, but much dust and ashes stored up within. Such also is the
whole land. If you find a stone, you will find it full of ashes. And why
do I speak of stone and wood and earth, where the air and water partake
of the calamity? For as when a body is burnt and consumed, the shape
remains, and the outline in the appearance of the fire, and the bulk and
the proportion, but the power is no more, so truly there you may see
earth, which yet has nothing of earth about it, but all ashes; trees and
fruit, but nothing of trees and fruit about them; air and water, but
nothing of water nor of air about them, for even these are turned to
ashes. And yet how could air ever have been burnt, or water, whilst it
remained water? For wood and stones indeed it is possible to burn, but
air and water it is altogether impossible. Impossible to us, but
possible to Him who did these things. Therefore the air is nothing else
than a furnace, the water is a furnace. All things are unfruitful, <span
id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="iv.v.viii-Page_358"></span>all
unproductive, all for vengeance; images of wrath that has gone before,
and proofs of that which is to come.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p23"></span>Are these too but threatening words? Are
these but the sound of words? For to me indeed the former things were
not incredible, but things not seen were equally credible with things
that were seen. But even to the unbeliever these are sufficient to
produce faith. If any one disbelieves hell, let him consider Sodom, let
him reflect upon Gomorrah, the vengeance that has been inflicted, and
which yet remains. This is a proof of the eternity of punishment. Are
these things grievous? And is it not grievous, when you say that there
is no hell, but that God has merely threatened it? when you slack the
hands of the people? <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) It is
thou who disbelievest that compellest me to say these things; it is thou
that hast drawn me out into these words. If thou believedst the words of
Christ I should not be compelled to bring forward facts to induce
belief. But since you have evaded them, you shall be persuaded
henceforth, whether willing or unwilling. For what have you to say
concerning Sodom? Would you wish also to know the cause, for which these
things were then done? It was one sin, a grievous and accursed one
certainly, yet but one. The men of that time had a passion for boys, and
on that account they suffered this punishment. But now ten thousand sins
equal and even more grievous than these are committed. Then He who for
one sin poured forth so much anger, and neither regarded the
supplication of Abraham, nor yet Lot who dwelt among them, the man who
from honor to His servants offered his own daughters to insult, will He
spare, when there are so many sins? These things truly are ridiculous,
trifling, delusion, and diabolical deceit!

<span id="iv.v.viii-p25"></span>Do you wish that I should also bring
forward another? You have certainly heard of Pharaoh, king of the
Egyptians; you know therefore the punishment also which he suffered, how
even with his whole host, chariots and horses and all, he was engulfed
in the Erythræan sea. Would you hear also other examples? he perhaps was
an impious man, or rather not perhaps, but certainly he was an impious
man. Would you see those also punished, who were of the number of
believers, and who held fast to God, but were not of upright life? Hear
Paul saying, “Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them
committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us
murmur, as some of them murmured, and perished by the destroyer. Neither
let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and perished by the
serpents.” ([1 Cor. x. 8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p25.1"></span>.) And if fornication, and if murmuring had
such power, what will not be the effect of our sins?

<span id="iv.v.viii-p26"></span>And if thou dost not now pay the
penalty, do not wonder. For they knew not of a hell, therefore they were
visited with punishments following close at their heels. But thou,
whatever sins thou commit, though thou shouldest escape present penalty,
wilt pay for it all There. Did he so punish those who were nearly in the
state of children, and who did not sin so greatly—and will He spare us?
It would not be reasonable. For if we commit the same sins with them, we
shall deserve a greater punishment than they did. Wherefore? Because we
have enjoyed more grace. But when our offenses are numerous, and more
heinous than theirs, what vengeance shall we not undergo? They—and let
no one think I say it as admiring them, or excusing them; far be it: for
when God punishes, he who passes a contrary sentence, does it at the
suggestion of the devil; I say this therefore, not praising them nor
excusing them, but showing our wickedness—they therefore, although they
murmured, were, however, traveling a wilderness road: but we murmur
though we have a country, and are in our own houses. They, although they
committed fornication, yet it was just after they came out of the evils
of Egypt, and had hardly heard of such a law. But we do it, having
previously received from our forefathers the doctrine of salvation, so
that we are deserving of greater punishment.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p27"></span>Would you hear also of other things?
what were their sufferings in Palestine, famines, pestilences, wars,
captivities, under the Babylonians, and under the Assyrians, and their
miseries from the Macedonians, and those under Hadrian and Vespasian? I
have something that I wish, beloved, to relate to thee; nay, do not run
away! <span id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) Or rather I will tell
thee another thing before it. There was once a famine, it says, and the
king was walking upon the wall; then a woman came to him and uttered
these words: “O king, this woman said to me, Let us roast thy son
to-day, and eat him—to-morrow mine. And we roasted and ate, and now she
does not give me hers.” (From [2 Kings vi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#028)<span id="iv.v.viii-p28.1"></span>.)
What can be more dreadful than this calamity? Again, in another place
the Prophet says, “The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own
children.” ([Lam. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p28.2"></span>.) The Jews then suffered such punishment,
and shall we not much rather suffer?

<span id="iv.v.viii-p29"></span>Would you also hear other calamities of
theirs? Read over Josephus, and you will learn that whole tragedy, if
perchance we may persuade you from these things, that there is a hell.
For consider, if they were punished, why are we not punished? or how is
it reasonable that we are not now punished, who sin more grievously than
<span id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii-Page_359"></span>they? Is it not manifest that it is,
because the punishment is kept in store for us? And, if you please, I
will tell you in the person of every individual how they were punished.
Cain murdered his brother. A horrible sin indeed, who can deny it? But
he suffered punishment; and a heavy one, equivalent to ten thousand
deaths, for he would rather have died ten thousand times. For hear him
saying, “If Thou castest me out from the land, and I shall be hidden
from Thy face, then it will happen that every one who findeth me will
slay me.” ([Gen. iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p29.1"></span>, Sept.) Tell me then, do not many even now
do the same things that he did? For when thou slayest not thy brother
according to the flesh, but thy spiritual brother, dost thou not do the
same? For what, though not by the sword? yet by some other means; when
being able to relieve his hunger, thou neglectest him. What then? Has no
one now envied his brother? has no one plunged him into dangers? But
here they have not suffered punishment, yet they will suffer it. Then
he, who never heard the written laws, nor the prophets, nor saw great
miracles suffered such great vengeance; and shall he who has done the
same things in another way, and was not rendered wise by so many
examples, shall he go unpunished? Where then is the justice of God, and
where His goodness?

<span id="iv.v.viii-p30"></span>Again, a certain one for having gathered
sticks on the Sabbath was stoned, and yet this was a small commandment,
and less weighty than circumcision. He then who gathered sticks on the
Sabbath was stoned; but those who often commit ten thousand things
contrary to the Law have gone off unpunished! If then there be not a
hell, where is His justice, where His impartiality, that respects not
persons? And yet He lays to their charge many such things, that they did
not observe the Sabbath.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p31"></span>Again, another, Charmi, <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) having stolen a devoted thing, was
stoned with all his family. What then? Has no one from that time
committed sacrilege? Saul, again, having spared contrary to the command
of God, suffered so great punishment. Has no one from that time spared?
Would indeed that it were so! Have we not, worse than wild beasts,
devoured one another contrary to the command of God, and yet no one has
fallen in war? <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) Again, the
sons of Eli, because they ate before the incense was offered, suffered
the most severe punishment together with their father. Has no father
then been neglectful with respect to his children? and are there no
wicked sons? But no one has suffered punishment. Where will they suffer
it then, if there be no hell?

<span id="iv.v.viii-p34"></span>Again, numberless instances one might
enumerate. What? Ananias and Sapphira were immediately punished, because
they stole part of what they had offered. Has no one then since that
time been guilty of this? How was it then that they did not suffer the
same punishment?

<span id="iv.v.viii-p35"></span>Do we then persuade you that there is a
hell, or do you need more examples? Therefore we will proceed also to
things that are unwritten, such as now take place in life. For it is
necessary that this idea should be gathered by us from every quarter,
that we may not, by vainly gratifying ourselves, do ourselves harm. Do
you not see many visited by calamities, maimed in their bodies,
suffering infinite troubles, but others in good repute? For what reason
do some suffer punishment for murders, and others not? Hear Paul saying,
“Some men’s sins are evident,…and some men they follow after.” ([1 Tim.
v. 24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p35.1"></span>.) How many murderers have escaped! how many
violators of the tombs! But let these things pass. How many do you not
see visited with the severest punishment? Some have been delivered to a
long disease, others to continued tortures, and others to numberless
other ills. When therefore you see one who has been guilty of the same
things as they, or even much worse—and yet not suffering punishment,
will you not suspect, even against your will, that there is a hell?
Reckon those here who before you have been severely punished, consider
that God is no respecter of persons, and that though you have done
numberless wickednesses, you have suffered no such thing, and you will
have the idea of hell. For God has so implanted that idea within us,
that no one can ever be ignorant of it. For poets and philosophers and
fabulists, and in short all men, have philosophized concerning the
retribution that is there, and have said that the greater number are
punished in Hades. And if those things are fables, yet what we have
received are not so.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p36"></span>I say not these things as wishing to
frighten you, nor to lay a burden on your souls, but to make them wise,
and render them easier. I could wish also myself that there were no
punishment—yes, myself most of all men. And why so? Because whilst each
of you fears for his own soul, I have to answer for this office also in
which I preside over you. So that most of all it is impossible for me to
escape. But it cannot be that there is not punishment and a hell. What
can I do? Where then, they say, is the kindness of God to men? In many
places. But on this subject I will rather discourse at some other
season, that we may not confuse the discourses concerning hell. In the
meantime let not that slip, which we have gained. For <span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span id="iv.v.viii-Page_360"></span>it is
no small advantage to be persuaded concerning hell. For the recollection
of such discourses, like some bitter medicine, will be able to clear off
every vice, if it be constantly settled in your mind. Let us therefore
use it, that having a pure heart, we may so be thought worthy to see
those things, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered
into the heart of man. Which may we all obtain by the grace and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[355:1015](1130079.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p5"></span> \[The saying was probably in circulation
among the Christians, for Paul bids the elders “remember the
words.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[356:1016](1130079.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p7"></span> \[The N.T. text is, without variation,
“with the trump of God.” Chrys. mingles in his recollection this and the
kindred passage in [1 Cor. xv. 53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p7.1"></span>. The quotation at the head of the Homily is
correct.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[356:1017](1130079.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p12"></span> i.e. How are those, whom the Angels
have already taken and gathered, still “here,” that they should be
caught up? L. places ἐνταῦθα before αὐτοὶ, which gives that sense more
decidedly. Or “here” may only mean “in this passage.”

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[356:1018](1130079.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p13"></span> Musculus takes it of our Lord’s
descent, Hervetus otherwise.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[356:1019](1130079.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p15"></span> He seems to allude to [Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span id="iv.v.viii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[356:1020](1130079.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p16"></span> ἵσως, which has been translated
“equally.”

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[357:1021](1130079.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p22"></span> \[Properly “the region around Jordan,”
and denoting the deep and rather wide valley through which it flows.
Chrys. makes it include all of central Judea, and applies to that whole
district what he had heard of the desolate country between Jerusalem and
the Dead Sea, the N.T. “wilderness of Judea.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[358:1022](1130079.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p24"></span> See [Heb.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012), [Jer.
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[358:1023](1130079.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p28"></span> μὴ ἀποπηδήσης, perhaps only “turn
away.”

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[359:1024](1130079.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p32"></span> \[This is an error in the documents, or
a slip of memory in the preacher, for he means Achan the son of Carmi,
[Josh. vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p32.1"></span>.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[359:1025](1130079.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p33"></span> \[No one of us has been punished for
it, as Saul was, by falling in battle.—J.A.B.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians 5:1,2](1130080)
