[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130096)  [Next](1130098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.v-p2.2"></span>[1 Tim.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.iii.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p3"></span>“This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners;
of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me
first Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to
them which should hereafter believe on Him to life everlasting.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.v-p4.1"></span>The</span> favors of God so far exceed human
hope and expectation, that often they are not believed. For God has
bestowed upon us such things as the mind of man never looked for, never
thought of. It is for this reason that the Apostles spend much discourse
in securing a belief of the gifts that are granted us of God. For as
men, upon receiving some great good, ask themselves if it is not a
dream, as not believing it; so it is with respect to the gifts of God.
What then was it that was thought incredible? That those who were
enemies, and sinners, neither justified by the law, nor by works, should
immediately through faith alone be advanced to the highest favor. Upon
this head accordingly Paul has discoursed at length in his Epistle to
the Romans, and here again at length. “This is a faithful saying,” he
says, “and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p5"></span>As the Jews were chiefly attracted by this,
he persuades them not <span id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127.md) to give
heed to the law, since they could not attain salvation by it without
faith. Against this he contends; for it seemed to them incredible, that
a man who had mis-spent all his former life in vain and wicked actions,
should afterwards be saved by his faith <span id="page_420">p.
420</span> <span id="v.iii.v-Page_420"></span>alone. On this account he
says, “It is a saying to be believed.” But some not only disbelieved but
even objected, as the Greeks do now. “Let us then do evil, that good may
come.” This was the consequence they drew in derision of our faith, from
his words, “Where sin abounded grace did much more abound.” ([Rom.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md), [Rom.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.v-p6.1"></span>..md)
So when we discourse to them of Hell they say, How can this be worthy of
God? When man has found his servant offending, he forgives it, and
thinks him worthy of pardon and does God punish eternally? And when we
speak of the Laver, and of the remission of sins through it, this too
they say is unworthy of God, that he who has committed offenses without
number should have his sins remitted. What perverseness of mind is this,
what a spirit of contention does it manifest! Surely if forgiveness is
an evil, punishment is a good; but if punishment is an evil, remission
of it is a good. I speak according to their notions, for according to
ours, both are good. This I shall show at another time, for the present
would not suffice for a matter so deep, and which requires to be
elaborately argued. I must lay it before your Charity at a fitting
season. At present let us proceed with our proposed subject. “This is a
faithful saying,” he says. But why is it to be believed?

<span id="v.iii.v-p7"></span>This appears both from what precedes and
from what follows. Observe how he prepares us <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128.md) for this assertion, and how he then
dwells upon it. For he hath previously declared that He showed mercy to
me “a blasphemer and a persecutor”; this was in the way of preparation.
And not only did He show mercy, but “He accounted me faithful.” So far
should we be, he means, from disbelieving that He showed mercy. For no
one, who should see a prisoner admitted into a palace, could doubt
whether he obtained mercy. And this was visibly the situation of Paul,
for he makes himself the example. Nor is he ashamed to call himself a
sinner, but rather delights in it, as he thus can best demonstrate the
miracle of God’s regard for him, and that He had thought him worthy of
such extraordinary kindness.

<span id="v.iii.v-p9"></span>But how is it, that he here calls himself a
sinner, nay, the chief of sinners, whereas he elsewhere asserts that he
was “touching the righteousness which is in the law blameless”?
([Philip. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.iii.v-p9.1"></span>.) Because with respect to the righteousness
which God has wrought, the justification which is really sought, even
those who are righteous <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md) in
the law are sinners, “for all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God.” ([Rom. iii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023.md)<span
id="v.iii.v-p10.1"></span>.) Therefore he does not say righteousness
simply, but “the righteousness which is in the law.” As a man that has
acquired wealth, with respect to himself appears rich, but upon a
comparison with the treasures of kings is very poor and the chief of the
poor; so it is in this case. Compared with Angels, even righteous men
are sinners; and if Paul, who wrought the righteousness that is in the
law, was the chief of sinners, what other man can be called righteous?
For he says not this to condemn his own life as impure, let not this be
imagined; but comparing his own legal righteousness with the
righteousness of God, he shows it to be nothing worth, and not only so,
but he proves those who possess it to be sinners.

<span id="v.iii.v-p11"></span>[1 Tim.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p11.1"></span>.
“Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on Him to life everlasting.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p12"></span>See how he further humbles and depreciates
himself, by naming a fresh and less creditable reason. For that he
obtained mercy on account of his ignorance, does not so much imply that
he who obtained mercy was a sinner, or under deep condemnation; but to
say that he obtained mercy in order that no sinner hereafter might
despair of finding mercy, but that each might feel sure of obtaining the
like favor, this is an excess of humiliation, such that even in calling
himself the chief of sinners, “a blasphemer and a persecutor, and one
not meet to be called an Apostle,” he had said nothing like it. This
will appear by an example. Suppose a populous city, all whose
inhabitants were wicked, some more so, and some less, but all deserving
of condemnation; and let one among that multitude be more deserving of
punishment than all the rest, and guilty of every kind of wickedness. If
it were declared that the king was willing to pardon all, it would not
be so readily believed, as if they were to see this most wicked wretch
actually pardoned. There could then be no longer any doubt. This is what
Paul says, that God, willing to give men full assurance that He pardons
all their transgressions, chose, as the object of His mercy, him who was
more a sinner than any; for when I obtained mercy, he argues, there
could be no doubt of others: as familiarly speaking we might say, “If
God pardons such an one, he will never punish anybody”; and thus he
shows that he himself, though unworthy of pardon, for the sake of
others’ salvation, first obtained that pardon. Therefore, he says, since
I am saved, let no one doubt of salvation. And observe the humility of
this blessed man; he says not, “that in me he might show forth” His
“longsuffering,” but “all longsuffering”; as if he had said, greater
longsuffering He could not <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="v.iii.v-Page_421"></span>show in any case than in mine, nor find a
sinner that so required all His pardon, all His long-suffering; not a
part only, like those who are only partially sinners, but “all” His
longsuffering.

<span id="v.iii.v-p13"></span>“For a pattern to those who should
hereafter believe.” This is said for comfort, for encouragement. <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md) But because he had spoken highly of
the Son, and of the great love which He hath manifested, lest he should
be thought to exclude the Father from this, he ascribes the glory to Him
also.

<span id="v.iii.v-p15"></span>[1 Tim.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p15.1"></span>.
“Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p16"></span>For these things, then, we glorify not the
Son only, but the Father. Here let us argue with the heretics. Speaking
of the Father, he says, “To the only God.” Is the Son then not God? “The
only immortal.” <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) Is the Son
then not immortal? Or does He not possess that Himself, which hereafter
He will give to us? Yes, they say, He is God and immortal, but not such
as the Father. What then? is He of inferior essence, and therefore of
inferior immortality? What then is a greater and a less immortality? For
immortality is nothing else than the not being subject to destruction.
For there is a greater and a less glory; but immortality does not admit
of being greater or less: as neither is there a greater and a less
health. For a thing must either be destructible, or altogether
indestructible. Are we men then immortal even as He? God forbid! Surely
not! Why? because He has it by nature, but we adventitiously. Why then
do you make the difference? Because the Father, he says, is made such as
He is by no other: but the Son is what He is, from the Father. This we
also confess, not denying that the Son is generated from the Father
incorruptibly. <span id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) And we glorify
the Father, he means, for having generated the Son, such as He is. Thus
you see the Father is most glorified, when the Son hath done great
things. For the glory of the Son is referred again to Him. And since He
generated Him omnipotent and such as He is in Himself, it is not <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) more the glory of the Son than of
the Father, that He is self-sufficient, and self-maintained, and free
from infirmity. It has been said of the Son, “By whom He made the
worlds.” ([Heb. i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iii.v-p19.1"></span>.) Now there is a distinction observed among
us between creation and workmanship. <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) For one works and toils and
executes, another rules; and why? because he that executes is the
inferior. But it is not so there; nor is the sovereignty with One, the
workmanship with the Other. For when we hear, “By whom He made the
worlds,” <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) we do not exclude
the Father from creation. Nor when we say, “To the King immortal,” <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) do we deny dominion to the Son. For
these are common to the One and the Other, and each belongs to Both. The
Father created, in that He begat the creating Son; the Son rules, as
being Lord of all things created. For He does not work for hire, nor in
obedience to others, as workmen do among us, but from His own goodness
and love for mankind. But has the Son <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) ever been seen? No one can affirm
this. What means then, “To the King immortal, invisible, the only
wise <span id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md) God”? Or when it is
said, “There is no other name whereby we must be saved”: and again,
“There is salvation in no other”? ([Acts iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)<span id="v.iii.v-p24.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iii.v-p25"></span>“To Him be honor and glory forever. Amen.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p26"></span>Now honor and glory are not mere words;
and since He has honored us not by words only, but by what He has done
for us, so let us honor Him by works and deeds. Yet this honor touches
us, while that reaches not Him, for He needs not the honor that comes
from us, we do need that which is from Him.

<span id="v.iii.v-p27"></span>In honoring Him, therefore, we do honor to
ourselves. He who opens his eyes to gaze on the light of the sun,
receives delight himself, as he admires the beauty of the star, but does
no favor to that luminary, nor increases its splendor, for it continues
what it was; much more is this true with respect to God. He who admires
and honors God does so to his own salvation, and highest benefit; and
how? Because he follows after virtue, and is honored by Him. For “them
that honor Me,” He says, “I will honor.” ([1 Sam. iv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#030)<span id="v.iii.v-p27.1"></span>..md)
How then is He honored, if He enjoys no advantage from our honor? Just
as He is said to hunger and thirst. For He assumes everything that is
ours, that He may in anywise attract us to Him. He is said to receive
honors, and even insults, that we may be afraid. But with all this we
are not attracted towards Him!

<span id="v.iii.v-p28"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.v-p28.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let us then “glorify God,” and
bear God <span id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md) both “in our body
and in our spirit.” ([1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.v-p29.2"></span>..md)
And how is one to glorify Him in the body? saith one, and how in the
spirit? The soul is here called the spirit to distinguish it from the
body. But how may we glorify Him <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="v.iii.v-Page_422"></span>in the body and in the spirit? He glorifies
Him in the body, who does not commit adultery or fornication, who avoids
gluttony and drunkenness, who does not affect a showy exterior, who
makes such provision for himself as is sufficient for health only: and
so the woman, who does not perfume nor paint her person, but is
satisfied to be such as God made her, and adds no device of her own. For
why dost thou add thy own embellishments to the work which God made? Is
not His workmanship sufficient for thee? or dost thou endeavor to add
grace to it, as if forsooth thou wert the better artist? <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) It is not for thyself, but to
attract crowds of lovers, that thou thus adornest thy person, and
insultest thy Creator. And do not say, “What can I do? It is no wish of
my own, but I must do it for my husband. I cannot win his love except I
consent to this.” God made thee beautiful, that He might be admired even
in thy beauty, and not that He might be insulted. Do not therefore make
Him so ill a return, but requite Him with modesty and chastity. God made
thee beautiful, that He might increase the trials of thy modesty. For it
is much harder for one that is lovely to be modest, than for one who has
no such attractions, for which to be courted. Why does the Scripture
tell us, that “Joseph was a goodly person, and well favored” ([Gen.
xxxix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.iii.v-p30.1"></span>.), but that we might the more admire his
modesty coupled with beauty? Has God made thee beautiful? Why dost thou
make thyself otherwise? For as though one should overlay a golden statue
with a daubing of mire, so it is with those women that use paints. Thou
besmearest thyself with red and white earth! But the homely, you say,
may fairly have recourse to this. And why? To hide their ugliness? It is
a vain attempt. For when was the natural appearance improved upon by
that which is studied and artificial? And why shouldest thou be troubled
at thy want of beauty, since it is no reproach? For hear the saying of
the Wise Man, “Commend not a man for his beauty, neither abhor a man for
his outward appearance.” ([Ecclesiasticus
11.2](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.v-p30.2"></span>..md)
Let God be rather admired, the best Artificer, and not man, who has no
merit in being made such as he is. What are the advantages, tell me, of
beauty? None. It exposes its possessor to greater trials, mishaps,
perils, and suspicions. She that wants it escapes suspicion; she that
possesses it, except she practice a great and extraordinary reserve,
incurs an evil report, and what is worse than all, the suspicion of her
husband, who takes less pleasure in beholding her beauty, than he
suffers pain from jealousy. And her beauty fades in his sight from
familiarity, whilst she suffers in her character from the imputation of
weakness, dissipation, and wantonness, and her very soul <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) becomes degraded and full of
haughtiness. To these evils personal beauty is exposed. But she who has
not this attraction, escapes unmolested. The dogs do not assail her; she
is like a lamb, reposing in a secure pasture, where no wolf intrudes to
harass her, because the shepherd is at hand to protect her.

<span id="v.iii.v-p32"></span>The real superiority <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) is, not that one is fair, and the
other homely, but it is a superiority that one, even if she is not fair,
is unchaste, and the other is not wicked. Tell me wherein is the
perfection of eyes? Is it in their being soft, and rolling, and round,
and dark, or in their clearness and quicksightedness. Is it the
perfection of a lamp to be elegantly formed, and finely turned, or to
shine brightly, and to enlighten the whole house? We cannot say it is
not this, for the other is indifferent, and this the real object.
Accordingly we often say to the maid whose charge it is, “You have made
a bad lamp of it.” So entirely is it the use of a lamp to give light. So
it matters not what is the appearance of the eye, whilst it performs its
office with full efficiency. We call the eye bad, which is dim or
disordered, and which, when open, does not see. For that is bad, which
does not perform its proper office—and this is the fault of eyes. And
for a nose, tell me, when is it a good one? When it is straight, and
polished on either side, and finely proportioned? or when it is quick to
receive odors, and transmit them to the brain? Any one can answer this.

<span id="v.iii.v-p34"></span>Come now, let us illustrate this by an
example—as of gripers, I mean the instruments so called; we say those
are well-made, which are able to take up and hold things, not those
which are only handsomely and elegantly shaped. So those are good teeth
which are fit for the service of dividing and chewing our food, not
those which are beautifully set. And applying the same reasoning to
other parts of the body, we shall call those members beautiful, which
are sound, and perform their proper functions aright. So we think any
instrument, or plant, or animal good, not because of its form or color,
but because it answers its purpose. And he is thought a good <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md) servant, who is useful and ready
for our service, not one who is comely but dissolute. I trust ye now
understand how it is in your power to be beautiful.

<span id="v.iii.v-p36"></span>And since the greatest and most important
benefits are equally enjoyed by all, we are under no disadvantage.
Whether we are beautiful or not, we alike behold this universe, the sun,
the <span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="v.iii.v-Page_423"></span>moon, and the stars; we breathe the same
air, we partake alike of water, and the fruits of the earth. And if we
may say what will sound strange, the homely are more healthy than the
beautiful. For these, to preserve their beauty, engage in no labor, but
give themselves up to indolence and delicate living, by which their
bodily energies are impaired; whilst the others, having no such care,
spend all their attention simply and entirely on active pursuits.

<span id="v.iii.v-p37"></span>Let us then “glorify God, and take and
bear Him in our body.” ([1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.v-p37.1"></span>..md)
Let us not affect a beautiful appearance; that care is vain and
unprofitable. Let us not teach our husbands to admire the mere outward
form; for if such be thy adornment, his very habit of viewing thy face
will make him easy to be captivated by a harlot. But if thou teachest
him to love good manners, and modesty, he will not be ready to wander,
for he will see no attractions in a harlot, in whom those qualities are
not found, but the reverse. Neither teach him to be captivated by
laughter, nor by a loose dress, lest thou prepare a poison against
thyself. Accustom him to delight in modesty, and this thou wilt do, if
thy attire be modest. But if thou hast a flaunting air, an unsteady
manner, how canst thou address <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144.md) him in a serious strain? and who
will not hold thee in contempt and derision?

<span id="v.iii.v-p39"></span>But how is it possible to glorify God in
our spirit? <span id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145.md) By practicing
virtue, by adorning the soul. For such embellishment is not forbidden.
Thus we glorify God, when we are good in every respect, and we shall be
glorified by Him in a much higher degree in that great day. For “I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.” ([Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="v.iii.v-p40.1"></span>..md)
Of which that we may all be partakers, God grant, by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[419:1128](1130097.htm#fr_1127.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p6"></span> Sav. omits “not”; so the sense will be,
that a due consideration of the Law would prove that men could not be
saved by it.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[420:1129](1130097.htm#fr_1128.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p8"></span> Or, “gives proof beforehand.”

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[420:1130](1130097.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p10"></span> The word “righteous” seems to be
understood in “righteousness,” just before.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[421:1131](1130097.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p14"></span> προτροπήν, al. ἐπιστρόφην, “bringing
about conversion.”

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[421:1132](1130097.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p17"></span> Lit. “incorruptible.”

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[421:1133](1130097.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p18"></span> al. “out of time.”

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[421:1134](1130097.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p19"></span> It is necessary here to insert a negative
or to read οὔκοῦν for οὐκοῦν.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[421:1135](1130097.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p20"></span> κτίσις. Hales conjectures κτῆσις,
possession. But this may be doubted, as κτίζειν means “to found,” as a
king founds a city. The workmen *build*, but do not *found*.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[421:1136](1130097.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p21"></span> Or “the ages.” [Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[421:1137](1130097.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p22"></span> Or “King of Ages” (αἰ& 240·νων, for which
we have no word but “worlds,” taken in an extended sense).

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[421:1138](1130097.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p23"></span> i.e. in His Divine Nature.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[421:1139](1130097.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p24"></span> B. omits “wise” throughout, and then
“only” applies to the words before, and the argument here is complete;
viz., that there is One God. of whom all this is said, that is, the Ever
Blessed Trinity. Some good <span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii.v-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. favor this reading in the text.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[421:1140](1130097.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p29"></span> ἄρωμεν. St. Chrys. is almost the only
Greek authority for the reading of the Vulgate, well known as the
Capitulum of the 9th hour, “glorificate *et portate* Deum in corpore
vestro.” On the passage his reading so seems not quite decided. See
Scholz, and Hom. xviii. on [1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[422:1141](1130097.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p29.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p30"></span> “God never made his work for man to
mend.”—Dryden.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[422:1142](1130097.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p31"></span> Stopping the passage thus, the present
reading may stand.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[422:1143](1130097.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p33"></span> πλεονεξία seems here to be used for
“superiority,” if the reading of B. (*not* wicked) is correct; and this
makes the best sense. Otherwise, it must stand for “excess.”

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[422:1144](1130097.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p35"></span> καλός.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[423:1145](1130097.htm#fr_1144.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p38"></span> Ben. προσενεγκεῖν, Sav. προεν.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[423:1146](1130097.htm#fr_1145.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p40"></span> Ben. “to bear God in our body.” But this
seems rather the subject that has been already discussed. See the
beginning of the Moral.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 1:18,19](1130098.md)
