[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130102)  [Next](1130104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily X.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.xi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.xi-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p3"></span>“If a man desire the office of a Bishop,
he desireth a good work. A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of
one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt
to teach; not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but
patient, not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth well his own
house, having his children in subjection with all gravity.”

<span id="v.iii.xi-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>As</span> now proceeding to discourse of the
Episcopal office, he sets out with showing what sort of a person a
Bishop ought to be. And here he does not do it as in the course of his
exhortation to Timothy, but addresses all, and instructs others through
him. And what says he? “If a man desire the office of a Bishop,” I do
not blame him, for it is a work of protection. If any one has this
desire, so that he does not covet the dominion and authority, but wishes
to protect the Church, I blame him not. “For he desireth a good work.”
Even Moses desired <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="v.iii.xi-Page_438"></span>the office, though not the power, and his
desire exposed him to that taunt, “Who made thee a ruler and a judge
over us?” ([Acts 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027), [Exod.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014)<span id="v.iii.xi-p4.2"></span>.)
If any one, then, desire it in this way, let him desire it. For the
Episcopate is so called from having the oversight of all.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p5"></span>“A Bishop then,” he says, “must be
blameless, the husband of one wife.” This he does not lay down as a
rule, as if he must not be without one, but as prohibiting his having
more than one. <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192) For even the
Jews were allowed to contract second marriages, and even to have two
wives at one time. For “marriage is honorable,” ([Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>.)
Some however say, that this is said that he should be the husband of one
wife. <span id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193) “Blameless.” Every
virtue is implied in this word; so that if any one be conscious to
himself of any sins, he doth not well to desire an office for which his
own actions have disqualified him. For such an one ought to be ruled,
and not to rule others. For he who bears rule should be brighter than
any luminary; his life should be unspotted, so that all should look up
to him, and make his life the model of their own. But in employing this
exhortation, he had no common object in view. For he too <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194) was about to appoint Bishops,
(which also he exhorts Titus to do in his Epistle to him,) and as it was
probable that many would desire that office, therefore he urges these
admonitions. “Vigilant,” he says, that is, circumspect, having a
thousand eyes about him, quicksighted, not having the eyes of his mind
dimmed. For many things occur which permit not a man to see clearly, to
see things as they are. For care and troubles, and a load of business on
all sides press upon him. He must therefore be vigilant, not only over
his own concerns, but over those of others. He must be well awake, he
must be fervent in spirit, and, as it were, breathe fire; he must labor
and attend upon his duty by day and by night, even more than a general
upon his army; he must be careful and concerned for all. “Sober, of good
behavior, given to hospitality.” Because these qualities are possessed
by most of those who are under their rule, (for in these respects they
ought to be equal to those who rule over them,) he, to show what is
peculiar to the Bishops, adds, “apt to teach.” For this is not required
of him that is ruled, but is most essential to him who has this rule
committed to him. <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195)

<span id="v.iii.xi-p10"></span>“Not given to wine”: here he does not so
much mean intemperate, as insolent and impudent. “No striker”: this too
does not mean a striker with the hands. What means then “no striker”?
Because there are some who unseasonably smite the consciences of their
brethren, it seems to be said with reference to them. “Not greedy of
filthy lucre, but patient: not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity.”
If then “he who is married cares for the things of the world” ([1 Cor.
vii. 33](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#033)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p10.1"></span>.), and a Bishop ought not to care for the
things of the world, why does he say the husband of one wife? Some
indeed think that he says this with reference to one who remains
free <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196) from a wife. But if
otherwise, he that hath a wife may be as though he had none. ([1 Cor.
vii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p11.2"></span>.) For that liberty was then properly
granted, as suited to the nature of the circumstances then existing. And
it is very possible, if a man will, so to regulate his conduct. For as
riches make it difficult to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, yet rich
men have often entered in, so it is with marriage. But why does he say,
speaking of a Bishop, that he should be “not given to wine, hospitable,”
when he should name greater things? Why said he not that he should be an
Angel, not subject to human passions? Where are those great qualities of
which Christ speaks, which even those under their rule ought to possess?
To be crucified to the world, to be always ready to lay down their
lives, as Christ said. “The good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep”
([John x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p11.3"></span>.); and again, “He that taketh not his cross
and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.” ([Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span id="v.iii.xi-p11.4"></span>.)
But “not given to wine,” he says; a good prospect indeed, if such are
the things of which a Bishop is to be admonished! Why has he not said
that he ought to be already raised above the world? But dost thou demand
less of the Bishop, than even of those in the world? For to these he
saith, “Mortify your members which are upon the earth” ([Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.xi-p11.5"></span>.),
and “He that is dead, is freed from sin.” ([Rom. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.xi-p11.6"></span>.)
“They that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh”; and Christ again
says, “Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath, he is not worthy of
Me.” ([Luke xv. 33](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#033)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p11.7"></span>.) Why are not these things required by Paul?
Plainly because few could be found of such a character, and there was
need of many Bishops, that one might preside in every city.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p12"></span>But because the Churches were to be
exposed to attacks, <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) he
requires not that superior and <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="v.iii.xi-Page_439"></span>highly exalted virtue, but a moderate
degree of it; for to be sober, of good behavior, and temperate, were
qualities common to many. “Having his children in subjection with all
gravity.” This is necessary, that an example might be exhibited in his
own house. For who would believe that he who had not his own son in
subjection, would keep a stranger under command? “One that ruleth well
his own house.” Even those who are without say this, that he who is a
good manager of a house will be a good statesman. For the Church is, as
it were, a small <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) household,
and as in a house there are children and wife and domestics, and the man
has rule over them all; just so in the Church there are women, children,
servants. And if he that presides in the Church has partners in his
power, so hath the man a partner, that is, his wife. Ought the Church to
provide for her widows and virgins? so there are in a family servants,
and daughters, to be provided for. And, in fact, it is easier to rule
the house; therefore he asks, “if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the Church of God?”

<span id="v.iii.xi-p15"></span>[1 Tim.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xi-p15.1"></span>.
“Not a novice.” <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199) He does not
say, not a young man, but not a new convert. For he had said, “I have
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.” ([1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xi-p16.1"></span>.)
Wishing them to point out such an one, he used this word. For,
otherwise, what hindered him from saying, “Not a young man”? For if
youth only was an objection, why did he himself appoint Timothy, a young
man? (and this he proves by saying to him, “Let no man despise thy
youth.”) ([1 Tim. iv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p16.2"></span>.) Because <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) he was aware of his great virtue,
and his great strictness of life. Knowing which he writes, “From a child
thou hast learned the holy Scriptures.” ([2 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xi-p17.2"></span>.)
And that he practiced intense fasting is proved by the words, “Use a
little wine for thine often infirmities”; which he wrote to him amongst
other things, as, if he had not known of such good works of his, he
would not have written, nor given any such charge to his disciple. But
as there were many then who came over from the Heathen, and were
baptized, he says, “Do not immediately advance to a station of dignity a
novice, that is, one of these new converts.” For, if before he had well
been a disciple, he should at once be made a Teacher, he would be lifted
up into insolence. If before he had learnt to be under rule, he should
be appointed one of the rulers, he would be puffed up: therefore he
adds, “Lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the devil,” that is, into the same condemnation which Satan incurred by
his pride.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p18"></span>[1 Tim.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.xi-p18.1"></span>.
“Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he
fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.”

<span id="v.iii.xi-p19"></span>This is rightly said, as he was certain
to be reproached by them, and for the same reason perhaps he said, “the
husband of one wife,” though elsewhere he says, “I would that all men
were even as I myself!” ([1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.xi-p19.1"></span>.),
that is, practicing continency. That he may not therefore confine them
within too narrow a limit, by requiring an over-strict conversation, he
is satisfied to prescribe moderate virtue. For it was necessary to
appoint one to preside in every city, as he writes to Titus, “That thou
shouldest ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed thee.” ([Tit.
i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p19.2"></span>.) But what if he should have a good report,
and fair reputation, and not be worthy of it? In the first place this
would not easily happen. It is much for good men to obtain a good report
among their enemies. But, in fact, he has not left this to stand by
itself; a good report “also,” he says, that is, besides other qualities.
What then, if they should speak evil of him without a cause from envy,
especially as they were Heathens? This was not to be expected. For even
they will reverence a man of blameless life. Why then does he say,
speaking of himself, “Through evil report and good report”? ([2 Cor. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xi-p19.3"></span>.)
Because it was not his life that they assailed, but his preaching.
Therefore he says, “through evil report.” They were slandered as
deceivers and impostors, on account of their preaching, and this because
they could not attack their moral characters and lives. For why did no
one say of the Apostles, that they were fornicators, unclean, or
covetous persons, but that they were deceivers, which relates to their
preaching only? Must it not be that their lives were irreproachable? It
is manifest.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p20"></span>Therefore so let us too live, and no
enemy, no unbeliever, will be able to speak evil of us. For he whose
life is virtuous, is revered even by them. For truth stops the mouths
even of enemies.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p21"></span>But how does he “fall into a snare”? By
falling often into the same sins, as those who are without. For if he be
such a character, the evil one soon lays another snare for him, and they
soon effect his destruction. But if he should have a good report from
his enemies, much more will he have it from his friends. For that it is
not likely that he, whose life is blameless, should be ill-reported of,
we may infer from the words of Christ; “Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is
in Heaven.” ([Matt. 5.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p21.1"></span><span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="v.iii.xi-Page_440"></span>.) But what if one be falsely accused, and
from peculiar circumstances be slandered? Well this is a possible case;
but even such an one ought not to be promoted. For the result is much to
be feared. Therefore it is said he should have “a good report,” for your
good works are to shine. As therefore no one will say that the sun is
dark, not even the blind, (for he will be ashamed to oppose the opinion
of all,) so him that is of remarkable goodness no one will blame. And
though, on account of his doctrines, the Heathen will often slander him,
yet they will not attack his virtuous life, but will join with others in
admiring and revering it.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p22"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xi-p22.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let us then so live, that the
name of God be not blasphemed. Let us not, on the one hand, look to
human reputation; nor on the other, subject ourselves to an evil report,
but on both sides let us observe moderation; as he saith, “Among whom ye
shine as lights in the world.” ([Philip. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xi-p22.2"></span>.)
For on this account He left us here, that we may be as luminaries. that
we may be appointed Teachers of others, that we may be as leaven; that
we may converse as angels among men, as men with children, as spiritual
with natural men, that they may profit by us, that we may be as seed,
and may bring forth much fruit. There were no need of words, if we so
shone forth in our lives, there were no need of Teachers, did we but
exhibit works. There would be no Heathen, if we were such Christians as
we ought to be. If we kept the commandments of Christ, if we suffered
injury, if we allowed advantage to be taken of us, if being reviled we
blessed, if being ill-treated we did good ([1 Cor. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012)<span id="v.iii.xi-p22.3"></span>.);
if this were the general practice among us, no one would be so brutal as
not to become a convert to godliness. And to show this; Paul was but one
man, yet how many did he draw after him? If we were all such as he, how
many worlds might we not have drawn to us? Behold, Christians are more
numerous than Heathens. And in other arts, one man can teach a hundred
boys together; but here, where there are many more teachers, and many
more than the learners, no one is brought over. For those who are
taught, look to the virtue of their teachers: and when they see us
manifesting the same desires, pursuing the same objects, power and
honor, how can they admire Christianity? They see our lives open to
reproach, our souls worldly. We admire wealth equally with them, and
even more. We have the same horror of death, the same dread of poverty,
the same impatience of disease, we are equally fond of glory and of
rule. We harass ourselves to death from our love of money, and serve the
time. How then can they believe? From miracles? But these are no longer
wrought. From our conversation? It has become corrupt. From charity? Not
a trace of it is anywhere to be seen. Therefore we shall have to give an
account not only of our own sins, but of the injury done by them to
others.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p23"></span>Let us then return to a sound mind; let
us watch, and show forth a heavenly conversation upon earth. Let us say,
“Our conversation is in heaven” ([Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.xi-p23.1"></span>.),
and let us upon earth maintain the contest. There have been great men,
it may be said, amongst us, but “how,” says the Greek, “shall I believe
it? for I do not see anything like it in your conduct. If this is to be
said, we too have had our philosophers, men admirable for their lives.”
“But show me another Paul, or a John: you cannot.” Would he not then
laugh at us for reasoning in this manner? Would he not continue to sit
still in ignorance, seeing that the wisdom we profess is in words, not
in works? For now for a single halfpenny ye are ready to slay or be
slain! For a handful of earth thou raisest lawsuit after lawsuit! For
the death of a child thou turnest all upside down: I omit other things
that might make us weep; your auguries, your omens, your superstitious
observances, your casting of nativities, your signs, your amulets, your
divinations, your incantations, your magic arts. These are crying sins,
enough to provoke the anger of God; that after He has sent His own Son,
you should venture on such things as these.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p24"></span>What then can we do but weep? For hardly
is a small portion of the world in the way of salvation, and they who
are perishing hear it, and rejoice that they are not destined to suffer
alone, but in company with numbers. But what cause is this for joy? That
very joy will subject them to punishment. For do not think that it is
there as here, that to have companions in suffering affords consolation.
And whence is this manifest? I will make it clear. Suppose that a man
were commanded to be burnt, and that he saw his own son burning with
him, and that the smell of his scorched flesh rose to his nostrils;
would it not be of itself death to him? No doubt. And I will tell you
how it is. If those who are not suffering, yet seeing those things are
benumbed and faint with terror, much more will they be so affected, who
are themselves sufferers. Wonder not at this. Hear a certain wise one
saying, “Art thou become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?”
([Isa. xiv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p24.1"></span>.) For human nature is disposed to sympathy,
and the affections of others move us to pity. Will then a father seeing
His son in the same condemnation, or a husband his wife, or a man his
fellow-man, receive consolation, and not rather an aggravation of his
sufferings? Are not we in such case the more overcome? But there, you
say, there are no such feelings. I know there are not; but there are
others much more wretched. <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="v.iii.xi-Page_441"></span>For there will be wailing inconsolable,
all witnessing each other’s torments. Do they who are furnishing derive
comfort in their distress from the participation of others? It is no
consolation surely to see a son, a father, a wife, or grandchildren,
suffering the same punishment. If one sees friends in such a case, is it
any comfort? None! None! It rather adds to the intensity of our own
sufferings! Besides, there are evils, which by reason of their severity
cannot be mitigated by being common. If two men were together thrown
into the fire, would they comfort one another? Tell me; if we have ever
been attacked by a violent fever, have we not found that all consolation
has failed us? for there are calamities, so overwhelming as to leave no
room for comfort in the soul. When a wife has lost her husband, is it a
lessening of her grief to number up the many who have suffered the like
loss? Let us not therefore be supported by any such hope, rather let us
find our sole consolation in repenting of our sins, in pursuing the good
path that leads to Heaven, that we may obtain the kingdom of Heaven, by
the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[438:1193](1130103.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p6"></span> ἀμετρίαν.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[438:1194](1130103.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p7"></span> This is literal from the Greek, but the
sense is difficult to make out from the seeming tautology, unless he
means that some supposed marriage enjoined. The Greek will bear, “And
some say, ‘Let him be the husband of one wife,’ was said with a view to
this.” See below. Œcumenius says that some take it of one. See Comp.
[Ezek. xliv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[438:1195](1130103.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p8"></span> i.e. Timothy.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[438:1196](1130103.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p9"></span> πάροινον. A word often used as he here
explains it; and παροινία is used even for contumely apart from
insolence. Theodoret, Eccl. Hist. v. 17.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[438:1197](1130103.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p11"></span> He seems to mean without a second
marriage. See [1 Cor. vii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#027)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p11.1"></span>. An old Latin translation has this
expressly. The reading is not quite certain.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[438:1198](1130103.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p13"></span> i.e. and therefore to want many
guardians.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[439:1199](1130103.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p14"></span> Doun. conj. “great.”

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[439:1200](1130103.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p16"></span> νέοφυτον, one newly “planted.”

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[439:1201](1130103.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="v.iii.xi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p17"></span> These words, down to “disciple,” are not
in Sav.; they are supplied from a Colb. <span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii.xi-p17.1"></span>ms</span>. in the last Paris ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 3:8-10](1130104)
