[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130041)  [Next](1130043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span><span id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span
id="iv.iii.i-Page_181"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>epistle of St. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p5.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p6.1"></span>philippians.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Introductory Discourse.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p9.1"></span>The</span> Philippians are of a city in
Macedonia, a city that is a colony, as Luke saith. Here that seller of
purple was converted, a woman of uncommon piety and heedfulness. Here
the ruler of the synagogue <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506)
believed. Here was Paul scourged with Silas. Here the magistrates
requested them to depart, and were afraid of them, and the preaching had
an illustrious commencement. And he bears them many and high testimonies
himself, calling them his own crown, and saying they had suffered much.
For, “To you,” he saith, “it hath been granted of God, <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) not only to believe on Him, but also
to suffer in His behalf.” ([Philip. i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.)
But when he wrote to them, it happened that he was in bonds. Therefore
he says, “So that my bonds became manifest in Christ in the whole
prætorium,” calling the palace of Nero the prætorium. <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) But he was bound and let go
again, <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) and this he showed to
Timothy by saying, “At my first defence no one took my part, but all
forsook me: may it not be laid to their account. But the Lord stood by
me and strengthened me.” ([2 Tim. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.)
He speaks of the bonds then in which he was before that defence. For
that Timothy was not present then, is evident: for, “At my first
defence,” he says, “no man took my part”; and this, by writing, he was
making known to him. He would not then, had he already known it, have
written thus to him. But when he wrote this epistle, Timothy was with
him. And he shows it by what he says: “But I hope in the Lord Jesus to
send Timothy shortly unto you.” ([Philip. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>.)
And again, “Him I hope to send forthwith so soon as I shall see how it
will go with me.” For he was loosed from his bonds and again bound after
he had been to them. But if he saith, “Yea, and I am <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) offered upon the sacrifice and service
of your faith,” it is not as though this were now come to pass, but as
much as to say, “and whenever this takes place I am glad,” raising them
from their dejection at his bonds. For that he was not about to die at
that time is plain from what he saith: “But I hope <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) in the Lord that I myself also shall
come shortly unto you.” ([Philip. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.i-p15.1"></span>.)
And again, “And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide, yea,
and abide with you all.”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span>2. But the Philippians had sent to him
Epaphroditus, to carry him money, and to know the things concerning him,
for they were most lovingly disposed toward him. For that they sent,
hear himself, saying, “I have all things, and <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> <span id="iv.iii.i-Page_182"></span>abound; I am filled,
having received from Epaphroditus the things that came from you.” At the
same time they sent to know this. For that they sent also to know this
he shows at once in the beginning of the epistle, writing of his own
matters, and saying, “But I would have you know that the things which
happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the progress of the
Gospel.” ([Philip. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>.) And again, “I hope to send Timothy shortly
unto you, that I also may be of good comfort when I know your state.”
This, “that I also,” is as if he meant “as you for full assurance sent
to know the things concerning me, so ‘I also,’ that I may be of good
comfort when I know the things concerning you.” Since then they had also
been a long time without sending <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)
(for this he proves by saying, “Now at length you have revived your
thought for me”) ([Philip. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.1"></span>.), and then they heard that he was in bonds
([Philip. ii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.2"></span>.); for if they heard about Epaphroditus,
that he was sick, he being no such very remarkable person as Paul was,
much more did they hear about Paul, and it was reasonable that they
should be disturbed; therefore, in the opening of the epistle he offers
them much consolation about his bonds, showing that they should not
merely not be disturbed, but even rejoice. Then he gives them counsel
about unanimity and humility, teaching them that this was their greatest
safety, and that so they could easily overcome their enemies. For it is
not being in bonds that is painful to your teachers, but their disciples
not being of one mind. For the former brings even furtherance to the
Gospel, but the latter distracts.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span>3. So then after admonishing them to be
of one mind, and showing that unanimity comes of humility, and then
aiming a shaft at those Jews who were everywhere corrupting the doctrine
under a show of Christianity, and calling them “dogs” and “evil workers”
([Philip. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>.), and giving admonition to keep away from
them, and teaching to whom it is right to attend, and discoursing at
length on moral points, and bringing them to order, and recalling them
to themselves, by saying, “The Lord is at hand” ([Philip. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.i-p18.2"></span>.),
he makes mention also, with his usual wisdom, of what had been sent, and
then offers them abundant consolation. But he appears in writing to be
doing them special honor, and never in any place writes any thing of
reproof, which is a proof of their virtue, in that they gave no occasion
to their teacher, and that he has written to them not in the way of
rebuke, but throughout in the way of encouragement. And as I said also
at first, this city showed great readiness for the faith; inasmuch as
the very jailor, (and you know it is a business full of all wickedness,)
at once, upon one miracle, both ran to them, and was baptized with all
his house. For the miracle that took place he saw alone, but the gain he
reaped not alone, but jointly with his wife and all his house. Nay, even
the magistrates who scourged him seem to have done this rather of sudden
impulse than out of wickedness, both from their sending at once to let
him go, and from their being afterwards afraid. And he bears testimony
to them not only in faith, or in perils, but also in well-doing, where
he says, “That even in the beginning of the Gospel, ye sent once and
again unto my need” ([Phil. 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.3"></span>.), when no one else did so; for he says, “no
Church had fellowship with me in the matter of giving and receiving”;
and that their intermission had been rather from lack of opportunity
than from choice, saying, “Not that ye took no thought for me, but ye
lacked opportunity.” ([Philip. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.i-p18.4"></span>.)
Let us also, knowing these things, and having so many patterns, and the
love that he bore them—for that he loved them greatly appears in his
saying, “For I have no man like minded, who will care truly for your
state” ([Philip. ii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.5"></span>.); and again, “Because I have you in my
heart, and in my bonds,”—

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span>4. let us also, knowing these things,
show ourselves worthy of such examples, by being ready to suffer for
Christ. <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) But now the persecution
is no more. So then, if there is nothing else, let us imitate their
earnestness in well doing, and not think, if we have given once or
twice, that we have fulfilled all. For we must do this through our whole
life. For it is not once that we have to please God, but constantly. The
racer, if, after running even ten heats, he leave the remaining one
undone, has lost all; and we, if we begin with good works, and afterward
faint, have lost all, have spoiled all. Listen to that profitable
admonition that saith, “Let not mercy <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) and truth forsake thee.” ([Prov. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>.)
He saith not do so once, nor the second time, nor the third, nor the
tenth, nor the hundredth, but continually: “let them not forsake thee.”
And he did not say, Do not forsake them, but, “Let them not forsake
thee,” showing that we are in need of them, and not they of us; and
teaching us that we ought to make every effort to keep them with us. And
“bind them,” saith he, “about thy neck.” For as the children of the
wealthy have an ornament of gold about their neck, and never put it off,
because it exhibits a token of their high birth, so should we too wear
mercy ever about us, showing that we are children of the compassionate
one, “who <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="iv.iii.i-Page_183"></span>makes the sun to rise upon the evil and
the good” ([Matt. v. 45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p21.2"></span>.). “But the unbelievers,” you say, “do not
believe it.” I say then, hereby shall they believe, if we do these
works. If they see that we take pity on all, and are enrolled under Him
for our Teacher, they will know that it is in imitation of Him that we
so act. For “mercy,” it says, “and true faith.” <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) He well said “true.” For He willeth it
not to be of rapine or fraud. For this were not “faith”; this were not
“truth.” For he that plundereth must lie and forswear himself. So do not
thou, saith he, but have faith with thy mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span>Let us put on this ornament. Let us make
a golden chain for our soul, of mercy I mean, while we are here. For if
this age <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) pass, we can use it no
longer. And why? <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.3"></span>There</span> there are no poor, <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.i-p24.4"></span>There</span> there are no
riches, no more want <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.5"></span>There.</span> While we are children, let us
not rob ourselves of this ornament. For as with children, if they become
men, these are taken away, and they are advanced to other adornment; so
too is it with us. There will be no more alms by money, but other and
far nobler. <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) Let us not then
deprive ourselves of this! Let us make our soul appear beautiful! Great
is alms, beautiful, and honorable, great is that gift, but greater is
goodness. If we learn to despise riches, we shall learn other things
besides. For behold how many good things spring from hence! He that
giveth alms, as he ought to give, learns to despise wealth. He that has
learned to despise wealth has cut up the root of evils. So that he does
not do a greater good than he receives, not merely in that there is a
due recompense and a requital for alms, but also in that his soul
becomes philosophic, and elevated, and rich. He that gives alms is
instructed not to admire riches or gold. And this lesson once fixed in
his mind, he has gotten a great step toward mounting to Heaven, and has
cut away ten thousand occasions of strife, and contention, and envy, and
dejection. For ye know, ye too know, that all things are done for
riches, and unnumbered wars are made for riches. But he that has learned
to despise them, has placed himself in a quiet harbor, he no longer
fears damage. For this hath alms taught him. He no longer desires what
is his neighbor’s; for how should he, that parts with his own, and
gives? He no longer envies the rich man; for how should he, that is
willing to become poor? He clears the eye of his soul. And these are but
here. But hereafter it is not to be told what blessings he shall win. He
shall not abide without with the foolish virgins, but shall enter in
with those that were wise, together with the Bridegroom, having his
lamps bright. And though they have endured hardship in virginity, he
that hath not so much as tasted these hardships shall be better than
they. Such is the power of Mercy. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) She brings in her nurslings with much
boldness. For she is known to the porters in Heaven, that keep the gates
of the Bride-Chamber, and not known only, but reverenced; and those whom
she knows to have honored her, she will bring in with much boldness, and
none will gainsay, but all make room. For if she brought God down to
earth, and persuaded him to become man, much more shall she be able to
raise a man to Heaven; for great is her might. If then <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) from mercy and loving-kindness God
became man, and He persuaded Himself to become a servant, much rather
will He bring His servants into His own house. Her let us love, on her
let us set our affection, not one day, nor two, but all our life long,
that she may acknowledge us. If she acknowledge us, the Lord will
acknowledge us too. If she disown us, the Lord too will disown us, and
will say, “I know you not.” But may it not be ours to hear this voice,
but that happy one instead, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” ([Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="iv.iii.i-p27.1"></span>.)
Which may we all obtain, by His grace and lovingkindness, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory,
strength, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_506"></span>[181:507](1130042.htm#fr_506) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span> \[This reading contains an obvious
error, and would be readily altered by students or copyists; and one
manuscript gives “keeper of the prison.” Chrysostom not unfrequently
makes slips in quoting from memory, as do most preachers. He is here
doubtless thinking of Crispus. ([Acts xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.1"></span>.)
Below, in paragraph 3, he has it right.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_507"></span>[181:508](1130042.htm#fr_507) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span> \[All documents for New Testament give
“in behalf of Christ.” Chrysostom was quoting from memory.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_508"></span>[181:509](1130042.htm#fr_508) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span> \[Scholars now generally understand the
prætorian camp or the prætorian guard. See Lightfoot here.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_509"></span>[181:510](1130042.htm#fr_509) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span> His statement amounts to this, that the
present epistle was written in St. Paul’s first imprisonment, when
Timothy was with him, for that the second to Timothy was written in a
second imprisonment, from which he was only released by martyrdom. The
“first defence” belongs to the second imprisonment. Between the two, it
is probable that he visited the Philippians, according to his intention.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[181:511](1130042.htm#fr_510) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span> The *if* is omitted, perhaps in order to
put the objection in a strong light.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[181:512](1130042.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span> \[Correct New Testament text,
“trust.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_512"></span>[182:513](1130042.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span> \[The altered text and most editions add
“but had then done it,” through misunderstanding of the rather obscure
connection.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_513"></span>[182:514](1130042.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span> \[Such a digressive and awkward sentence
is of course smoothed out in the altered text, but is perfectly natural
in a freely spoken discourse.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_514"></span>[182:515](1130042.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span> The same word is here used for “mercy”
and “alms.” \[And it is quoted from the Sept. in the plural, “mercies,”
or “almsgivings.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_515"></span>[183:516](1130042.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span> The LXX. have “faith,” probably in the
sense of “truth,” which Aquila has, and the Hebrew requires; “true” is
added by St. Chrys. to mark this.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[183:517](1130042.htm#fr_516) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.2"></span>λικία</span>, which carries on the simile.
\[He means the age of childhood, when ornaments are a pleasure.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_517"></span>[183:518](1130042.htm#fr_517) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span> He probably refers to the benefits
conferred by the Saints on those on earth.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[183:519](1130042.htm#fr_518) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span> \[The same Greek word that above is
translated “alms.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_519"></span>[183:520](1130042.htm#fr_519) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p27"></span> Such a repetition is common with
Chrysostom, sometimes perhaps from his own excitement. Here it seems
rather meant to temper the warmth of his eloquence, and fix a sober
thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily I](1130043)
