[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130006)  [Next](1130008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_14"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>[Gal.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>*“Then after the space of fourteen
years,* <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) *I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me. And I went up by
revelation.”*

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>His</span> first journey was owing to his
desire to visit Peter, his second, he says, arose from a revelation of
the Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>[Gal.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.
“And I laid before them the Gospel which I preach among the Gentiles,
but privately before them who were of repute, lest by any means I should
be running or had run in vain.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>What is this, O Paul! thou who neither
at the beginning nor after three years wouldest confer with the
Apostles, dost thou now confer with them, after fourteen years are past,
lest thou shouldest be running in vain? Better would it have been to
have done so at first, than after so many years; and why didst thou run
at all, if not satisfied that thou wert not running in vain? Who would
be so senseless as to preach for so many years, without being sure that
his preaching was true? And what enhances the difficulty is, that he
says he went up by revelation; this difficulty, however, will afford a
solution of the former one. Had he gone up of his own accord, it would
have been most unreasonable, nor is it possible that this blessed soul
should have fallen into such folly; for it is himself who says, “I
therefore so run, as not uncertainly; so fight I, as not beating the
air.” ([1 Cor. ix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>.) If therefore he runs, “not uncertainly,”
how can he say, “lest I should be running, or had run, in vain?” It is
evident from this, that if he had gone up without a revelation, he would
have committed an act of folly. But the actual case involved no such
absurdity; who shall dare to still harbor this suspicion, when it was
the grace of the Spirit which drew him? On this account he added the
words “by revelation,” lest, before the question was solved, he should
be condemned of folly; well knowing that it was no human occurrence, but
a deep Divine Providence concerning the present and future. What then is
the reason of this journey of his? As when he went up before from
Antioch to Jerusalem, it was not for his own sake, (for he saw clearly
that his duty was simply to obey the doctrines of Christ,) but from a
desire to reconcile the contentious; so now his object was the complete
satisfaction of his accusers, not any wish of his own to learn that he
had not run in vain. They conceived that Peter and John, of whom they
thought more highly than of Paul, differed from him in that he omitted
circumcision in his preaching, while the former allowed it, and they
believed that in this he acted unlawfully, and was running in vain. I
went up, says he, and communicated unto them my Gospel, not that I might
learn aught myself, (as appears more clearly further on,) but that I
might convince these suspicious persons that I do not run in vain. The
Spirit forseeing this contention had provided that he should go up and
make this communication.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>Wherefore he says that he went up by
revelation, <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) and, taking Barnabas
and Titus as witnesses of his preaching, communicated to them the Gospel
which he preached to the Gentiles, that is, with the omission of
circumcision. “But privately before them who were of repute.” What means
“privately?” Rather, he who wishes to reform doctrines held in common,
proposes them, not privately, but before all in common; but Paul did
this privately, for his object was, not to learn or reform any thing,
but to cut off the grounds of those who would fain deceive. All at
Jerusalem were offended, if the law was transgressed, or the use of
circumcision forbidden; as James says, “Thou seest, brother, how many
thousands there are among the Jews of them which have believed; and they
<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii-Page_15"></span>are
informed of thee, that thou teachest to forsake the law.” ([Acts xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>,
et seq.) Since then they were offended he did not condescend to come
forward publicly and declare what his preaching was, but he conferred
privately with those who were of reputation before Barnabas and Titus,
that they might credibly testify to his accusers, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) that the Apostles found no discrepancy in
his preaching, but confirmed it. The expression, “those that were of
repute,” (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>τοῖς
δοκοῦσιν</span>) does not impugn the reality of their greatness; for he
says of himself, “And I also seem (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p10.2"></span>δοκῶ</span>) to have the Spirit of God,”
thereby not denying the fact, but stating it modestly. And here the
phrase implies his own assent to the common opinion.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11"></span>[Gal.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>. “But not even Titus, who was with me,
being a Greek, <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) was compelled to be
circumcised.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p13"></span>What means, “being a Greek?” Of Greek
extraction, and not circumcised; for not only did I so preach but Titus
so acted, nor did the Apostles compel him to be circumcised. A plain
proof this that the Apostles did not condemn Paul’s doctrine or his
practice. Nay more, even the urgent representations of the adverse
party, who were aware of these facts, did not oblige the Apostles to
enjoin circumcision, as appears by his own words,—

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>[Gal.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>. “And that because of the false brethren,
privily brought in.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p15"></span>Here arises a very important question,
Who were these false brethren? <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) If
the Apostles permitted circumcision at Jerusalem, why are those who
enjoined it, in accordance with the Apostolic sentence, to be called
false brethren? First; because there is a difference between commanding
an act to be done, and allowing it after it is done. He who enjoins an
act, does it with zeal as necessary, and of primary importance; but he
who, without himself commanding it, alloweth another to do it who wishes
yields not from a sense of its being necessary but in order to subserve
some purpose. We have a similar instance, in Paul’s Epistle to the
Corinthians, in his command to husbands and wives to come together
again. To which, that he might not be thought to be legislating for
them, he subjoins, “But this I say by way of permission, not of
commandment.” ([1 Cor. vii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p16.2"></span>.) For this was not a judgment
authoritatively given but an indulgence to their incontinence; as he
says, “for your incontinency.” Would you know Paul’s sentence in this
matter? hear his words, “I would that all men were even as I myself,”
([1 Cor. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p16.3"></span>.) in continence. And so here, the Apostles
made this concession, not as vindicating the law, but as condescending
to the infirmities of Judaism. Had they been vindicating the law, they
would not have preached to the Jews in one way, and to the Gentiles in
another. Had the observance been necessary for unbelievers, then indeed
it would plainly have likewise been necessary for all the faithful. But
by their decision not to harass the Gentiles on this point, they showed
that they permitted it by way of condescension to the Jews. Whereas the
purpose of the false brethren was to cast them out of grace, and reduce
them under the yoke of slavery again. This is the first difference, and
a very wide one. The second is, that the Apostles so acted in Judæa,
where the Law was in force, but the false brethren, every where, for all
the Galatians were influenced by them. Whence it appears that their
intention was, not to build up, but entirely to pull down the Gospel,
and that the thing was permitted by the Apostles on one ground and
zealously practiced by the false brethren on another.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p17"></span>[Gal.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>. “Who came in privily to spy out our
liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into
bondage.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p18"></span>He points out their hostility by
calling them spies; for the sole object of a spy is to obtain for
himself facilities of devastation and destruction, by becoming
acquainted with his adversary’s position. And this is what those did,
who wished to bring the disciples back to their old servitude. Hence too
appears how very contrary their purpose was to that of the Apostles; the
latter made concessions that they might gradually extricate them from
their servitude, but the former plotted to subject them to one more
severe. Therefore they looked round and observed accurately and made
themselves busybodies to find out who were uncircumcised; as Paul says,
“they came in privily to spy out our liberty,” thus pointing out their
machinations not only by the term “spies,” but by this expression of a
furtive entrance and creeping in.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p19"></span>[Gal.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>. “To whom we gave place in the way of
subjection, no, not for an hour.” <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p21"></span>Observe the force and emphasis of the
phrase; he says not, “by argument,” but, “by subjection,” for their
object was not to teach good doctrine, but to subjugate and enslave
them. <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_16"></span>Wherefore, says he, we yielded to the
Apostles, but not to these.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>[Gal.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>. “That the truth of the Gospel might
continue with you.” <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24"></span>That we may confirm, says he, by our
deeds what we have already declared by words,—namely, that the “old
things are passed away, behold they are become new;” and that “if any
man is in Christ he is a new creature;” ([2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>.) and that “if ye receive circumcision,
Christ will profit you nothing.” ([Gal. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24.2"></span>.)
In maintaining this truth we gave place not even for an hour. Then, as
he was directly met by the conduct of the Apostles, and the reason of
their enjoining the rite would probably be asked, he proceeds to solve
this objection. This he does with great skill, for he does not give the
actual reason, which was, that the Apostles acted by way of
condescension and in the use of a scheme, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p24.3"></span>οἰκονομία</span>) as it were; for otherwise
his hearers would have been injured. For those, who are to derive
benefit from a scheme should be unacquainted with the design of it; all
will be undone, if this appears. Wherefore, he who is to take part in it
should know the drift of it; those who are to benefit by it should not.
To make my meaning more evident, I will take an example from our present
subject. The blessed Paul himself, who meant to abrogate circumcision,
when he was about to send Timothy to teach the Jews, first circumcised
him and so sent him. This he did, that his hearers might the more
readily receive him; he began by circumcising, that in the end he might
abolish it. But this reason he imparted to Timothy only, and told it not
to the disciples. Had they known that the very purpose of his
circumcision was the abolition of the rite, they would never have
listened to his preaching, and the whole benefit would have been lost.
But now their ignorance was of the greatest use to them, for their idea
that his conduct proceeded from a regard to the Law, led them to receive
both him and his doctrine with kindness and courtesy, and having
gradually received him, and become instructed, they abandoned their old
customs. Now this would not have happened had they known his reasons
from the first; for they would have turned away from him, and being
turned away would not have given him a hearing, and not hearing, would
have continued in their former error. To prevent this, he did not
disclose his reasons; here too he does not explain the occasion of the
scheme, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p24.4"></span>οἰκονομία</span>,) but shapes his discourse
differently; thus:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25"></span>[Gal.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>. “But from those who were reputed to be
somewhat <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) (whatsoever they were, it
maketh no matter to me, God accepteth no man’s person.)”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p27"></span>Here he not only does not defend the
Apostles, but even presses hard upon those holy men, for the benefit of
the weak. His meaning is this: although they permit circumcision, they
shall render an account to God, for God will not accept their persons,
because they are great and in station. But he does not speak so plainly,
but with caution. He says not, if they vitiate their doctrine, and
swerve from the appointed rule of their preaching, they shall be judged
with the utmost rigor, and suffer punishment; but he alludes to them
more reverently, in the words, “of those who were reputed to be
somewhat, whatsoever they were.” He says not, “whatsoever they ‘are,’”
but “were,” showing that they too had thenceforth <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) ceased so to preach, the doctrine having
extended itself universally. The phrase, “whatsoever they were,”
implies, that if they so preached they should render account, for they
had to justify themselves before God, not before men. This he said, not
as doubtful or ignorant of the rectitude of their procedure, but (as I
said before) from a sense of the expediency of so forming his discourse.
Then, that he may not seem to take the opposite side and to accuse them,
and so create a suspicion of their disagreement, he straightway subjoins
this correction: “for those who were reputed to be somewhat, in
conference imparted nothing to me.” This is his meaning; What you may
say, I know not; this I know well, that the Apostles did not oppose me,
but our sentiments conspired and accorded. This appears from his
expression, “they gave me the right hand of fellowship;” but he does not
say this at present, but only that they neither informed or corrected
him on any point, nor added to his knowledge.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p29"></span>[Gal.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>. “For those who were reputed to be
somewhat, imparted nothing to me:”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30"></span>That is to say, when told of my
proceedings, they added nothing, they corrected nothing, and though
aware that the object of my journey was to communicate with them, that I
had come by revelation of the Spirit, and that I had Titus with me who
was uncircumcised, they neither circumcised him, nor imparted to me any
additional knowledge.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p31"></span>[Gal.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>. “But contrariwise.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p32"></span><span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_17"></span>Some hold his meaning to be, not only
that the Apostles did not instruct him, but that they were instructed by
him. But I would not say this, for what could they, each of whom was
himself perfectly instructed, have learnt from him? He does not
therefore intend this by the expression, “contrariwise,” but that so far
were they from blaming, that they praised him: for praise is the
contrary of blame. Some would probably here reply: Why did not the
Apostles, if they praised your procedure, as the proper consequence
abolish circumcision? <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) Now to assert
that they did abolish it Paul considered much too bold, and inconsistent
with his own admission. On the other hand, to admit that they had
sanctioned circumcision, would necessarily expose him to another
objection. For it would be said, if the Apostles praised your preaching,
yet sanctioned circumcision, they were inconsistent with themselves.
What then is the solution? is he to say that they acted thus out of
condescension to Judaism? To say this would have shaken the very
foundation of the economy. Wherefore he leaves the subject in suspense
and uncertainty, by the words, “but of those who were reputed to be
somewhat; it maketh no matter to me.” Which is in effect to say, I
accuse not, nor traduce those holy men; they know what it is they have
done; to God must they render their account. What I am desirous to prove
is, that they neither reversed nor corrected my procedure, nor added to
it as in their opinion defective, but gave it their approbation and
assent; and to this Titus and Barnabas bear witness. Then he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p34"></span>[Gal.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>. “When they saw that I had been entrusted
with the Gospel of the Uncircumcision even as Peter with the Gospel of
the Circumcision <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) ,”—

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p36"></span>The Circumcision and Uncircumcision;
meaning, not the things themselves, but the nations known by these
distinctions; wherefore he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37"></span>[Gal.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>. “For He that wrought for Peter unto the
Apostleship of the Circumcision wrought for me also unto the Gentiles.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p38"></span>He calls the Gentiles the
Uncircumcision and the Jews the Circumcision, and declares his own rank
to be equal to that of the Apostles; and, by comparing himself with
their Leader not with the others, he shows that the dignity of each was
the same. After he had established the proof of their unanimity, he
takes courage, and proceeds confidently in his argument, not stopping at
the Apostles, but advances to Christ Himself, and to the grace which He
had conferred upon him, and calls the Apostles as his witnesses, saying,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39"></span>[Gal.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>. “And when they perceived the grace that
was given unto me, James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to
be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of
fellowship.” <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p41"></span>He says not when they “heard,” but when
they “perceived,” that is, were assured by the facts themselves, “they
gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.” Observe how he
gradually proves that his doctrine was ratified both by Christ and by
the Apostles. For grace would neither have been implanted, nor been
operative in him, had not his preaching been approved by Christ. Where
it was for the purpose of comparison with himself, he mentioned Peter
alone; here, when he calls them as witnesses, he names the three
together, “Cephas, James, John,” and with an encomium, “who were reputed
to be pillars.” Here again the expression “who were reputed” does not
impugn the reality of the fact, but adopts the estimate of others, and
implies that these great and distinguished men, whose fame was
universal, bare witness that his preaching was ratified by Christ, that
they were practically informed and convinced by experience concerning
it. “Therefore they gave the right hands of fellowship” to me, and not
to me only, but also to Barnabas, “that we should go unto the Gentiles,
and they unto the Circumcision.” Here indeed is exceeding prudence as
well as an incontrovertible proof of their concord. For it shows that
his and their doctrine was interchangeable, and that both approved the
same thing, that they should so preach to the Jews, and he to the
Gentiles. Wherefore he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p42"></span>[Gal.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>. “That we should go unto the Gentiles and
they unto the Circumcision.” <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p44"></span>Observe that here also he means by “the
Circumcision,” not the rite, but the Jews; whenever he speaks of the
rite, and wishes to contrast it, he adds the word “uncircumcision;” as
when he says, “For circumcision indeed profiteth, if thou be a doer of
the law; but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is
become uncircumcision.” ([Rom. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p44.1"></span>.) And again, “Neither circumcision
availeth any <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_18"></span>thing, nor uncircumcision.” But when it
is to the Jews and not to the deed that he gives this name, and wishes
to signify the nation, he opposes to it not uncircumcision in its
literal sense, but the Gentiles. For the Jews are the contradistinction
to the Gentiles, the Circumcision to the Uncircumcision. Thus when he
says above, “For He that wrought for Peter into the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, wrought for me also unto the Gentiles;” and again, “We
unto the Gentiles and they unto the Circumcision,” he means not the rite
itself, but the Jewish nation, thus distinguishing them from the
Gentiles.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p45"></span>[Gal.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p45.1"></span>. “Only they would that we should remember
the poor; which very thing I was also zealous to do.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p46"></span>This is his meaning: In our preaching
we divided the world between us, I took the Gentiles and they the Jews,
according to the Divine decree; but to the sustenance of the poor among
the Jews I also contributed my share, which, had there been any
dissension between us, they would not have accepted. Next, who were
these poor persons? Many of the believing Jews in Palestine had been
deprived of all their goods, and scattered over the world, as he
mentions in the Epistle to the Hebrews <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) , “For ye took joyfully the spoiling of
your possessions;” and in writing to the Thessalonians, ([1 Thes. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p47.2"></span>.) he extols their fortitude, “Ye became
imitators of the Churches of God which are in Judæa,…for ye also
suffered the same thing of your own countrymen, even as they did of the
Jews.” And he shows throughout that those Greeks who believed were not
under persecution from the rest, such as the believing Jews were
suffering from their own kindred, for there is no nation of a temper so
cruel. Wherefore he exercises much zeal, as appears in the Epistles to
the Romans ([Rom. xv. 25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p47.3"></span>.) and Corinthians ([1 Cor. xvi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p47.4"></span>.) that these persons should meet with much
attention; and Paul not only collects money for them, but himself
conveys it, as he says, “But now I go unto Jerusalem ministering unto
the saints,” ([Rom. xv. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p47.5"></span>.) for they were without the necessaries of
life. And he here shows that in this instance having resolved to assist
them, he had undertaken and would not abandon it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p48"></span>Having by these means declared the
unanimity and harmony between the Apostles and himself, he is obliged to
proceed to mention his debate with Peter at Antioch.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p49"></span>[Gal.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p49.1"></span>. “But when Cephas came to Antioch, I
resisted him to the face, because he stood condemned. For before that
certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they
came, he drew back and separated himself, fearing them that were of the
circumcision.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p50"></span>Many, on a superficial reading of this
part of the Epistle, suppose that Paul accused Peter of hypocrisy. But
this is not so, indeed it is not, far from it; <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) we shall discover great wisdom, both of
Paul and Peter, concealed herein for the benefit of their hearers. But
first a word must be said about Peter’s freedom in speech, and how it
was ever his way to outstrip the other disciples. Indeed it was upon one
such occasion that he gained his name from the unbending and impregnable
character of his faith. For when all were interrogated in common, he
stepped before the others and answered, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God.” ([Mat. xvi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.3"></span>.) This was when the keys of heaven were
committed to him. So too, he appears to have been the only speaker on
the Mount; ([Mat. xvii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.4"></span>.) and when Christ spoke of His
crucifixion, and the others kept silence, he said, “Be it far from
Thee.” ([Mat. xvi. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.5"></span>.) These words evince, if not a cautious
temper, at least a fervent love; and in all instances we find him more
vehement than the others, and rushing forward into danger. So when
Christ was seen on the beach, and the others were pushing the boat in,
he was too impatient to wait for its coming to land. ([John xxi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p51.6"></span>.)
And after the Resurrection, when the Jews were murderous and maddened,
and sought to tear the Apostles in pieces, he first dared to come
forward, and to declare, that the Crucified was taken up into heaven.
([Acts 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.7"></span>.) It is a greater thing to open a closed
door, and to commence an action, than to be free-spoken afterwards. How
could he ever dissemble who had exposed his life to such a populace? He
who when scourged and bound would not bate a jot of his courage, and
this at the beginning of his mission, and in the heart of the chief city
where there was so much danger,—how could he, long afterwards in
Antioch, where no danger was at hand, and his character had received
lustre from the testimony of his actions, feel any apprehension of the
believing Jews? How could he, I say, who at the very first and in their
chief city feared not the Jews while Jews, after a long time and in a
foreign city, fear those of them who had been converted? Paul therefore
does not speak this against Peter, but with the same meaning in which he
said, “for they who were reputed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were,
it maketh no matter to me.” But to remove any doubt on this point, we
must unfold the reason of these expressions.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p52"></span>The Apostles, as I said before,
permitted cir<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_19"></span>cumcision at Jerusalem, an abrupt
severance from the law not being practicable; but when they come to
Antioch, they no longer continued this observance, but lived
indiscriminately with the believing Gentiles which thing Peter also was
at that time doing. But when some came from Jerusalem who had heard the
doctrine he delivered there, he no longer did so fearing to perplex
them, but he changed his course, with two objects secretly in view, both
to avoid offending those Jews, and to give Paul a reasonable pretext for
rebuking him. <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) For had he, having
allowed circumcision when preaching at Jerusalem, changed his course at
Antioch, his conduct would have appeared to those Jews to proceed from
fear of Paul, and his disciples would have condemned his excess of
pliancy. And this would have created no small offence; but in Paul, who
was well acquainted with all the facts, his withdrawal would have raised
no such suspicion, as knowing the intention with which he acted.
Wherefore Paul rebukes, and Peter submits, that when the master is
blamed, yet keeps silence, the disciples may more readily come over.
Without this occurrence Paul’s exhortation would have had little effect,
but the occasion hereby afforded of delivering a severe reproof,
impressed Peter’s disciples with a more lively fear. Had Peter disputed
Paul’s sentence, he might justly have been blamed as upsetting the plan,
but now that the one reproves and the other keeps silence, the Jewish
party are filled with serious alarm; and this is why he used Peter so
severely. Observe too Paul’s careful choice of expressions, whereby he
points out to the discerning, that he uses them in pursuance of the
plan, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p54.3"></span>οἰκονομίας</span>) and not from anger.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p55"></span>His words are, “When Cephas came to
Antioch, I resisted him to the face, because he stood condemned;” that
is, not by me but by others; had he himself condemned him, he would not
have shrunk from saying so. And the words, “I resisted him to the face,”
imply a scheme for had their discussion been real, they would not have
rebuked each other in the presence of the disciples, for it would have
been a great stumblingblock to them. But now this apparent contest was
much to their advantage; as Paul had yielded to the Apostles at
Jerusalem, so in turn they yield to him at Antioch. The cause of censure
is this, “For before that certain came from James,” who was the teacher
at Jerusalem, “he did eat with the Gentiles, but when they came he drew
back and separated himself, fearing them that were of the Circumcision:”
his cause of fear was not his own danger, (for if he feared not in the
beginning, much less would he do so then,) but their defection. As Paul
himself says to the Galatians, “I am afraid of you, lest by any means I
have bestowed labor upon you in vain:” ([Gal. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p55.1"></span>.) and again, “I fear lest by any means as
the serpent beguiled Eve,…so your minds should be corrupted.” ([2 Cor.
xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p55.2"></span>.) Thus the fear of death they knew not,
but the fear lest their disciples should perish, agitated their inmost
soul.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p56"></span>[Gal.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p56.1"></span>. “Insomuch that even Barnabas was carried
away with their dissimulation.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p57"></span>Be not surprised at his giving this
proceeding the name of dissimulation, for he is unwilling, as I said
before, to disclose the true state of the case, in order to the
correction of his disciples. On account of their vehement attachment to
the Law, he calls the present proceeding “dissimulation,” and severely
rebukes it, in order effectually to eradicate their prejudice. And Peter
too, hearing this joins in the feint, as if he had erred, that they
might be corrected by means of the rebuke administered to him. Had Paul
reproved these Jews, they would have spurned at it with indignation, for
they held him in slight esteem; but now, when they saw their Teacher
silent under rebuke, they were unable to despise or resist Paul’s
sentence.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p58"></span>[Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p58.1"></span>. “But when I saw that they walked not
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p59"></span>Neither let this phrase disturb you,
for in using it he does not condemn Peter, but so expresses himself for
the benefit of those who were to be reformed by the reproof of Peter.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p60"></span>[Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p60.1"></span>. “I said unto Cephas before them all.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p61"></span>Observe his mode of correcting the
others; <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_20"></span>he speaks “before them all,” that the
hearers might be alarmed thereby. And this is what he says,—

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p62"></span>[Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p62.1"></span>. “If thou, being a Jew, livest as do the
Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews?” <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p64"></span>But it was the Jews and not the
Gentiles who were carried away together with Peter; why then does Paul
impute what was not done, instead of directing his remarks, not against
the Gentiles, but against the dissembling Jews? And why does he accuse
Peter alone, when the rest also dissembled together with him? Let us
consider the terms of his charge; “If thou, being a Jew, livest as do
the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles
to live as do the Jews?” for in fact Peter alone had withdrawn himself.
His object then is to remove suspicion from his rebuke; had he blamed
Peter for observing the Law, the Jews would have censured him for his
boldness towards their Teacher. But now arraigning him in behalf of his
own peculiar disciples, I mean the Gentiles, he facilitates thereby the
reception of what he has to say which he also does by abstaining from
reproof of the others, and addressing it all to the Apostle. “If thou,”
he says, “being a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles, and not as do the
Jews;” which almost amounts to an explicit exhortation to imitate their
Teacher, who, himself a Jew, lived after the manner of the Gentiles.
This however he says not, for they could not have received such advice,
but under color of reproving him in behalf of the Gentiles, he discloses
Peter’s real sentiments. On the other hand, if he had said, Wherefore do
you compel these Jews to Judaize? his language would have been too
severe. But now he effects their correction by appearing to espouse the
part, not of the Jewish, but of the Gentile, disciples; for rebukes,
which are moderately severe, secure the readiest reception. And none of
the Gentiles could object to Paul that he took up the defense of the
Jews. The whole difficulty was removed by Peter’s submitting in silence
to the imputation of dissimulation, in order that he might deliver the
Jews from its reality. At first Paul directs his argument to the
character which Peter wore, “If thou, being a Jew:” but he generalizes
as he goes on, and includes himself in the phrase, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p66"></span>[Gal.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p66.1"></span>. “We being Jews by nature, and not sinners
of the Gentiles.” <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p68"></span>These words are hortatory, but are
couched in the form of a reproof, on account of those Jews. So
elsewhere, under cover of one meaning he conveys another; as where he
says in his Epistle to the Romans, “But now I go unto Jerusalem,
ministering unto the saints.” ([Rom. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p68.1"></span>.) Here his object was not simply to inform
them of the motive of his journey to Jerusalem, but to excite them to
emulation in the giving of alms. Had he merely wished to explain his
motive, it would have sufficed to say, “I go to ministering unto the
saints;” but now observe what he says in addition; “For it hath been the
good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for
the poor among the saints that are at Jerusalem. Yea, it hath been their
good pleasure and their debtors they are.” And again, “For if the
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they owe it
to them, also to minister unto them in carnal things.” ([Rom.
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p68.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p69"></span>Observe how he represses the high
thoughts of the Jews; preparing for one thing by means of another, and
his language is authoritative. “We being Jews by nature, and not sinners
of the Gentiles.” The phrase, “Jews by nature,” implies that we, who are
not proselytes, but educated from early youth in the Law, have
relinquished our habitual mode of life, and be taken ourselves to the
faith which is in Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p70"></span>[Gal.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p70.1"></span>. “Knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, save through faith, in Jesus Christ, even we
believed on Christ Jesus.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p71"></span>Observe here too how cautiously he
expresses himself; he does not say that they had abandoned the Law as
evil, but as weak. If the law cannot confer righteousness, it follows
that circumcision is superfluous; and so far he now proves; but he
proceeds to show that it is not only superfluous but dangerous. It
deserves especial notice, how at the outset he says that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law; but as he proceeds he speaks more
strongly;

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p72"></span>[Gal.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p72.1"></span>. “But if, while we sought to be justified
in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners is Christ a minister of
sin?”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p73"></span>If faith in Him, says he, avail not for
our justification, but it be necessary again to embrace the Law, and if,
having forsaken the Law for Christ’s sake, we are not justified but
condemned for such abandonment,—then shall we find Him, for whose sake
we forsook the Law and went over to faith the author of our
condemnation. <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) Observe how, he has
<span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_21"></span>resolved the matter to a necessary
absurdity. And mark how earnestly and strongly he argues. For if, he
says, it behooved us not to abandon the Law, and we have so abandoned it
for Christ’s sake, we shall be judged. Wherefore do you urge this upon
Peter, who is more intimately acquainted with it than any one? Hath not
God declared to him, that an uncircumcised man ought not to be judged by
circumcision; and did he not in his discussion with the Jews rest his
bold opposition upon the vision which he saw? Did he not send from
Jerusalem unequivocal decrees upon this subject? Paul’s object is not
therefore to correct Peter, but his animadversion required to be
addressed to him, though it was pointed at the disciples; and not only
at the Galatians, but also at others who labor under the same error with
them. For though few are now circumcised, yet, by fasting and observing
the sabbath with the Jews, they equally exclude themselves from grace.
If Christ avails not to those who are only circumcised, much more is
peril to be feared where fasting and sabbatizing are observed, and thus
two commandments of the Law are kept in the place of one. And this is
aggravated by a consideration of time: for they so acted at first while
the city and temple and other institutions yet existed; but these who
with the punishment of the Jews, and the destruction of the city before
their eyes, <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) observe more precepts
of the Law than the others did, what apology can they find for such
observance, at the very time when the Jews themselves, in spite of their
strong desire, cannot keep it? Thou hast put on Christ, thou hast become
a member of the Lord, and been enrolled in the heavenly city, and dost
thou still grovel in the Law? How is it possible for thee to obtain the
kingdom? Listen to Paul’s words, that the observance of the Law
overthrows the Gospel, and learn, if thou wilt, how this comes to pass,
and tremble, and shun this pitfall. Wherefore dost thou keep the
sabbath, and fast with the Jews? Is it that thou fearest the Law and
abandonment of its letter? But thou wouldest not entertain this fear,
didst thou not disparage faith as weak, and by itself powerless to save.
A fear to omit the sabbath plainly shows that you fear the Law as still
in force; and if the Law is needful, it is so as a whole, not in part,
nor in one commandment only; and if as a whole, the righteousness which
is by faith is little by little shut out. If thou keep the sabbath, why
not also be circumcised? and if circumcised, why not also offer
sacrifices? If the Law is to be observed, it must be observed as a
whole, or not at all. If omitting one part makes you fear condemnation,
this fear attaches equally to all the parts. If a transgression of the
whole is not punishable, much less is the transgression of a part; on
the other hand, if the latter be punishable, much more is the former.
But if we are bound to keep the whole, we are bound to disobey Christ,
or by obedience to Him become transgressors of the Law. If it ought to
be kept, those who keep it not are transgressors, and Christ will be
found to be the cause of this transgression, for He annulled the Law as
regards these things Himself, and bid others annul it. Do you not
understand what these Judaizers are compassing? They would make Christ,
who is to us the Author of righteousness, the Author of sin, as Paul
says, “Therefore Christ is the minister of sin.” Having thus reduced the
proposition to an absurdity, he had nothing further to do by way of
overthrowing it, but was satisfied with the simple protestation,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p76"></span>[Gal.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p76.1"></span>. “God forbid:” for shamelessness and
irreverence need not be met by processes of reasoning, but a mere
protest is enough.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p77"></span>[Gal.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p77.1"></span>. “For if I build up again those things
which I destroyed, I prove myself a transgressor.” <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p79"></span>Observe the Apostle’s discernment; his
opponents endeavored to show, that he who kept not the Law was a
transgressor, but he retorts the argument upon them, and shows that he
who did keep the Law was a transgressor, not merely of faith, but of the
Law itself. “I build up again the things which I destroyed,” that is,
the Law; he means as follows: the Law has confessedly ceased, and we
have abandoned it, and betaken ourselves to the salvation which comes of
faith. But if we make a point of setting it up again, we become by that
very act transgressors, striving to keep what God has annulled. Next he
shows how it has been annulled.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p80"></span>[Gal.
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p80.1"></span>. “For I <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) through the Law died unto the Law.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p82"></span>This may be viewed in two ways; it is
either the law of grace which he speaks of, for he is wont to call this
a law, as in the words, “For the law of the Spirit of life made me
free:” ([Rom. viii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p82.1"></span>.) or it is the old Law, of which he says,
that by the Law itself he has become dead to the Law. That is to say,
the Law itself has taught me no longer to obey itself, and therefore if
I do so, I shall be transgressing even its teaching. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_22"></span>How, in what way has it so taught? Moses
says, speaking of Christ, “The Lord God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee of thy brethren, like unto me; unto Him
shall ye hearken.” ([Deut. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p83.4"></span>.) Therefore they who do not obey Him,
transgress the Law. Again, the expression, “I through the Law died unto
the Law,” may be understood in another sense: the Law commands all its
precepts to be performed, and punishes the transgressor; therefore we
are all dead to it, for no man has fulfilled it. Here observe, how
guardedly he assails it; he says not, “the Law is dead to me;” but, “I
am dead to the Law;” the meaning of which is, that, as it is impossible
for a dead corpse to obey the commands of the Law, so also is it for me
who have perished by its curse, for by its word am I slain. Let it not
therefore lay commands on the dead, dead by its own act, dead not in
body only, but in soul, which has involved the death of the body. This
he shows in what follows:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p84"></span>[Gal.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p84.1"></span>. “That I might live unto God, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) I have been crucified with Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p86"></span>Having said, “I am dead,” lest it
should be objected, how then dost thou live? he adds the cause of his
living, and shows that when alive the Law slew him, but that when dead
Christ through death restored him to life. He shows the wonder to be
twofold; that by Christ both the dead was begotten into life, and that
by means of death. He here means the immortal life, for this is the
meaning of the words, “That I might live unto God I am crucified with
Christ.” <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) How, it is asked, can a
man now living and breathing have been crucified? That Christ hath been
crucified is manifest, but how canst thou have been crucified, and yet
live? He explains it thus;

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p88"></span>[Gal.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p88.1"></span>. “Yet <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)
I live; and yet no longer I, but Christ liveth in me.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p90"></span>In these words, “I am crucified with
Christ,” he alludes to Baptism <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) and
in the words “nevertheless I live, yet not I,” our subsequent manner of
life whereby our members are mortified. By saying “Christ liveth in me,”
he means nothing is done by me, which Christ disapproves; for as by
death he signifies not what is commonly understood, but a death to sin;
so by life, he signifies a delivery from sin. For a man cannot live to
God, otherwise than by dying to sin; and as Christ suffered bodily
death, so does Paul a death to sin. “Mortify,” says he, “your members
which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, passion;” ([Col.
iii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p91.1"></span>.), and again, “our old man was crucified,”
([Rom. vi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p91.2"></span>.) which took place in the Bath. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) After which, if thou remainest dead to
sin, thou livest to God, but if thou let it live again, thou art the
ruin of thy new life. This however did not Paul, but continued wholly
dead; if then, he says, I live to God a life other than that in the Law,
and am dead to the Law, I cannot possibly keep any part of the Law.
Consider how perfect was his walk, and thou wilt be transported with
admiration of this blessed soul. He says not, “I live,” but, “Christ
liveth in me;” who is bold enough to utter such words? Paul indeed, who
had harnessed himself to Christ’s yoke, and cast away all worldly
things, and was paying universal obedience to His will, says not, “I
live to Christ,” but what is far higher, “Christ liveth in me.” As sin,
when it has the mastery, is itself the vital principle, and leads the
soul whither it will, so, when it is slain and the will of Christ
obeyed, this life is no longer earthly, but Christ liveth, that is,
works, has mastery within us. His saying, “I am crucified with Him” “I
no longer live,” but “am dead,” seeming incredible to many, he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p93"></span>[Gal.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p93.1"></span>. “And that life which I now live in the
flesh, I live in faith, the faith which is in the Son of God.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p94"></span>The foregoing, says he, relates to our
spiritual life, but this life of sense too, if considered, will be found
owing to my faith in Christ. For as regards the former Dispensation and
Law, I had incurred the severest punishment, and had long ago perished,
“for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.” ([Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p94.1"></span>.) And we, who lay under sentence, have
been liberated by Christ, for all of us are dead, if not in fact, at
least by sentence; and He has delivered us from the expected blow. When
the Law had accused, and God condemned us, Christ came, and by giving
Himself up to death, rescued us all from death. So that “the life which
I now live in the flesh, I live in faith.” Had not this been, nothing
could have averted a destruction as general as that which took place at
the flood, but His advent arrested the wrath of God, and caused us to
live by faith. That such is his meaning appears from what follows. After
saying, that “the life which I now live in the flesh, I live in faith,”
he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p95"></span>[Gal.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p95.1"></span>. “In the Son of God, Who loved me, and
gave Himself up for me.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p96"></span>How is this, O Paul! why dost thou
appropriate a general benefit, and make thine own what was done for the
whole world’s sake? for <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii-Page_23"></span>he says not, “Who loved us,” but, “Who
loved me.” And besides the Evangelist says, “God so loved the world;”
([John iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p96.1"></span>.) and Paul himself, “He that spared not
His own Son, but delivered Him up,” not for Paul only, but, “for us
all;” ([Rom. viii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p96.2"></span>.) and again, “that He might purify unto
himself a people for his own possession,” ([Tit. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p96.3"></span>.) But considering the desperate condition
of human nature, and the ineffably tender solicitude of Christ, in what
He delivered us from, and what He freely gave us, and kindled by the
yearning of affection towards Him, he thus expresses himself. Thus the
Prophets often appropriate to themselves Him who is God of all, as in
the words, “O God, thou art my God, early will I seek Thee.” ([Psalm
lxiii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p96.4"></span>.) Moreover, this language teaches that
each individual justly owes as a great debt of gratitude to Christ, as
if He had come for his sake alone, for He would not have grudged this
His condescension though but for one, so that the measure of His love to
each is as great as to the whole world. Truly the Sacrifice was offered
for all mankind, <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) and was sufficient
to save all, but those who enjoy the blessing are the believing only.
Nevertheless it did not deter Him from His so great condescension, that
not all would come; but He acted after the pattern of the supper in the
Gospel, which He prepared for all, ([Luke xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p97.1"></span>.) yet when the guests came not, instead of
withdrawing the viands, He called in others. So too He did not despise
that sheep, though one only, which had strayed from the ninety and nine.
([Mat. xviii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p97.2"></span>.) This too in like manner St. Paul
intimates, when he says, speaking about the Jews, “For what if some were
without faith, shall their want of faith make of none effect the
faithfulness of God? God forbid: yea let God be found true, but every
man a liar.” ([Rom. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p97.3"></span>.) When He so loved thee as to give Himself
up to bring thee who wast without hope to a life so great and blessed,
canst thou, thus gifted, have recourse to things gone by? His reasoning
being completed, he concludes with a vehement asseveration, saying,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p98"></span>[Gal.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p98.1"></span>. “I do not make void the grace of
God.” <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p100"></span>Let those, who even now Judaize and
adhere to the Law, listen to this, for it applies to them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p101"></span>[Gal.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p101.1"></span>. “For if righteousness is through the
Law, then Christ died for naught.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p102"></span>What can be more heinous than this
sin? <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) what more fit to put one to
shame than these words? Christ’s death is a plain proof of the inability
of the Law to justify us; and if it does justify, then is His death
superfluous. Yet how could it be reasonable to say that has been done
heedlessly and in vain which is so awful, so surpassing human reason, a
mystery so ineffable, with which Patriarchs travailed, which Prophets
foretold, which Angels gazed on with consternation, which all men
confess as the summit of the Divine tenderness? Reflecting how utterly
out of place it would be if they should say that so great and high a
deed had been done superfluously, (for this is what their conduct came
to,) he even uses violent language against them, as we find in the words
which follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[14:41](1130007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span> \[“The Acts mention five such journeys
after his conversion: (1.)-[Acts
9.23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>
(Comp. [Gal. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>.) (2.)-[Acts
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030), [Acts
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.3"></span>. (3.)-[Acts
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.4"></span>, the journey to the Apostolic Council,
<span class="c16"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p4.5"></span>a.d.</span> 50 or
51. (4.)-[Acts 18.22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.6"></span>, the journey in 54. (5.)-[Acts
21.15](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.7"></span>(Comp. [Ro. 15:
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4.8"></span>
ff.) the last journey when he was made a pardoner and sent to Cæsarea in
58. The first of these journeys cannot be meant on account of [Gal. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4.9"></span>.
The second is excluded by the chronological date of [Gal. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4.10"></span>,
for as it took place during the famine of Palestine in the year of
Herod’s death, <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.11"></span>a.d.</span> 44, it would put the commission
of Paul back to the year 30, which is much too early. There is no good
reason why Paul should have mentioned this second journey. The fifth
journey cannot be meant for it took place after the composition of
Epistle to Galatians and after dispersion of Apostles. Nor can we think
of the fourth journey which was transient, nor was Barnabas with him on
that journey, [Acts xv. 39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.12"></span>. So the journey here mentioned is the same
as that of [Acts xv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p4.13"></span>. This took place 50 or 51, i.e., fourteen
years after his conversion, 37.”—Schaff in *Pop. Com.*—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_41"></span>[14:42](1130007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span> \[“In St. Luke’s narrative ([Acts xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>.)
he is said to have been sent by the Church at Antioch. The revelation
either prompted or confirmed the decision of the
Church.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_42"></span>[15:43](1130007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p10"></span> \[That is, that Barnabas and Titus as
witnesses of the proceedings might testify to the Judaizing teachers
everywhere, &c.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_43"></span>[15:44](1130007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p12"></span> \[Being “a Greek:” Lightfoot says this
is a “causal” participial clause giving the “reason” why Titus was not
circumcised; *because* he was a Greek and not a Jew or part Jew as
Timothy was. Schaff makes it a “concessive” clause; *although* he was a
Greek, that is, a heathen. Farrar in *Life and Work of Paul* (233–6)
claims that Titus *was* circumcised but not compelled to be. This
however cannot be held in view of the context and the position of the
words in the sentence.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_44"></span>[15:45](1130007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p16"></span> \[“These were formerly Pharisees
([Acts xv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>.) and were still so in spirit although
they professed Christianity and were baptized.” Schaff in *Pop.
Com.*—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_45"></span>[15:46](1130007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20"></span> \[“Had we consented to the suggestion
to circumcise Titus, we should thereby have yielded to the false
brethren standing in the background, who declared the circumcision of
Gentile Christians to be necessary ([Acts xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>.); but this did not at all take
place.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_46"></span>[16:47](1130007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p23"></span> \[“In order that by our conduct the
principle of Christian freedom should not be shaken and ye should not be
induced to deviate from the truth of the Gospel by mixing it up with
Mosaism.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_47"></span>[16:48](1130007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p26"></span> \[Lightfoot says, “The expression is
depreciatory here, not indeed of the twelve themselves but of the
extravagant and exclusive claims set up for them by the Judaizers.” So
also Dr. Schaff. “The addition of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>τι εἷναι</span> and ὅ<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>ποιοι</span>betrays a
certain irritation in reference to the opponents who would not concede
Paul an estimation given to the original Apostles.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_48"></span>[16:49](1130007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p28"></span> \[“It is entirely in opposition to the
context that Chrysostom, Theophylact and Jerome refer this to the
earlier teaching of the Apostles, making Paul say that whether at an
earlier date they had been Judaizers or not was to him a matter of
indifference.”— Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_49"></span>[17:50](1130007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p33"></span> \[They did virtually abolish
circumcision by the decree of the council at Jerusalem as is shown in
the account in ([Acts xv](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>.) And the failure of the effort to have
Titus circumcised shows that the account in [Gal.
ii](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p33.2"></span>.
has nothing inconsistent with that decree. This as to Gentiles. The
question did not concern Jews, who were already circumcised in infancy
except in cases like that of Timothy where circumcision had been
neglected. His case Paul himself decided without any consultation with
others.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_50"></span>[17:51](1130007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p35"></span> \[“This passage cannot be worse
misunderstood than it has been by Baur according to whom there was a
special Gospel of the uncircumcision and a special gospel of the
circumcision, one maintaining the necessity of circumcision, the other
allowing it to drop.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_51"></span>[17:52](1130007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p40"></span> \[“If there had been a real conflict
in doctrine, the Apostles would not have given Paul their hand, and Paul
would have refused them his.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_52"></span>[17:53](1130007.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p43"></span> \[“There was no difference of doctrine
or gospel, but only a division of territory, and how little Paul
considered his apostolic call to the ‘Gentiles’ as *excluding* the
conversion of the Jews from his operations may be seen from such
passages as [1 Cor. 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020), [Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), [Rom.
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001), [Rom.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p43.1"></span>.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_53"></span>[18:54](1130007.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p47"></span> \[[Hebrews x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p47.1"></span>.
\[This is interesting as showing that Chrysostom attributed the Epistle
to the Hebrews to St. Paul, though most modern critics do not agree with
him in that view.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_54"></span>[18:55](1130007.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p51"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p51.2"></span>λλ᾽ οῦκ ἔστι ταῦτα, οὐκ ἔοτιν
ἄπαγε</span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_55"></span>[19:56](1130007.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p53"></span> S. Jerome adopts the interpretation
given in the text, viz. that S. Peter’s dissimulation was no sin, but
intended as an opportunity for S. Paul to declare the freedom of the
Gentiles from the Jewish Law. On the other hand, S. Austin considers
that he acted through wrong motives, and sinned in dissembling. In this
opinion he is supported by Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Cyril, of
Alexandria, S. Gregory and Ambrosiaster. (Hieron. *in loc, et alibi*.
August. *de Bapt. contr. Donatist.* ii. 2. *de Mendacio* 8. Tertull. *de
Præscript.* 23. *in Marc.* iv. 3. v. 3. Cyprian, *Ep. ad Quint.* 71.
Cyril. Alex. *in Julian*. ix. fin. Gregor. *in Ezech.* ii. *Hom*. 6, 9.
Ambrosiast. *in loc*.) S. Austin is influenced in his judgment of the
transaction by an anxiety lest disingenuousness and duplicity should
receive countenance from the apparent example of an Apostle; S.
Chrysostom and S. Jerome by affectionate reverence for the memory of so
great a benefactor and so exalted a saint. Vid. Justinian, *in loco.*

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p54"></span>\[In earlier life Chrysostom had
himself practiced such a “scheme,” as that which he here attributes to
Paul. In order to induce his friend Basil to be consecrated as a bishop
he made on him the (false) impression that he himself had already been
consecrated.\] Neander (*Life of Chrysostom* p. 22.) says: “In the first
book of his work on the Priesthood Chrysostom defends the principle that
a falsehood is permitted for a good object. An invention which has for
its sole object the advantage of another is rather an <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p54.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span> (the
word he uses in expounding our passage.) This lax view respecting truth
was not peculiar to Chrysostom but was consonant with the prevailing
spirit of the Eastern Church. There were a few exceptions however to
this view, among whom were John of Lycopolis in Egypt, and Basil of
Cæsarea who says <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p54.2"></span>του κυρίον διαφορὰν ψεύδους οὐδεμαίν
εκφήναντος</span>. Schaff says (*Prolegomena* p. 8): “Origen, Jerome and
Chrysostom explain the offense of this collision away by turning it into
a theatrical and hypocritical farce, shrewdly arranged by the Apostle
for a purpose. In this respect the modern standard of ethics is far
superior to that of the Fathers and more fully accords with the spirit
of the New Testament.” \[We may add that Chrysostom’s view gains
nothing; for to save one Apostle from the charge of unpremeditated
hypocrisy, he makes both guilty of premeditated hypocrisy.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_56"></span>[20:57](1130007.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p63"></span> \[For the bearing of this passage upon
the Tübingen theory of Baur, “the most important of recent theological
controversies” see Lightfoot’s *Commentary on Galatians, Excursus on St.
Paul and the Three*, pp. 191 ff., and Fisher’s *Supernatural Origin of
Christianity*, pp. 205-ff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_57"></span>[20:58](1130007.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p65"></span> \[For the bearing of this passage upon
the Tübingen theory of Baur, “the most important of recent theological
controversies” see Lightfoot’s *Commentary on Galatians, Excursus on St.
Paul and the Three*, pp. 191 ff., and Fisher’s *Supernatural Origin of
Christianity*, pp. 205-ff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_58"></span>[20:59](1130007.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p67"></span> \[Schaff says: “The following verses
to the end of the chapter are a summary report or dramatic sketch of
Paul’s address to Peter.” So also Meyer who gives four good reasons for
this view. So also Schmoller (in Lange) and Ellicott. Others think that
[Gal. 2.15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p67.1"></span> are addressed to the Galatians.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_59"></span>[20:60](1130007.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p74"></span> \[“Thus to be justified in Christ, it
was necessary to sink to the level of Gentiles to become ‘sinners’ in
fact. But are we not thus making Christ a minster of sin? Away with the
profane thought! No, the guilt is not in abandoning the Law, but in
seeking it again when abandoned. Thus alone we convict ourselves of
transgression. On the other hand in abandoning the Law we did but follow
the promptings of the Law.” Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_60"></span>[21:61](1130007.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p75"></span> \[The Epistle to the Galatians was
written in the year <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p75.1"></span>a.d.</span> 56 or 57 and the destruction of
Jerusalem occurred in <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p75.2"></span>a.d.</span> 70.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_61"></span>[21:62](1130007.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p78"></span> \[“I myself (Paul now politely chooses
the first person but means Peter) stand convicted of transgression if I
build again (as thou dost now at Antioch) the very law of Moses which I
pulled down (as thou didst at Cæsarea by divine command and at first at
Antioch) and thus condemn my own former conduct.”—Schaff in *Pop.
Com.*—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_62"></span>[21:63](1130007.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p81"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p81.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p81.2"></span>εγὡ γὰρ</span>—In my case the process has
been this, using his own experience.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_63"></span>[21:64](1130007.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p83"></span> \[“This second interpretation of
Chrysostom is undoubtedly the correct one (though he errs in elucidating
the relation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p83.1"></span>διὰ</span>; by referring to [Deut. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p83.2"></span>.) comp. [Rom.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p83.3"></span>;
The law itself led him to Christ, by developing the sense of sin and the
need of redemption.”—Schaff in *Pop. Com*.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_64"></span>[22:65](1130007.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p85"></span> \[“That I might live unto God” is not
to be joined to “I have been crucified with Christ” as Chrysostom, for
it belongs to the completeness of the thought introduced by <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p85.1"></span>γαρ</span> ver.
19.—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_65"></span>[22:66](1130007.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p87"></span> \[“That I might live unto God” is not
to be joined to “I have been crucified with Christ” as Chrysostom, for
it belongs to the completeness of the thought introduced by <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.ii-p87.1"></span>γαρ</span> ver.
19.—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_66"></span>[22:67](1130007.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p89"></span> \[This is the rendering of the Rev.
Ver. though the American Committee has, “And it is no longer I that
live;” and correctly so. For as Dr. Schaff says, The reading of the Rev.
Ver. (and the Author. Ver. too) conveys a beautiful and true idea, but
it is grammatically incorrect, since the original has no “nevertheless”
and no “yet.” *Pop. Com. on Gal.* and *Companion to the Greek
Testament*, p. 453.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_67"></span>[22:68](1130007.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p91"></span> \[Chrysostom held baptismal
regeneration.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_68"></span>[22:69](1130007.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p92"></span> \[Chrysostom held baptismal
regeneration.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_69"></span>[23:70](1130007.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p96.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p97"></span> \[“Chrysostom teaches that God
foreordained all men to holiness and salvation and that Christ died for
all and is both willing and able to save all, but not against their
will.”—Schaff, *Proleg.* p. 20.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_70"></span>[23:71](1130007.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p99"></span> \[“Negative side of the life which
Paul (from [Gal. 2.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p99.1"></span>.) has described as his own. By this
negative, with the grave reason assigned for it in the latter part of
the verse, the perverse conduct of Peter is completely
condemned.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_71"></span>[23:72](1130007.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p103"></span> \[“This blasphemous inference gives
the finishing stroke to the false Judaizing gospel.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p104"></span>“This collision between Peter and Paul
furnished material to the Ebionites for an attack upon Paul, to the
Gnostics for an attack upon the Jewish apostles and to Porphyry for an
attack upon Christianity itself \[as well as to Baur and the Tübingen
school for an attack in modern times from a different standpoint\]. But
Christianity has surveyed all these attacks and gains new strength from
every conflict.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians 3:1](1130008)
