[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130045)  [Next](1130047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-Page_198"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.v-p2.2"></span>[Philippians i.
22-26](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>“Then what I shall choose I wot not. But I
am in a strait betwixt the two, having the desire to depart and be with
Christ; which is very far better: yet to abide in the flesh is more
needful for your sake. And having this confidence, I know that I shall
abide, yea and abide with you all, for your progress and joy in the
faith; that your glorying may abound in Jesus Christ in me, through my
presence with you again.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.v-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> can be more blessed than the
spirit of Paul, for the reason that nothing is more noble. We all
shudder at death, I am wont to say, some by reason of our many sins, of
whom I too am one, others from love of life, and cowardice, of whom may
I never be one; for they who are subject to this fear are mere animals.
This then, which we all shudder at, he prayed for, and hasted toward
Him; saying, “To depart is very far better.” What sayest thou? when thou
art about to change from earth to heaven, and to be with Christ, dost
thou not know what to choose? Nay, far is this from the spirit of Paul;
for if such an offer were made to any one on sure grounds, would he not
straightway seize it? Yes, for as it is not ours “to depart and be with
Christ,” neither, if we were able to attain to this, were it ours to
remain here. Both are of Paul, and of his spirit. He was confidently
persuaded. What? Art thou about to be with Christ? and dost thou say,
“What I shall choose I wot not”? and not this only, but dost thou choose
that which is here, “to abide in the flesh”? What in the world? didst
thou not live an exceeding bitter life, in “watchings,” in shipwrecks,
in “hunger and thirst,” and “nakedness,” in cares and anxiety? “with the
weak” thou wert “weak,” and for those who “were made to stumble” thou
dost “burn.” ([2 Cor. 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii.v-p4.2"></span>.)
“In much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in fastings, in pureness.” ([2
Cor. 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p4.3"></span>.)
“Five times” didst thou “receive forty stripes save one,” “thrice” wast
thou “beaten with rods, once” wast thou “stoned” “a night and a day”
thou hast “been in the deep, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers,
in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils among
false brethren.” ([2 Cor. xi.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p4.4"></span>.) Didst thou not, when the whole nation of
the Galatians returned to the observance of the law, didst thou not cry
aloud, and say, “Whosoever of you would be justified by the law, ye are
fallen away from grace”? ([Gal. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.v-p4.5"></span>.)
How great was then thy grief, and still dost thou desire this perishing
life? Had none of these things befallen thee, but had thy success,
wherever success attended thee, been without fear, and full of delight,
yet shouldest not thou hasten to some harbor, from fear of the uncertain
future? For tell me, what trader, whose vessel is full of untold wealth,
when he may run into port, and be at rest, would prefer to be still at
sea? what wrestler, when he might be crowned, would prefer to contend?
what boxer, when he might put on his crown, would choose to enter afresh
into the contest, and offer his head to wounds? what general is there,
who when he might be quit of war with good report, and trophies, and
might with the king refresh himself in the palace, would choose still to
toil, and to stand in battle array? How then dost thou, who livest a
life so exceeding bitter, wish to remain still here? Didst thou not say,
I am in dread, “lest by any means, after that I have preached to others,
I myself should be rejected?” ([1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.v-p4.6"></span>.)
If for no other cause, yet surely for this, thou oughtest to desire thy
release; were the present full of innumerable goods, yet for the sake of
Christ thy Desire. <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>Oh that spirit of Paul! nothing was ever
like it, nor ever will be! Thou fearest the future, thou art compassed
by innumerable dreadful things, and wilt thou not be with Christ? No, he
answers, and this for Christ’s sake, that I may render more loving unto
Him those whom I have made his servants, that I may make the plot <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) which I have planted bear much fruit.
([1 Cor. iii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.). Didst thou not hear me, when I declared
that I sought not “that which profited myself” ([1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="iv.iii.v-p7.2"></span>.),
but my neighbor? Heardest thou not these words, “I could wish that I
myself were anathema from Christ” ([Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.v-p7.3"></span>.),
that many might come unto Him? I, who chose that part, shall I not much
rather choose this, shall I not with pleasure harm myself by this delay
and postponement, that they may be saved?

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>“Who shall utter Thy mighty acts, O Lord”
([Psa. cvi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p8.1"></span>.), because Thou sufferedst not Paul to be
hidden, because Thou madest manifest to the world such a man? All the
Angels of God <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-Page_199"></span>praised Thee with one accord, when Thou
madest the stars ([Job xxxviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p8.2"></span>.), and so too surely when Thou madest the
sun, but not so much as when Thou didst manifest Paul to the whole
world. By this, the earth was made more brilliant than the heaven, for
he is brighter than the solar light, he hath shot forth more brilliant
rays, he hath shed abroad more joyous beams. What fruit hath this man
borne for us! not by making fat our corn, not by nurturing our
pomegranates, but by producing and perfecting the fruit of holiness, and
when falling to pieces, continually recovering them. For the sun itself
can nothing profit fruits that are once decayed, but Paul has called out
of their sins those who had manifold decays. And it gives place to the
night, but he had mastery over the Devil. Nothing ever subdued him,
nothing mastered him. The sun, when it mounts the heavens, darts down
its rays, but he, as he rose from beneath, filled not the mid space of
heaven and earth with light, but as soon as he opened his mouth, filled
the Angels with exceeding joy. For if “there is joy in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth” ([Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.v-p8.3"></span>.),
while he at his first address caught multitudes, does he not fill with
joy the Powers above? What say I? It sufficeth that Paul should only be
named, and the heavens leap for joy. For if when the Israelites “went
forth out of Egypt, the mountains skipped like rams” ([Psa. cxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.v-p8.4"></span>.),
how great, thinkest thou, was the joy, when men ascended from earth to
heaven!

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>[Philip.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.v-p9.1"></span>.
For this cause “to abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>And what excuse is left to us? ofttimes
it happens that a man who possesses a little and poor city, chooses not
to depart to another place, preferring his own rest. Paul might depart
to Christ, and would not, (Christ whom he so desired, as for his sake to
choose even hell, <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) ) but still
remained in the contest on behalf of man. What excuse shall we have? May
we then even make mention of Paul? Look to his deeds. He showed that to
depart was better, persuading himself not to grieve: he showed them,
that if he remained, he remained for their sake, that it proceeded not
from wickedness of those who plotted against him. He subjoined also the
reason, that he might secure their belief. For if this is necessary,
that is, I shall by all means remain, and I will not “remain” simply,
but “will remain with you.” For this is the meaning of the word, “and I
shall abide with,” i.e. I shall see you. For what cause? “For your
progress and joy in the faith.” Here too he rouses them, to take heed
unto themselves. If, says he, for your sakes I abide, see that ye shame
not my abiding. “For your progress,” I have chosen to remain, when I was
about to see Christ. I have chosen to remain, because my presence
advances both your faith and your joy. What then? Did he remain for the
sake of the Philippians only? He stayed not for their sake only; but
this he says, that he may show regard to them. And how were they to
“progress” in “the faith ”? That you may be more strengthened, like
young fowl, who need their mother until their feathers are set. This is
a proof of his great love. In like sort, we also rouse some of you, when
we say, for your sake have I remained, that I may make you good.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span>[Philip.
1.26](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#026)<span id="iv.iii.v-p12.1"></span>.
“That your glorying may abound in Christ Jesus in me, through my
presence with you again.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>You see that this explains the word
“abide with you.” Behold his humility. Having said, “for your progress,”
he shows that it was for his own profit too. This also he does, when he
writes to the Romans, and says, “That is, that we may be comforted
together in you.” ([Rom. 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.v-p13.1"></span>.)
Having previously said, “That I may impart unto you some spiritual
gift.” And what means, “That your glorying may abound”? This glorying
was, their establishment in the faith. For an upright life is glorying
in Christ. And sayest thou, “Your glorying in me, through my presence
with you again”? Yes, he answers; “For what is our hope, or crown of
glorying? Are not even ye?” ([1 Thess. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii.v-p13.2"></span>.)
Because “you are our glorying, even as we also are yours” ([2 Cor. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.v-p13.3"></span>.),
i.e. that I may be able to rejoice in you greatly. How sayest thou,
“That your glorying may abound”? I may glory the more when you make
progress. <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span>“Through my presence with you again.”
What then! Did he come to them? Search ye whether he came.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>[Philip.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.v-p16.1"></span>.
“Only let your manner of life be worthy of the Gospel of Christ.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span>Do you see, how all that he has said,
tends to turn them to this one thing, advancement in virtue? “Only let
your manner of life be worthy of the Gospel of Christ.” What means this
word “only,” but that this, and nought else, is the only thing we should
seek? If we have this, nothing grievous will befall us. “That whether I
come and see you, or be absent, I may hear of your state.” This he says
not as if he had changed his purpose, and no longer meant to visit them.
But if this come to pass, he says, even though absent, I am able to
rejoice. “If,” that is, “I hear that ye stand fast in one spirit, with
one soul.” This is what above all things unites believers, and maintains
love unbroken, <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-Page_200"></span>“that they may be one.” ([John xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.1"></span>.)
For a “kingdom divided against itself shall not stand.” ([Mark iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.2"></span>.)
For this cause he everywhere counsels his disciples much to be of one
mind. And Christ says, “By this shall all men know that ye are My
disciples, if ye love one another.” ([John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.3"></span>.)
That is, do not look with expectation toward me, and therefore slumber,
as waiting for my coming, and then, when ye see me not coming faint. For
even from report I can receive pleasure likewise.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span>What means, “In one spirit”? By the same
gift of grace, viz. that of concord, and zeal; for the Spirit <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) is one, and he shows it; for then are
we able to stand in “one soul,” also, when we all have “one Spirit.” See
how the word “one” is used for concord. See how their souls being many
are called one. Thus was it of old. “For they were all,” it is written,
“of one heart and of one soul. Striving together for the faith of the
Gospel.” ([Acts iv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p19.1"></span>.) Does he say, striving together for each
other, <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) as though the faith did
strive? For did they wrestle against each other? But help each other, he
says, in your striving for the faith of the Gospel.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span>[Philip.
1.28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028)<span id="iv.iii.v-p21.1"></span>.
“And in nothing affrighted by the adversaries; which is for them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span>Well said he, “affrighted,” this is what
befalls us from our enemies, they only frighten. “In nothing” therefore,
he says, whatever happens, whether dangers—whether plots. For this is
the part of those who stand upright; the enemy can do nought but
frighten only. Since it was likely that they should be greatly troubled,
when Paul suffered such numberless ills, he says, I exhort you not only
not to be shaken, but not to be affrighted, yea rather to despise them
heartily; for if ye are thus affected, ye will straightway, by this
means, make evident at once their destruction, and your salvation. For
when they see, that with their innumerable plots they are unable to
frighten you, they will take it as a proof of their own destruction. For
when the persecutors prevail not over the persecuted, the plotters over
the objects of their plots, the powerful over those subject to their
power, will it not be self-evident, that their perdition is at hand,
that their power is nought, that their part is false, that their <span
id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) part is weak? “And this,” he says,
“comes from God.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span>[Philip.
1.29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)<span id="iv.iii.v-p24.1"></span>.
“For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on Him, but also to suffer in his behalf.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span>Again does he teach them moderation of
spirit by referring all to God, and saying that sufferings in behalf of
Christ are of grace, the gift of grace, a free gift. Be not then ashamed
of the gift of grace, for it is more wonderful than the power of raising
the dead, or working miracles; for there I am a debtor, but here I have
Christ for my debtor. Wherefore ought we not only not to be ashamed, but
even to rejoice, in that we have this gift. Virtues he calls gifts, yet
not in like sort as other things, for those are entirely of God, but in
these we have a share. But since even here the greatest part is of God,
he ascribes it entirely to Him, not to overturn our free will, but to
make us humble and rightly disposed.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p26"></span>[Philip.
1.30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>.
“Having the same conflict which ye saw in me”; i.e. ye have also an
example. Here again he raises them up, by showing them that everywhere
their conflicts were the same with his, their struggles were the same
with his, both severally, and in that they united with him in bearing
trials. He said not, ye have heard, but “ye saw,” for he strove too at
Philippi. Truly this is an exceeding virtue. Wherefore writing to the
Galatians, also he said, “Did ye suffer so many things in vain, if it be
indeed in vain.” ([Gal. iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.2"></span>.) And again, writing to the Hebrews, he
said, “But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were
enlightened, ye endured a great conflict of suffering; partly, being
made a gazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions.” ([Heb.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#033)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.3"></span>.)
And writing again to Macedonians, that is, to the Thessalonians, he
said, “For they themselves report concerning us, what manner of entering
in we had unto you.” ([1 Thess. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.4"></span>.)
And again, “For yourselves, brethren, know our entering in unto you,
that it hath not been found vain.” ([1 Thess. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.5"></span>.)
And in like sort does he witness the same things of them all, labors and
strivings. But such things ye will not now find among us; now it is much
if one suffer a little in goods alone. And in respect of their goods
also he witnesses great things of them. For to some he says, “For ye
took joyfully the spoiling of your possessions” ([Heb. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.6"></span>.);
and to others, “For it hath been the good pleasure of Macedonia and
Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor” ([Rom. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.7"></span>.);
and “your zeal hath stirred up very many of them.” ([2 Cor. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.v-p26.8"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p27"></span>Seest thou the praises of the men of that
time? But we endure not so much as buffetings or blows, neither insult
nor loss of our possessions: they were straightway zealous, and all of
them strove as martyrs, whilst we have grown cold in love toward Christ.
Again I am constrained to accuse things present; and what shall I do? It
is against my will, yet am I constrained. Were <span id="page_201">p.
201</span> <span id="iv.iii.v-Page_201"></span>I able by my silence of
things which are done, by holding my peace, and not mentioning aught, to
remove them, it would behoove me to be silent. But if the contrary comes
to pass; if not only are these things not removed by our silence, but
even become worse, we are forced to speak. For he who rebukes sinners,
if he does nought else, suffers them not to go farther. For there is no
such shameless and rash soul, as not to turn, and remit the extravagance
of its evil deeds, on hearing any one continually rebuking it. There is,
there is indeed, even in the shameless, a small portion of shame. For
God hath sown in our nature the seeds of shame; for since fear was
insufficient to bring us to a right tone, He hath also prepared many
other ways for avoiding sin. For example, that a man should be accused,
fear of the enacted laws, <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) love
of reputation, the desire of forming friendships; for all these are
paths to avoid sin. Ofttimes that which was not done for God’s sake, was
done through shame; that which was not done for God’s sake, was done for
fear of men. That which we seek for is, in the first place not to sin,
and we shall afterwards succeed in doing this for God’s sake. Else why
did Paul exhort those, who were about to overcome <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) their enemies, not by the fear of God,
but on the score of waiting for the vengeance? <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) “For by so doing,” he says, “thou
shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.” ([Rom. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.v-p30.1"></span>.)
For this is his first wish, that our virtue should be established. As I
said then, there is in us a sense of shame. We have many good natural
affections, which lead to virtue; as, for example, all of us men are
naturally moved to pity, and no other good thing so inheres in our
nature, but this alone. Whence any one might reasonably enquire,
wherefore these seeds have above all others been sown in our nature, by
which we melt <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) at tears, by which
we are turned to compassion, and are ready to pity. No one is naturally
idle, <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) no one is naturally
regardless of his reputation, no one is naturally above emulation, but
pity lies deep in every one’s nature, however fierce and ungentle he be.
And what wonder? we pity beasts, such a superabundance of pity lies deep
in us. If we see a lion’s whelp, we are somewhat affected; much more in
the case of one of our race. See, how many maimed are there! and this is
sufficient to lead us to pity. Nothing so much pleases God as
mercy. <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) Wherefore with this the
priests were anointed, and the kings, and the prophets, for they had, in
oil, a type of God’s love to man; and they further learnt, that rulers
should have a greater share of mercy. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) It showed that the Spirit is to come
to men through mercy, since God pities and is kind to man. For, “Thou
hast mercy upon all,” it is written, “for Thou canst do all things.”
([Wisd. xi. 23](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p34.1"></span>.) For this cause they were anointed with
oil: and indeed it was from mercy He appointed the priesthood. And kings
were anointed with oil; and would one praise a ruler, he can make
mention of nothing so becoming him as mercy. For pity is peculiar to
power. Consider that the world was established by pity, <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) and then imitate thy Lord. “The mercy
of man is toward his neighbor, but the mercy of the Lord is upon all
flesh.” ([Ecclesiasticus 18.13](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p35.2"></span>.) How “upon all flesh”? Whether you mean
sinners, or just men, we all need the mercy of God; we all enjoy it, be
it Paul, be it Peter, or be it John. And listen to their own words;
there is no need of mine. For what says this blessed one? “But I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly.” ([1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.3"></span>.)
What then, was there afterwards no need of mercy? Hear what he says;
“But I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me.” ([1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.4"></span>.)
And of Epaphroditus he says, “For indeed he was sick, nigh unto death;
but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I
might not have sorrow upon sorrow.” ([Philip. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.5"></span>.)
And again he says, “We were weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power,
insomuch that we despaired even of life. Yea, we ourselves have had the
answer of death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves,
but in God, who delivered us out of so great a death, and will deliver.”
([2 Cor. 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.6"></span>.)
And again, “And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion; and the
Lord will deliver me.” ([2 Tim. 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.7"></span>.)
And everywhere we shall find him glorying in this, that by mercy he was
saved. Peter, too, became so great, because mercy was shown him. For
hear Christ saying to him, “Satan hath desired to sift you as wheat; and
I made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not.” ([Luke
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span id="iv.iii.v-p35.8"></span>.)
John, too, became so great through mercy, and in short all of them. For
listen to Christ when He says, “Ye did not choose Me, but I chose you.”
([John xv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p35.9"></span>.) For we all have need of the mercy of God,
as it is written, “The mercy of God is upon all flesh.” <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) But if these men needed the mercy of
God, what should one say of the rest? For why, tell me, doth He “make
the sun to rise on the evil and the good”? Did He withhold the rain for
one year, would He not destroy all? And what if He caused <span
id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-Page_202"></span>overwhelming rain? what if He rained down
fire? what if He sent flies? But what do I say? if He were so to
do <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) as He once did, would not all
perish? If He were to shake the earth, would not all perish? It is now
seasonable to say, “What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?” ([Ps.
viii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p37.2"></span>.) Were He only to threaten the earth, all
men would become one tomb. “As a drop of water from the bucket,” it is
written, “so are the nations in His sight, they shall be counted as very
small dust, as the turning of the balance.” ([Isa. xl.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015)<span id="iv.iii.v-p37.3"></span>.)
It were as easy for Him to destroy all things, and to make them again,
as for us to turn the balance. He then who has such power over us, and
sees us sinning every day, and yet punishes us not, how is it but by
mercy He bears with us? Since beasts too exist by mercy: “Thou, Lord,
wilt preserve both men and beasts.” ([Ps. xxxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.v-p37.4"></span>.)
He looked upon the earth, and filled it with living things. And
wherefore? For thy sake! And wherefore did He make thee? Through His
goodness.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p38"></span>There is nothing better than oil. It is
the cause of light, and there also it is the cause of light. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) “Then shall thy light break forth as
the morning” ([Isa. lviii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p39.1"></span>.), saith the Prophet, if thou showest pity
upon thy neighbour. And as natural oil contains light, so then doth
mercy \[alms\] grant us a great, a marvelous light. Much mention doth
Paul, too, make of this mercy. In one place, hear him say, “Only that we
should remember the poor.” ([Gal. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.v-p39.2"></span>.)
And in another, “If it be meet for me to go also.” ([1 Cor. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.v-p39.3"></span>.)
And in every place, turn where you will, ye see him anxious about this
very thing. And again, “And let our people also learn to maintain good
works.” ([Tit. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p39.4"></span>.) And again, “These things are good and
profitable unto men.” ([Tit. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.v-p39.5"></span>.)
Listen to a certain other one who saith, “Alms <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) do deliver from death” ([Tob. xii.
9](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.v-p40.1"></span>.);
If Thou takest away pity, “Lord, Lord, who shall stand” ([Ps. cxxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.v-p40.2"></span>.);
and it is said, If Thou enterest “into judgment with thy servant” ([Ps.
cxliii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p40.3"></span>.); “A great thing is man”; why? “and an
honorable thing is a merciful man.” ([Prov. xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p40.4"></span>,
LXX.) For this is the true character of man, to be merciful, yea rather
the character of God, to show mercy. Dost thou see, how strong is the
mercy of God? This made all things, this formed the world, this made the
angels, it was through mere goodness. For this cause, too, He threatened
hell, that we may attain unto the kingdom, and through mercy we do
attain unto the kingdom. For wherefore did God, being alone, create so
many beings? was it not through goodness? was it not through love to
men? If you ask why such and such things are, you will always find your
answer in Goodness. Let us show mercy to our neighbors, that mercy may
be shown to us. These acts of mercy <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) we show not so much to them, as lay up
for ourselves against That Day. When the flame of the fire is great,
this oil (mercy) is that which quenches the fire, and this brings light
to us. Thus by this means shall we be freed from the fire of hell. For
whence will He be compassionate and show mercy? Mercy comes of love!
Nothing incenses God so much as to be pitiless. “A man was brought to
him who owed him ten thousand talents, and he was moved with compassion,
and forgave him. And there were owing to that man from his
fellow-servant a hundred pence, and he caught him by the throat.
Therefore the Lord delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay
what was due.” Let us on hearing this be merciful to those who are our
debtors in money or in sins. Let no one remember evils, if at least he
does not wish to injure himself; for he does not so much aggrieve the
other (as he injures himself). For he <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) either will follow him with vengeance,
or he has not done so; but dost thou thyself, while not forgiving thy
neighbor his sins, seek for a kingdom? Lest this should happen to us,
let us forgive all, (for it is ourselves that we pardon,) that God may
forgive us our sins, and so we may obtain the good things which are in
store, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_560"></span>[198:561](1130046.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p4.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span> \[The editions in Greek, and the Latin
translations, without support from any known Greek <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.v-p5.1"></span>ms</span>., here repeat,
“thou oughtest to desire thy release from these things.” Field retains
it as if necessary. Yet it is not necessary, and is in character quite
similar to the additions which are so common in the altered
text.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_561"></span>[198:562](1130046.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span> γεώργιον.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[199:563](1130046.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span> \[Chrys. frequently refers to [Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.v-p11.1"></span>,
according to his mistaken interpretation.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_563"></span>[199:564](1130046.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span> St. Chrys. seems to take “your glorying”
as “the glorying which I Paul have in you.” The passage quoted from [2
Cor. i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p14.1"></span> shows that the two senses are connected.
Compare [2 Cor. v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[200:565](1130046.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span> The punctuation is altered. He seems to
be proving, not the unity of the Spirit, but the relation of that
doctrine to practice.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[200:566](1130046.htm#fr_565) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span> \[i.e. you and the faith.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_566"></span>[200:567](1130046.htm#fr_566) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span> Chrys. seems to make a false opposition
between ἐκείνων and αὑτῶν; but if the reading is correct, this is really
one of his rapid changes of the “point of view,” though not amounting to
a change of person. Dounæus suggests ὅτι τὰ ἐκείνων ἀληθῆ; (for ἀσθενῆ;)
‘That the others’ (principles) ‘are true.’ Compare the letter of
Antoninus \[Hadrian\] quoted by Justin Martyr. Apol. i. 70.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[201:568](1130046.htm#fr_567) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p28"></span> See on Stat. Hom. vi.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[201:569](1130046.htm#fr_568) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p29"></span> κρατεῖν. He seems to mean “to have them
in their power.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[201:570](1130046.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p30"></span> See on the passage, Hom. xxii., Tr. p.
508.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[201:571](1130046.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p31"></span> κατακλᾶσθαι. See on Stat. Hom. xiii. §
9, Tr. p. 429. In that and Hom. xii. the law of nature is discussed at
some length.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[201:572](1130046.htm#fr_571) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p32"></span> \[This is obscure, and the Oxford editor
follows the suggestion of Downes that for ἀργός, “idle,” we should read
ἄοργος, “without anger,” but, as Field points out, there is no such
word.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_572"></span>[201:573](1130046.htm#fr_572) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p33"></span> ἐλεημοσύνη.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[201:574](1130046.htm#fr_573) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p34"></span> ἐλέου.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[201:575](1130046.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p35"></span> Comp. [Wis.
1:14](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#014), [Wis.
11:24](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[201:576](1130046.htm#fr_575) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p35.10"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p36"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
18.13](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p36.1"></span>, as above. Compare [Ps.
145:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#009), [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.v-p36.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[202:577](1130046.htm#fr_576) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p37"></span> \[So the best group of <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.v-p37.1"></span>mss</span>., though Field
retains the reading of the other group, “if he were to make darkness.”
The vague expression, “so to do as He once did,” probably refers to the
universal destruction at the Deluge.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_577"></span>[202:578](1130046.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p39"></span> \[There is a queer play upon the words
ἐλαίου, “oil,” and ἐλέου, “mercy,” which in Chrys.’s day (as in Mod.
Greek) were pronounced alike. As oil in the natural, so mercy in the
spiritual sphere, he says, is the cause of light.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_578"></span>[202:579](1130046.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p39.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p40"></span> \[The Greek word which we borrow and
contract into “alms” is derived from the word here rendered pity and
mercy.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_579"></span>[202:580](1130046.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p40.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p41"></span> al. This oil; see note 2; and on [Rom.
xiv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p41.1"></span>, Hom. xxv., Tr. p. 425, note g; and on
[Matt. xxv.](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p41.2"></span>, Hom. lxxviii. init., also Hom. on Stat.
vi., Tr. p. 130, note c. He may mean here to distinguish the fire of
Hell, from which we may be freed, from that which is to rage, but to be
quenched.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[202:581](1130046.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p42"></span> \[This probably means God, as suggested
by the altered text, which of course tinkered so obscure a
passage.—J.A.B.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 2:1-4](1130047)
