[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130106)  [Next](1130108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.xv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.xv-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p3"></span>“But if any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel.”

<span id="v.iii.xv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>Many</span> consider that their own virtue is
sufficient for their salvation, and if they duly regulate their own
life, that nothing further is wanting to save them. But in this they
greatly err, which is proved by the example of him who buried his one
talent, for he brought it back not diminished but entire, and just as it
had been delivered to him. It is shown also by the blessed Paul, who
says here, “If any one provide not for his own.” The provision of which
he speaks is universal, and relates to the soul as well as the body,
since both are to be provided for.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p5"></span>“If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house,” that is, those who are nearly
related to him, “he is worse than an infidel.” And so says Isaiah, the
chief of the Prophets, “Thou shalt not overlook thy kinsmen of thy own
seed.” ([Isa. lviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>, Sept.) For if a man deserts those who are
united by ties of kindred and affinity, how shall he be affectionate
towards others? Will it not have the appearance of vainglory, when
benefiting others he slights his own relations, and does not provide for
them? And what will be said, if instructing others, he neglects his own,
though he has greater facilities; and a higher obligation to benefit
them? Will it not be said, These Christians are affectionate indeed, who
neglect their own relatives? <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238)
“He is worse than an infidel.” Wherefore? Because the latter, if he
benefits not aliens, does not neglect his near kindred. What is meant is
this: The law of God and of nature is violated by him who provides not
for his own family. But if he who provides not for them has denied the
faith, and is worse than an infidel, where shall he be ranked who has
injured his relatives? With whom shall he be placed? But how has he
denied the faith? Even as it is said, “They profess that they know God,
but in works they deny Him.” ([Tit. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span id="v.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>.)
What has God, in whom they believe, commanded? “Hide not thyself from
thine own flesh.” ([Isa. lviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p6.2"></span>.) How does he then believe who thus denies
God? Let those consider this, who to spare their wealth neglect their
kindred. It was the design of God, in uniting us by the ties of kindred,
to afford us many opportunities of doing good to one another. When
therefore thou neglectest a duty which infidels perform, hast thou not
denied the faith? For it is not faith merely to profess belief, but to
do works worthy of faith. And it is possible in each particular to
believe and not to believe. <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239)
For since he had spoken <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_454"></span>of luxury and self-indulgence, he says
that it is not for this only that such a woman is punished, because she
is luxurious, but because her luxury compels her to neglect her
household. This he says with reason; for she that liveth to the belly,
perishes hereby also, as “having denied the faith.” But how is she worse
than an infidel? Because it is not the same thing to neglect our
kindred, as to neglect a stranger. How should it be? But the fault is
greater here, to desert one known than one who is unknown to us, a
friend than one who is not a friend.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p8"></span>[1 Tim.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)<span id="v.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>.
“Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old,
having been the wife of one man. Well reported of for good works.”

<span id="v.iii.xv-p9"></span>He had said, “Let them learn first to show
piety at home, and to requite their parents.” He had also said, “She
that liveth in pleasure is dead whilst she liveth.” He had said, “If
she <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) provides not for her own
she is worse than an infidel.” Having mentioned the qualities which not
to have would render a woman unworthy to be reckoned among the widows,
he now mentions what she ought to have besides. What then? are we to
receive her for her years? What merit is there in that? It is not her
own doing that she is threescore years old. Therefore he does not speak
of her age merely, as, if she has even reached those years, she may not
yet, he says, without good works, be reckoned among the number. But why
then is he particular about the age? He afterwards assigns a cause not
originating with himself, but with the widows themselves. Meanwhile let
us hear what follows. “Well reported of for good works, if she have
brought up children.” Truly, it is no unimportant work to bring up
children; but bringing them up is not merely taking care of them; they
must be brought up well; as he said before, “If they continue in faith,
and charity, and holiness.” ([1 Tim. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>.)
Observe how constantly he sets kindnesses to our own relatives before
those to strangers. First he says, “If she have brought up children,”
then, “If she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints’
feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently
followed every good work.” But what if she be poor? Not even in that
case is she debarred from bringing up children, lodging strangers,
relieving the afflicted. She is not more destitute than the widow who
gave the two mites. Poor though she be, she has an house, she does not
lodge in the open air. “If,” he says, “she have washed the Saints’
feet.” This is not a costly work. “If she have diligently followed every
good work.” What precept does he give here? He exhorts them to
contribute bodily service, for women are peculiarly fitted for such
attendance, for making the bed of the sick, and composing them to rest.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p11"></span>Strange! what strictness does he require
of widows; almost as much as of the Bishop himself. For he says, “If she
have diligently followed every good work.” This is as though he meant
that, if she could not of herself perform it, she shared and cooperated
in it. When he cuts off luxury, he would have her provident, a good
economist, and at the same time continually persevering in prayer. Such
was Anna. Such strictness does he require of widows. Greater even than
of virgins, from whom he yet requires much strictness, and eminent
virtue. For when he speaks of “that which is comely,” and “that she may
attend upon the Lord without distraction” ([1 Cor. vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="v.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>.),
he gives, in a manner, a summary of all virtue. You see that it is not
merely the not contracting a second marriage that is enough to make a
widow, many other things are necessary. But why does he discourage
second marriages? Is the thing condemned? By no means. That is
heretical. Only he would have her henceforth occupied in spiritual
things, transferring all her care to virtue. For marriage is not an
impure state, but one of much occupation. He speaks of their having
leisure, not of their being more pure by remaining unmarried. For
marriage certainly implies much secular engagement. If you abstain from
marriage that you may have leisure for the service of God, and yet do
not so employ that leisure, it is of no advantage to you, (if you do not
use your leisure,) to perform all services to strangers, and to the
Saints. <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) If you do not thus,
you abstain from marriage not for any good end, but as though you
condemned the state. So the virgin, who is not truly crucified to the
world, by declining marriage, appears to condemn it as accursed and
impure.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p13"></span>Observe, the hospitality here spoken of
is not merely a friendly reception, but one given with zeal and
alacrity, with readiness, and going about it as if one were receiving
Christ Himself. The widows should perform these services themselves, not
commit them to their handmaids. For Christ said, “If I your Master and
Lord have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another’s feet.”
([John xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>.) And though a woman may be very rich, and
of the highest rank, vain of her birth and noble family, there is not
the same distance between her and others, as between God and the
disciples. If thou receivest the stranger as Christ, be not ashamed, but
rather glory: but if you receive <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_455"></span>him not as Christ, receive him not at all.
“He that receiveth you,” He said, “receiveth Me.” ([Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span id="v.iii.xv-p13.2"></span>.)
If you do not so receive him, you have no reward. Abraham was receiving
men that passed as travelers, as he thought, and he did not leave to his
servants to make the preparations for their entertainment, but took the
greater part of the service upon himself, and commanded his wife to mix
the flour, though he had three hundred and eighteen servants born in his
house, of whom there must have been many <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) maidservants; but he wished that
himself and his wife should have the reward, not of the cost only, but
of the service. Thus ought we ever to exercise hospitality by our own
personal exertions, that we may be sanctified, and our hands be blessed.
And if thou givest to the poor, disdain not thyself to give it, for it
is not to the poor that it is given, but to Christ; and who is so
wretched, as to disdain to stretch out his own hand to Christ?

<span id="v.iii.xv-p15"></span>This is hospitality, this is truly to do
it for God’s sake. But if you give orders with pride, though you bid him
take the first place, it is not hospitality, it is not done for God’s
sake. The stranger requires much attendance, much encouragement, and
with all this it is difficult for him not to feel abashed; for so
delicate is his position, that whilst he receives the favor, he is
ashamed. That shame we ought to remove by the most attentive service,
and to show by words and actions, that we do not think we are conferring
a favor, but receiving one, that we are obliging less than we are
obliged. So much does good will multiply the kindness. For as he who
considers himself a loser, and thinks that he is doing a favor, destroys
all the merit of it; so he who looks upon himself as receiving a
kindness, increases the reward. “For God loveth a cheerful giver.” ([2
Cor. ix. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p15.1"></span>.) So that you are rather indebted to the
poor man for receiving your kindness. For if there were no poor, the
greater part of your sins would not be removed. They are the healers of
your wounds, their hands are medicinal to you. The physician, extending
his hand to apply a remedy, does not exercise the healing art more than
the poor man, who stretches out his hand to receive your alms, and thus
becomes a cure <span id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) for your ills.
You give your money, and with it your sins pass away. Such were the
Priests of old, of whom it was said, “They eat up the sin of My people.”
([Hosea iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>.) Thus thou receivest more than thou givest,
thou art benefited more than thou benefitest. Thou lendest to God, not
to men. Thou increasest thy wealth, rather than diminishest it. But if
thou dost not lessen it by giving, then it is indeed diminished!

<span id="v.iii.xv-p17"></span>“If she have received strangers, if she
have washed the Saints’ feet.” But who are these? The distressed saints,
not any saints whatever. For there may be saints, who are much waited on
by every one. Do not visit these, who are in the enjoyment of plenty,
but those who are in tribulation, who are unknown, or known to few. He
who hath “done it unto the least of these,” He saith, “hath done it unto
Me.” ([Matt. xxv. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xv-p18"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xv-p18.1"></span>Moral</span>. Give not thy alms to those who
preside in the Church to distribute. Bestow it thyself, that thou mayest
have the reward not of giving merely, but of kind service. Give with
thine own hands. Cast into the furrow thyself. Here it is not required
to handle the plow, to yoke the ox, to wait the season, nor to break up
the earth, or to contend with the frost. No such trouble is required
here, where thou sowest for heaven, where there is no frost nor winter
nor any such thing. Thou sowest in souls, where no one taketh away what
is sown, but it is firmly retained with all care and diligence. Cast the
seed thyself, why deprive thyself of thy reward. There is great reward
in dispensing <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244) even what
belongs to others. There is a reward not only for giving, but for
dispensing well the things that are given. Why wilt thou not have this
reward? For that there is a reward for this, hear how we read that the
Apostles appointed Stephen to the ministry of the widows. ([Acts vi.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.xv-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xv-p20"></span>Be thou the dispenser of thine own gifts.
Thine own benevolence and the fear of God appoint thee to that ministry.
Thus vainglory is excluded. This refreshes the soul, this sanctifies the
hands, this pulls down pride. This teaches thee philosophy, this
inflames thy zeal, this makes thee to receive blessings. Thy head, as
thou departest, receives all the blessings of the widows.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p21"></span>Be more earnest in thy prayers. Inquire
diligently for holy men, men that are truly such, who, in the retirement
of the desert, cannot beg, but are wholly devoted to God. Take a long
journey to visit them, and give with thine own hand. For thou mayest
profit much in thine own person, if thou givest. Dost thou see their
tents, their lodging? dost thou see the desert? dost thou see the
solitude? Often when thou hast gone to bestow money, thou givest thine
whole soul. Thou art detained, and hast become his fellow-captive, and
hast been alike estranged from the world.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p22"></span>It is of great benefit even to see the
poor. “It is better,” he saith, “to go to the house of mourning, than to
the house of feasting.” <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_456"></span>([Eccles. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xv-p22.1"></span>.)
By the latter the soul is inflamed. For if thou canst imitate the
luxury, then thou art encouraged to self-indulgence, and if thou canst
not, thou art grieved. In the house of mourning there is nothing of this
kind. If thou canst not afford to be luxurious, thou art not pained; and
if thou canst, thou art restrained. Monasteries are indeed houses of
mourning. There is sackcloth and ashes, there is solitude, there is no
laughter, no pressure of worldly business. There is fasting, and lying
upon the ground; there is no impure savor of rich food, no blood
shed, <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) no tumult, no
disturbance, or crowding. There is a serene harbor. They are as lights
shining from a lofty place to mariners afar off. They are stationed at
the port, drawing all men to their own calm, and preserving from
shipwreck those who gaze on them, and not letting those walk in darkness
who look thither. Go to them, and make friends with them, embrace their
holy feet, more honorable to touch than the heads of others. If some
clasp the feet of statues, because they bear but a likeness of the king,
wilt thou not clasp his feet who has Christ within him, and be saved?
The Saints’ feet are holy, though they are poor men, but not even the
head of the profane is honorable. Such efficacy is there in the feet of
the Saints, that when they shake off the dust of their feet, they
inflict punishment. When a saint is among us, let us not be ashamed of
anything that belongs to him. <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246)
And all are saints, who unite a holy life with a right faith and though
they do not work miracles nor cast out devils, still they are saints.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p25"></span>Go then to their tabernacles. To go to
the monastery of a holy man <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247)
is to pass, as it were, from earth to heaven. Thou seest not there what
is seen in a private house. That company is free from all impurity.
There is silence and profound quiet. The words “mine and thine” are not
in use among them. And if thou remainest there a whole day or even two,
the more pleasure thou wilt enjoy. There, as soon as it is day, or
rather before day, the cock crows, and you see it not as you may see
it <span id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) in a house, the servants
snoring, the doors shut, all sleeping like the dead, whilst the muleteer
without is ringing his bells. There is nothing of all this. All,
immediately shaking off sleep, reverently rise when their President
calls them, and forming themselves into a holy choir, they stand, and
lifting up their hands all at once sing the sacred hymns. For they are
not like us, who require many hours to shake off sleep from our heavy
heads. We indeed, as soon as we are waked, sit some time stretching our
limbs, go as nature calls, then proceed to wash our face and our hands;
afterwards we take our shoes and clothes, and a deal of time is spent.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p28"></span>It is not so there. No one calls for his
servant, for each waits upon himself: neither does he require many
clothes, nor need to shake off sleep. For as soon as he opens his eyes,
he is like one who has been long awake in collectedness. <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) For when the heart is not stifled
within by excess of food, it soon recovers itself, and is immediately
wakeful. The hands are always pure; for his sleep is composed and
regular. No one among them is found snoring or breathing hard, or
tossing about in sleep, or with his body exposed; but they lie in sleep
as decently as those who are awake, and all this is the effect of the
orderly state of their souls. These are truly saints and angels among
men. And marvel not when you hear these things. For their great fear of
God suffers them not to go down into the depths of sleep, and to drown
their minds, but it falls lightly upon them, merely affording them rest.
And as their sleep is, such are their dreams, not full of wild fancies
and monstrous visions.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p30"></span>But, as I said, at the crowing of the
cock their President comes, and gently touching the <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) sleeper with his foot, rouses them
all. For there are none sleeping naked. Then as soon as they have arisen
they stand up, and sing the prophetic hymns with much harmony, and well
composed tunes. And neither harp nor pipe nor other musical instrument
utters such sweet melodies, as you hear from the singing of these saints
in their deep and quiet solitudes. And the songs themselves too are
suitable, and full of the love of God. “In the night,” they say, “lift
up your hands unto God. With my soul have I desired Thee in the night,
yea with my spirit within me will I seek Thee early,” ([Isa. xxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.1"></span>.)
And the Psalms of David, that cause fountains of tears to flow. For when
he sings, “I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to
swim; I water my couch with my tears” ([Ps. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.2"></span>.):
and, again, “I have eaten ashes like bread.” ([Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.3"></span>.)
“What is man that thou art mindful of him?” ([Ps. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.4"></span>.)
“Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passeth away.”
([Ps. cxliv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.5"></span>.) “Be not afraid when one is made rich, when
the glory of his house is increased” ([Ps. xlix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.6"></span>.);
and, “Who maketh men to be of one mind in a house” ([Ps. lxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.7"></span>.):
and, “Seven times a day do I praise Thee, because of Thy righteous
judgments” ([Ps. cxix. 164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.8"></span>.): and, “At midnight will I rise to give
thanks unto Thee, <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_457"></span>because of Thy righteous judgments” ([Ps.
cxix. 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.9"></span>.): and, “God will redeem my soul from the
power of the grave” ([Ps. xlix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.10"></span>.): and, “Though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me” ([Ps.
xxiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.11"></span>.): and, “I will not be afraid for the
terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day, nor for the
pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor for the destruction that
wasteth at noonday” ([Ps. 91:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.12"></span>.): and, “We are counted as sheep for the
slaughter” ([Ps. xliv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.13"></span>.): he expresses their ardent love to God.
And again, when they sing with the Angels, (for Angels too are singing
then,) “Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens.” ([Ps. cxlviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.xv-p31.14"></span>.)
And we meanwhile are snoring, or scratching our heads, or lying supine
meditating endless deceits. <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251)
Think what it was for them to spend the whole night in this employment.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p33"></span>And when the day is coming on, they take
rest again; for when we begin our works, they have a season of
rest. <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) But each of us, when it
is day, calls upon his neighbor, takes account of his outgoings,
then <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) goes into the forum;
trembling he appears before the magistrate, and dreads a reckoning.
Another visits the stage, another goes about his own business. But these
holy men, having performed their morning prayers and hymns, proceed to
the reading of the Scriptures. There are some too that have learned to
write out books, each having his own apartment assigned to him, where he
lives in perpetual quiet; no one is trifling, not one speaks a word.
Then at the third, sixth, and ninth hours, and in the evening, they
perform their devotions, having divided the day into four parts, and at
the conclusion of each they honor God with psalms and hymns, and whilst
others are dining, laughing, and sporting, and bursting with gluttony,
they are occupied with their hymns. For they have no time for the table
nor for these things of sense. After their meal <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) they again pursue the same course,
having previously given themselves a while to sleep. The men of the
world sleep during the day: but these watch during the night. Truly
children of light are they! And while the former, having slept away the
greater part of the day, go forth oppressed with heaviness, these are
still collected, <span id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) remaining
without food <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) till the
evening, and occupied in hymns. Other men, when evening overtakes them,
hasten to the baths, and different recreations, but these, being
relieved from their labors, then betake themselves to their table, not
calling up a multitude of servants, nor throwing the house into bustle
and confusion, nor setting before them high-seasoned dishes, and
rich-steaming viands, but some only partaking of bread and salt, to
which others add oil, whilst the weakly have also herbs and pulse. Then
after sitting a short time, or rather after concluding all with hymns,
they each go to rest upon a bed made for repose only and not for luxury.
There is no dread of magistrates, no lordly arrogance, no terror of
slaves, no disturbance of women or children, no multitudes of chests, or
superfluous laying by of garments, no gold or silver, no guards and
sentinels, no storehouse. Nothing of all these, but all there is full of
prayer, of hymns, and of a spiritual savor. Nothing carnal is there.
They fear no attacks of robbers, having nothing of which they can be
deprived, no wealth, but a soul and body, of which if they are robbed,
it is not a loss but a gain. For it is said, “To me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain.” ([Philip. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span id="v.iii.xv-p38.1"></span>.)
They have freed themselves from all bonds. Truly, “The voice of gladness
is in the tabernacles of the righteous.” ([Ps. cxviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xv-p38.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xv-p39"></span>There is no such thing to be heard there
as wailing and lamentation. Their roof is free from that melancholy and
those cries. Deaths happen there indeed, for their bodies are not
immortal, but they know not death, as death. The departed are
accompanied to the grave with hymns. This they call a procession, <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) not a burial; <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) and when it is reported that any
one is dead, great is their cheerfulness, great their pleasure; or
rather not one of them can bear to say that one is dead, but that he is
perfected. Then there is thanksgiving, and great glory, and joy, every
one praying that such may be his own end, that so his own combat may
terminate, and he may rest from his labor and struggles, and may see
Christ. And if any is sick, instead of tears and lamentations they have
recourse to prayers. Often not the care of physicians, but faith alone
relieves the sick. And if a physician be necessary, then too there is
the greatest firmness and philosophy. There is no wife tearing her hair,
nor children bewailing their orphan state before the time, nor slaves
entreating the dying man to give them an assurance that they shall be
committed to good hands. Escaping from all these, the soul looks but to
one thing at its last breath, that it may depart in favor with God. And
if disease occurs, the causes of it are matter of glory rather than of
reproach, as in other cases. For it proceeds not from gluttony nor
fullness of the head, <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_458"></span>but from intense watchfulness and fasting,
or the like causes; and hence it is easily removed, for it is sufficient
for its removal to abate the severity of these exercises.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p42"></span>Tell me then, you will say, whether any
one could wash the Saints’ feet in the Church? Whether such are to be
found among us? Yes: undoubtedly they are such. Let us not, however,
when the life of these saints is described despise those that are in the
Churches. There are many such often among us, though they are in secret.
Nor let us despise them, because they go from house to house, or go into
the forum, or stand forth in public. <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) God hath even commanded such
services, saying, “Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.” ([Isa. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span id="v.iii.xv-p43.1"></span>.)
Many are the ways of being virtuous, as there are many varieties of
jewels, <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) though all are called
jewels; one is bright and round on all sides, another has some different
beauty. And how is this? As coral has, by a kind of art, its line
extended, and its angles shaped off, and another color more delicious
than white, and the prasius above every green, another has the rich
color of blood, another an azure surpassing the sea, another is more
brilliant than the purple, and thus rivaling in their varieties all the
colors of flowers or of the sun. Yet all are called jewels. So it is
with the Saints. Some discipline <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) themselves, some the Churches. Paul
therefore has well said, “If she have washed the Saints’ feet, if she
have relieved the afflicted.” For he speaks thus, that he may excite us
all to imitation. Let us hasten then to perform such actions, that we
may be able hereafter to boast that we have washed the Saints’ feet. For
if we ought to wash their feet, much more ought we to give them our
money with our own hands, and at the same time study to be concealed.
“Let not thy left hand know,” He says, “what thy right hand doeth.”
([Matt. vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)<span
id="v.iii.xv-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xv-p46"></span>Why takest thou so many witnesses? Let
not thy servant know it, nor, if possible, thy wife. Many are the
impediments of the deceitful one. Often she who never before interfered,
will impede such works, either from vainglory, or some other motive.
Even Abraham, who had an admirable wife, when he was about to offer up
his son, concealed it from her, though he knew not what was to happen,
but was fully persuaded that he must slaughter his son. What then, would
any one that was but an ordinary man have said? Would it not be, “Who is
this that perpetrates such acts?” Would he not have accused him of
cruelty and brutality? His wife was not even allowed to see her son, to
receive his last words, to witness his dying struggles. But he led him
away like a captive. That just man though not of any such thing,
inebriated as he was with zeal, <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) so that he looked only how to
fulfill that which was commanded. No servant, no wife was present, nay,
he himself knew not what would be the issue. But intent upon offering up
a pure victim, he would not defile it with tears, or with any
opposition. Mark too with what gentleness Isaac asks, “Behold the fire
and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?”: and what was
the father’s answer? “My son, God will provide Himself a lamb for a
burnt offering.” ([Gen. 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)<span id="v.iii.xv-p47.1"></span>.)
In this he uttered a prophecy that God would provide Himself a burnt
offering in His Son, and it also came true at the time. But why did he
conceal it from him who was to be sacrificed? Because he feared lest he
should be astounded, <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) lest he
should prove unworthy. With such care and prudence did he act throughout
this affair! Well then hath the Scripture said, “Let not thy left hand
know what thy right hand doeth.” If we have one dear to us as one of our
own members, let us not be anxious to show to him our charitable works,
unless it be necessary. For many evils may arise from it. A man is
excited to vainglory, and impediments are often raised. For this reason
let us conceal it, if possible, from our own selves, that we may attain
the blessings promised, through the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus
Christ our Lord, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[453:1239](1130107.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p6"></span> Colb., “For the heathen will presently
say, Well! these Christians are affectionate indeed, to neglect their
own relatives! And he well said,” &c.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[453:1240](1130107.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p7"></span> Colb. omits this sentence.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[454:1241](1130107.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p10"></span> The feminine is not marked, but implied
by his comment; see p. 450.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[454:1242](1130107.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p12"></span> The sense is clear, but the Greek admits
of no grammatical construction. Downes, as usual, alters it boldly. This
translation supposes an abrupt construction, reading ἐπιδεικνύ& 219·.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[455:1243](1130107.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p14"></span> Old Lat., “Many wives that were.” “Of
whom” may also be taken collectively of the household.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[455:1244](1130107.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p16"></span> ἐκμαγειον, as if wiping a sore clean.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[455:1245](1130107.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p19"></span> Gr. “being able to dispense.”

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[456:1246](1130107.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p23"></span> They commonly abstained from all animal
food; see p. 457.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[456:1247](1130107.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p24"></span> Sav. mar. τῶν αὐτοῦ. The other reading
is scarcely intelligible.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[456:1248](1130107.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p26"></span> μοναστήριον. The monasteries of that
date were formed by those who gathered round some holy man. For
instances, see Theodoret, Hist. Relig.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[456:1249](1130107.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p27"></span> Some words added from Colb.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[456:1250](1130107.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p29"></span> τῆς νήψεως ἕνεκεν.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[456:1251](1130107.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p31"></span> al. each.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[457:1252](1130107.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p31.15"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p32"></span> He means not self-deceits, but actual
frauds, for he is now as it were on a sally, among the enemy’s works.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[457:1253](1130107.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p34"></span> Not their principal rest, but an
interval.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[457:1254](1130107.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p35"></span> So Old Lat. (prob. from εἶτα εἰς) Ed. εἰ
εἰς, “if he goes.” Colb. om εἰ.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[457:1255](1130107.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p36"></span> ἄριστον. See on Stat. Hom. ix. 1, note
e, and x. 1, note a.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[457:1256](1130107.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p37"></span> νήφουσιν.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[457:1257](1130107.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p38"></span> This seems to contradict what was said
just before, but it need not be taken quite strictly, as the former meal
was not at table, and extremely light.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[457:1258](1130107.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p40"></span> προπομπήν.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[457:1259](1130107.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p41"></span> ἐκφοράν.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[458:1260](1130107.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p43"></span> προίστανται. “Stand forth in behalf of
another.”

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[458:1261](1130107.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p44"></span> μαργαριτῶν, pearls.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[458:1262](1130107.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p45"></span> ἀσκοῦσιν.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[458:1263](1130107.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p47"></span> πόθῳ. Love of God, or desire to do His
will.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[458:1264](1130107.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="v.iii.xv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xv-p48"></span> ναρκήσῃ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 5:11-15](1130108)
