[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130025)  [Next](1130027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2.2"></span>[Ephesians iv.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p3"></span>“This I say therefore, and testify in
the Lord, that ye no longer walk as the Gentiles also walk, in the
vanity of their mind, being darkened in their understanding, alienated
from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because
of the hardening of their heart: who being past feeling, gave themselves
up to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>These</span> words are not addressed to the
Ephesians only, but are now addressed also to you; and that, not from
me, but from Paul; or rather, neither from me nor from Paul, but from
the grace of the Spirit. And we then ought so to feel, as though that
grace itself were uttering them. And now hear what it saith. “This I say
therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye no longer walk as the
Gentiles also walk, in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in their
understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance
that is in them, because of the hardening of their heart.” If then it is
ignorance, if it is hardening, why blame it? <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) if a man is ignorant, it were just,
not that he should be ill-treated for it, nor be blamed, but that he
should be informed of those things of which he is ignorant. But mark how
at once he cuts them off from all excuse. “Who being past feeling,”
saith he, “gave themselves up to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness; but ye did not so learn Christ.” Here he shows us, that
the cause of their hardening was their way of life, and that their life
was the consequence of their own indolence and want of feeling.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p6"></span>“Who being past feeling,” <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) saith he, “gave themselves up.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p8"></span>Whenever then ye hear, that “God gave
them up unto a reprobate mind” ([Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>.), remember this expression, that “they
gave themselves up.” If then they gave themselves over, how did God give
them over? and if again God gave them over, how did they give themselves
over? Thou seest the seeming contradiction. The word, “gave them over,”
then, means this, He permitted <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)
them to be given over. Seest thou, that the impure life is the ground
for like doctrines also? “Every one,” saith the Lord, “that doeth ill
hateth the light, and cometh not to the light.” ([John iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>.)
For how could a profligate man, one more immersed in the practice of
indiscriminate lewdness than the swine <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) that wallow in the mire, and who is a
lover of money, and has not so much as any desire after temperance,
enter upon a life like this? They made the thing, saith he, their
“work.” <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) Hence their “hardening”
([Eph. 4.19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>), hence the “darkness of their
understand<span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-Page_113"></span>ing.” There is such a thing as being in
the dark, even while the light is shining, when the eyes are weak; and
weak they become, either by the influx of ill humors, or by
superabundance of rheum. And so surely is it also here; when the strong
current of the affairs of this life overwhelms the perceptive power of
the understanding, it is thrown into a state of darkness. And in the
same way as if we were placed in the depths under water, we should be
unable to see the sun through the quantity of water lying, like a sort
of barrier, above us, so surely, in the eyes of the understanding also a
blindness of the heart takes place, that is, an insensibility, whenever
there is no fear to agitate the soul. “There is no fear of God,” it
saith, “before his eyes” ([Ps. xxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p11.2"></span>.); and again, “The fool hath said in his
heart, There is no God.” ([Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p11.3"></span>.)
Now blindness arises from no other cause than from want of feeling; this
clogs the channel; for whenever the fluids are curdled and collected
into one place, the limb becomes dead and void of feeling; and though
thou burn it, or cut it, or do what thou wilt with it, still it feels
not. So is it also with those persons, when they have once given
themselves over to lasciviousness: though thou apply the word to them
like fire, or steel, yet nothing touches, nothing reaches them; their
limb is utterly dead. And unless thou canst remove the insensibility, so
as to touch the healthy members, everything thou doest is vain.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p12"></span>“With greediness,” saith he.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p13"></span>Here he has most completely taken away
their excuse; for it was in their power, if at least they chose it, not
to be “greedy,” <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) nor to be
“lascivious,” nor gluttonous, and yet to enjoy their desires. It was in
their power to partake in moderation <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) of riches, and even of pleasure and of
luxury; but when they indulged the thing immoderately, <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) they destroyed all.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p17"></span>“To work all uncleanness,” saith he.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p18"></span>Ye see how he strips them of all excuse
by speaking of “working uncleanness.” They did not sin, he means, by
making a false step, but they worked out these horrid deeds, and they
made the thing a matter of study. “All uncleanness”; uncleanness is all
adultery, fornication, unnatural lust, envy, every kind of profligacy
and lasciviousness.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p19"></span>[Eph.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>. “But ye did not so learn Christ,” he
continues, “if so be that ye heard Him, and were taught in Him even as
truth is in Jesus.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p20"></span>The expression, “If so be that ye heard
Him,” is not that of one doubting, but of one even strongly affirming:
as he also speaks elsewhere, “If so be that it is a righteous thing with
God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you.” ([2 Thess. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p20.1"></span>.)
That is to say, It was not for these purposes that “ye learned Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p21"></span>[Eph.
4.22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p21.1"></span>. “That ye put away as concerning your
former manner of life, the old man.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p22"></span>This then surely is to learn Christ, to
live rightly; for he that lives wickedly knows not God, neither is known
of Him; for hear what he saith elsewhere, “They profess that they know
God, but by their works they deny Him.” ([Tit. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p23"></span>“As truth is in Jesus; that ye put away
as concerning your former manner of life, the old man.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p24"></span>That is to say, It was not on these
terms that thou enteredst into covenant. What is found among us is not
vanity, but truth. As the doctrines are true, so is the life also. Sin
is vanity and falsehood; but a right life is truth. For temperance is
indeed truth, for it has a great end; whereas profligacy ends in
nothing.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p25"></span>“Which waxeth corrupt,” saith he,
“after the lusts of deceit.” As his lusts became corrupt, so himself
also. How then do his lusts become corrupt? By death all things are
dissolved; for hear the Prophet, how he saith, “In that very day his
thoughts perish.” ([Ps. cxlvi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>.) And not by death only, but by many
things besides; for instance, beauty, at the advance of either disease
or old age, withdraws and dies away, and suffers corruption. Bodily
vigor again is destroyed by the same means; nor does luxury itself
afford the same pleasure in old age, as is evident from the case of
Barzillai: <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) the history, no
doubt, ye know. Or again, in another sense, lust corrupts and destroys
the old man; for as wool is destroyed by the very same means by which it
is produced, so likewise is the old man. For love of glory destroys him,
and pleasures will often destroy him, and “lust” will utterly “deceive”
him. For this is not really pleasure but bitterness and deceit, all
pretense and outward show. The surface, indeed, of the things is bright,
but the things themselves are only full of misery and extreme
wretchedness, and loathsomeness, and utter poverty. Take off the mask,
and lay bare the true face, and thou shalt see the cheat, for cheat it
is, when that which is, appears not, and that which is not, is
displayed. And it is thus that impositions are effected.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p27"></span>The Apostle delineates for us four
men. <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) Of these I shall give an
explanation. In this place he mentions two, speaking thus, “Putting away
<span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-Page_114"></span>the old man, be ye renewed in the spirit
of your mind, and put on the new man.” And in the Epistle to the Romans,
two more, as where he saith, “But I see a different law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under
the law of sin which is in my members.” ([Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>.) And these latter bear affinity to those
former two, the “new man” to the “inner man,” and the “old man” to the
“outer man.” However, three of these four were subject to corruption. Or
rather there are three, the new man, the old, and this, man in his
substance and nature. <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326)

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p30"></span>[Eph.
4.23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p30.1"></span>. “And that ye be renewed,” saith he, “in
the spirit of your mind.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p31"></span>In order that no one may suppose that,
whereas he speaks of old and new, he is introducing a different person,
observe his expression, “That ye be renewed.” To be renewed is, when the
selfsame thing which has grown old is renewed, changed from one thing
into the other. So that the subject indeed is the same, but the change
is in that which is accidental. Just as the body indeed is the same, and
the change in that which is accidental, so is it here. How then is the
renewal to take place? “In the spirit of your mind,” saith he. Whosoever
therefore has the Spirit, will perform no old deed, for the Spirit will
not endure old deeds. “In the spirit,” saith he, “of your mind,” that
is, in the spirit which is in your mind. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327)

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p33"></span>[Eph.
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p33.1"></span>. “And put on the new man.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p34"></span>Seest thou that the subject is one, but
the clothing is twofold, that which is put off, and that which is put
on? “The new man,” he continues, “which after God hath been created in
righteousness and holiness of truth.” Now wherefore does he call virtue
a man? And wherefore vice, a man? Because a man cannot be shown without
acting; so that these things, no less than nature, show a man, whether
he be good or evil. Now as to undress one’s self and to dress one’s self
is easy, so may we see it is with virtue and vice. The young man is
strong; wherefore let us also become strong for the performance of good
actions. The young man has no wrinkle, therefore neither should we have.
The young man wavers not, nor is he easily taken with diseases,
therefore neither should we be.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p35"></span>Observe here how he calls this
realizing of virtue, this bringing of it into being from nothing, a
“creation.” But what? was not that other former creation after God? No,
in no-wise, but after the devil. He is the sole creator of sin.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p36"></span>How is this? For man is created
henceforth, not of water, nor of earth, but “in righteousness and
holiness of truth.” What is this? He straightway created him, he means,
to be a son: for this takes place from Baptism. This it is which is the
reality, “in righteousness and holiness of truth.” There was of old a
righteousness, there was likewise a holiness with the Jews. Yet was that
righteousness not in truth, but in figure. For the being clean in body
was a type of purity, not the truth of purity; was a type of
righteousness, not the truth of righteousness. “In righteousness,” saith
he, “and holiness,” which are “of truth.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p37"></span>And this expression is used with
reference to falsehood; for many there are, who to them that are
without, seem to be righteous, yet are false. Now by righteousness is
meant universal virtue. For hearken to Christ, how He saith, “Except
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in nowise enter into the kingdom of heaven.” ([Matt.
v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p37.1"></span>.) And again, he is called righteous, who
has no charge against him; for so even in courts of justice we say that
that man is righteous, who has been unrighteously treated, and has not
done unrighteously in return. If therefore we also before the terrible
Tribunal shall be able to appear righteous one towards another, we may
meet with some lovingkindness. Toward God indeed it is impossible we
should appear so, whatever we may have to show. For everywhere He
overcometh in what is righteous, as the Prophet <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) also saith, “That Thou mightest
prevail when Thou comest into judgment.” But if we violate not what is
righteous towards each other, then shall we be righteous. If we shall be
able to show that we have been treated unrighteously, then shall we be
righteous.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p39"></span>How does he say to them who are already
clothed, “put on”? He is now speaking of that clothing which is from
life and good works. Before, the clothing was from Baptism, whereas now
it is from the daily life and from works; no longer “after the lusts of
deceit,” but “after God.” But what means the word “holy”? It is that
which is pure, that which is due; hence also we use the word of the last
duty in the case of the departed, as much as to say, “I owe them nothing
further, I have nothing else to answer <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xiv-Page_115"></span>for.” Thus it is usual for us to
say, “I have acquitted myself of all obligations,” <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) and the like, meaning, “I owe nothing
more.”

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p41"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p41.1"></span>Moral</span>. Our part then is, never to
put off the garment of righteousness, which also the Prophet calls, “the
garment of salvation” ([Isa. lxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p41.2"></span>.), that so we may be made like unto God.
For He indeed hath put on righteousness. This garment let us put on. Now
the word, “put on,” plainly declares nothing else, than that we should
never at all put it off. For hear the Prophet, where he saith, “He
clothed himself also with cursing as with his garment, and it came into
his inward parts.” ([Ps. cix. 18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p41.3"></span>.) And again, “Who coverest Thyself with
light as with a garment.” ([Ps. civ.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p41.4"></span>.)
And again, it is usual with us to speak concerning men, such an one has
“put on” such an one. So then it is not for one day, nor for two, nor
for three, but he would have us ever arrayed in virtue, and never
stripped of this garment. For a man is not so disfigured when he is
stripped of his clothing, as when he is stripped of his virtue. In the
former case his fellow-servants behold his nakedness, in the latter his
Lord and the Angels. If ever thou happen to see any one going out naked
through the public square, tell me, art thou not distressed? When then
thou goest about stripped of this garment, what shall we say? Seest not
those beggars whom we are wont to call strollers, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) how they roam about, how we pity even
them? And yet nevertheless they are without excuse. We do not excuse
them when they have lost their clothes by gaming; and how then, if we
lose this garment, shall God pardon us? For whenever the devil sees a
man stripped of his virtue, he straightway disguises and disfigures his
face, and wounds him, and drives him to great straits.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p43"></span>Let us strip ourselves of our riches,
that we be not stripped of righteousness. The garb of wealth mars this
garment. It is a robe of thorns. Thorns are of this nature; and the more
closely they are wrapped around us, the more naked are we made.
Lasciviousness strips us of this garment; for it is a fire, and the fire
will consume this garment. Wealth is a moth; and as the moth eats
through all things alike, and spares not even silken garments, so does
this also. All these therefore let us put off, that we may become
righteous, that we may “put on the new man.” Let us keep nothing old,
nothing outward, nothing that is “corrupt.” Virtue is not toilsome, she
is not difficult to attain. Dost thou not see them that are in the
mountains? They forsake both houses, and wives, and children, and all
preëminence, and shut themselves away from the world, and clothe
themselves in sackcloth, and strew ashes beneath them; they wear collars
hung about their necks, and have pent themselves up in a narrow
cell. <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) Nor do they stop here, but
torture themselves with fastings and continual hunger. Did I now enjoin
you to do the like, would ye not all start away? Would ye not say, it is
intolerable? But no, I say not that we must needs do anything like
this:—I would fain indeed that it were so, still I lay down no law. What
then? Enjoy thy baths, take care of thy body, and throw thyself freely
into the world, and keep a household, have thy servants to wait on thee,
and make free use of thy meats and drinks! But everywhere drive out
excess, for that it is which causes sin, and the same thing, whatever it
be, if it becomes excessive, becomes a sin; so that excess is nothing
else than sin. For observe, when anger is excited above what is meet,
then it rushes out into insult, then it commits every sort of injury; so
does inordinate passion for beauty, for riches, for glory, or for
anything else. And tell me not, that indeed, those of whom I spoke were
strong; for many far weaker and richer, and more luxurious than thou
art, have taken upon them that austere and rugged life. And why speak I
of men? Damsels not yet twenty years old, who have spent their whole
time in inner chambers, and in a delicate and effeminate mode of life,
in inner chambers full of sweet ointments and perfumes, reclining on
soft couches, themselves soft in their nature, and rendered yet more
tender by their over indulgence, who all the day long have had no other
business than to adorn themselves, to wear jewels, and to enjoy every
luxury, who never waited on themselves, but had numerous handmaids
standing beside them, who wore soft raiment softer than their skin, fine
linen and delicate, who reveled continually in roses and such like sweet
odors,—yea, these very ones, in a moment, seized with Christ’s flame,
have put off all that indolence and even their very nature, have
forgotten their delicateness and youth, and like so many noble
wrestlers, have stripped themselves of that soft clothing, and rushed
into the midst of the contest. And perhaps I shall appear to be telling
things incredible, yet nevertheless are they true. These then, these
very tender damsels, as I myself have heard, have brought themselves to
such a degree of severe training, that they will wrap the coars<span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="iii.iv.xiv-Page_116"></span>est
horsehair about their own naked bodies, and go with those tender soles
unsandaled, and will lie upon a bed of leaves: nay more, that they watch
the greater part of the night, and that they take no heed of perfumes
nor of any other of their old delights, but will even let their head,
once so carefully dressed, go without special care, with the hair just
plainly and simply bound up, so as not to fall into unseemliness. And
their only meal is in the evening, a meal not even of herbs nor of
bread, but of flour and beans and pulse and olives and figs. They spin
without intermission, and labor far harder than their handmaids at home.
What more? they will take upon them to wait upon women who are sick,
carrying their beds, and washing their feet. Nay, many of them even
cook. So great is the power of the flame of Christ; so far does their
zeal surpass their very nature.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p45"></span>However, I demand nothing like this of
you, seeing ye have a mind to be outstripped by women. Yet at least, if
there be any tasks not too laborious, at least perform these: restrain
the rude hand, and the incontinent eye. What is there, tell me, so hard,
what so difficult? Do what is just and right, wrong no man, be ye poor
or rich, shopkeepers or hired servants; for unrighteousness may extend
even to the poor. Or see ye not how many broils these engage in, and
turn all things upside down? Marry freely, and have children. Paul also
gave charge to such, to such he wrote. Is that struggle I spoke of too
great, and the rock too lofty, and its top too nigh unto Heaven, and art
thou unable to attain to such an height? At least then lay hold on
lesser things, and aim at those which are lower. Hast thou not courage
to get rid of thine own riches? At least then forbear to seize on the
things of others, and to do them wrong. Art thou unable to fast? At
least then give not thyself to self-indulgence. Art thou unable to lie
upon a bed of leaves? Still, prepare not for yourselves couches inlaid
with silver; but use a couch and coverings formed not for display, but
for refreshment; not couches of ivory. Make thyself small. Why fill thy
vessel with overwhelming cargoes? If thou be lightly equipped, thou
shalt have nothing to fear, no envy, no robbers, no liers in wait. For
indeed thou art not so rich in money as thou art in cares. Thou
aboundest not so much in possessions, as in anxieties and in perils,
“which bring in many temptations and lusts.” ([1 Tim. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p45.1"></span>.)
These things they endure, who desire to gain great possessions. I say
not, minister unto the sick; yet, at least, bid thy servant do it. Seest
thou then how that this is no toilsome task? No, for how can it be, when
tender damsels surpass us by so great a distance? Let us be ashamed of
ourselves, I entreat you; for in worldly matters, to be sure, we in no
point yield to them, neither in wars, nor in games; but in the spiritual
contest they get the advantage of us, and are the first to seize the
prize, and soar higher, like so many eagles: <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) whilst we, like jackdaws, are ever
living in the steam and smoke; for truly is it the business of jackdaws,
and of greedy dogs, to be setting one’s thoughts upon caterers and
cooks. Hearken about the women of old; they were great characters, great
women and admirable; such were Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, Deborah, and
Hannah; and such there were also in the days of Christ. Yet did they in
no case outstrip the men, but occupied the second rank. But now it is
the very contrary; women outstrip and eclipse us. How contemptible! What
a shame is this! We hold the place of the head, and are surpassed by the
body. We are ordained to rule over them; not merely that we may rule,
but that we may rule in goodness also; for he that ruleth, ought
especially to rule in this respect, by excelling in virtue; whereas if
he is surpassed, he is no longer ruler. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) Perceive ye how great is the power of
Christ’s coming? how He dissolved the curse? For indeed there are more
virgins than before among women, there is more modesty in those virgins,
and there are more widows. No woman would lightly utter so much as an
unseemly word. Wherefore then, tell me, dost thou use filthy speech? For
tell me not that they were virgins in despondency or despair.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p48"></span>The sex is fond of ornament, and it has
this failing. Yet even in this you husbands surpass them, who pride
yourselves even upon them, as your own proper ornament; for I do not
think that the wife is so ostentatious of her own jewels, as the husband
is of those of his wife. He is not so proud of his own golden girdle, as
he is of his wife’s wearing jewels of gold. So that even of this you are
the causes, who light the spark and kindle up the flame. But what is
more, it is not so great a sin in a woman as in a man. Thou art ordained
to regulate her; in every way thou claimest to have the preëminence.
Show her then in this also, that thou takest no interest in this
costliness of hers, by thine own apparel. It is more suitable for a
woman to adorn herself, than for a man. If then thou escape not the
temptation, how shall she escape it? They have moreover their share of
vainglory, but this is common to them with men. They are in a measure
passionate, and this again is common to them with men. But as to those
things wherein they excel, these are <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xiv-Page_117"></span>no longer common to them with men;
their sanctity, I mean, their fervency, their devotion, their love
towards Christ. Wherefore then, one may say, did Paul exclude them from
the teacher’s seat? And here again is a proof how great a distance they
were from the men, and that the women of those days were great. For,
tell me, while Paul was teaching, or Peter, or those saints of old, had
it been right that a woman should intrude into the office? Whereas we
have gone on till we have come so debased, that it is worthy of
question, why women are not teachers. So truly have we come to the same
weakness as they. These things I have said not from any desire to elate
them, but to shame ourselves, to chastise, and to admonish us, that so
we may resume the authority that belongs to us, not inasmuch as we are
greater in size, but because of our foresight, our protection of them,
and our virtue. For thus shall the body also be in the order which
befits it, when it has the best head to rule. And God grant that all,
both wives and husbands, may live according to His good pleasure, that
we may all in that terrible day be counted worthy to enjoy the
lovingkindness of our Master, and to attain those good things which are
promised in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, and honor, now and forever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[112:317](1130026.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p5"></span> \[“The *cause* of this estrangement of
the Gentiles from the life of God is the *ignorance* which is in them
through *hardening* of heart, consequently due to their own
fault.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_317"></span>[112:318](1130026.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p7"></span> \[“The estrangement of the Gentiles
from the divine life, indicated in the preceding verse, is here proved
in conformity with *experience*.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_318"></span>[112:319](1130026.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p9"></span> \[“The word implies an *active giving
up*, not mere permission.”—Meyer, Ellicott, Thayer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_319"></span>[112:320](1130026.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p10"></span> \[The word “swine” (χοίρων), though
omitted from Field’s text, is clearly attested, and cannot be omitted
without leaving the sense difficult and obscure.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_320"></span>[112:321](1130026.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p11"></span> \[Namely, “to *work* all uncleanness,”
&c.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_321"></span>[113:322](1130026.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p14"></span> \[From the word used by Chrysostom as
the antithesis of πλεονεκτεῖν, namely, μετὰ συμμετρίας (and compare
ἀμέτρως below) it is evident he understood the phrase ἐν πλεονεξί& 139·,
as the Revisers of Eng. Ver. do, “with greediness.” But Meyer denies
that the word πλεονεξία ever means anything but “covetousness” in the
New Test. So also Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_322"></span>[113:323](1130026.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p15"></span> \[From the word used by Chrysostom as
the antithesis of πλεονεκτεῖν, namely, μετὰ συμμετρίας (and compare
ἀμέτρως below) it is evident he understood the phrase ἐν πλεονεξί& 139·,
as the Revisers of Eng. Ver. do, “with greediness.” But Meyer denies
that the word πλεονεξία ever means anything but “covetousness” in the
New Test. So also Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_323"></span>[113:324](1130026.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p16"></span> \[From the word used by Chrysostom as
the antithesis of πλεονεκτεῖν, namely, μετὰ συμμετρίας (and compare
ἀμέτρως below) it is evident he understood the phrase ἐν πλεονεξί& 139·,
as the Revisers of Eng. Ver. do, “with greediness.” But Meyer denies
that the word πλεονεξία ever means anything but “covetousness” in the
New Test. So also Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_324"></span>[113:325](1130026.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p26"></span> \[And David said to Barzillai, “Come
and I will sustain thee in Jerusalem.” And Barzillai said unto the king,
“I am this day fourscore years old: can thy servant taste what I eat or
what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing
women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord
the king?”—[2 Sam. xix. 31-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_325"></span>[113:326](1130026.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p28"></span> τέσσαρας ἀνθρώπους ὑπογράφει.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[114:327](1130026.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p29"></span> μᾶλλον δὲ τρεῖς εἰσι, καινὸς καὶ
παλαιὸς, καὶ οὗτος ὁ οὐσιώδης καὶ φυσικός.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[114:328](1130026.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p32"></span> \[Meyer takes a different view, and
says: The Holy Spirit is never, in the New Test., designated in such a
way that man appears as the subject of the Spirit (thus never: τὸ πνεῦμα
ὑμῶν, and the like, or as here: τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ νοὸς ὑμῶν). In the second
place, the Apostle is here putting forward the moral self-activity of
the Christian life, and hence had no occasion to introduce the point:
“Through the Holy Spirit.” Hence πνεῦμα here is the “human” spirit, the
spirit by which your νοῦς is governed. Otherwise Ellicott: Divine spirit
united with the human; and so he understands Meyer, but incorrectly. See
Ellicott and Meyer *in loc*.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_328"></span>[114:329](1130026.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p38"></span> \[This passage in the Hebrew ([Ps. li.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p38.1"></span>.)
reads, “And (that thou mayest) be clear when thou judgest.” In the Sept.
it is: καὶ νικήσῃς ἔν τῷ κρίνεσθαί σε, which is followed by Paul in
[Rom. iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p38.2"></span> (except νικήσεις, fut. ind., instead of
aor. subj.). We have given here the rendering of the Rev. Ver. of [Rom.
iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p38.3"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_329"></span>[115:330](1130026.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p40"></span> ἀφωσιωσάμην.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[115:331](1130026.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p41.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p42"></span> λώταγας. The word occurs also in the
*Constit. Apost*. viii. 32 \[along with such words as βλάξ, “dolt”;
μάγος, “sorcerer”; μάντις, “soothsayer”; θηρεπῳδός, “beast-charmer”;
ὀχλαγωγός, “mob-leader”; περιάμματα ποιῶν, “amulet-maker.”—G.A.\]. Its
derivation is somewhat uncertain. \[Zonaras (Constantinople, 12 cent.),
in his Lexicon, gives among other definitions, αὐλητής, “flute-player”;
so also Eustathius (Constantinople, d. 1198), in his famous commentary
on Homer, Il. 2, 776, defines it, from the fact that λῶτος sometimes
means a “flute.” But this derivation is questioned.—G.A.\] The persons
denoted by it were wandering musicians or buffoons.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[115:332](1130026.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p44"></span> \[This reference to the Monks in the
mountains (in the neighborhood of Antioch) is one of the indications
that these Homilies on Ephesians were delivered while Chrysostom was
still at Antioch, and before his elevation to the archbishopric of
Constantinople. Compare also Hom. vi. on Ephesians.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_332"></span>[116:333](1130026.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p46"></span> \[This passage is so like a passage in
one of Pindar’s Nemean odes that some have thought Chrysostom must have
had that in mind. Pind. *Nem*. 3. 138: ἔστι δ᾽ αἰετὸς ὠκὺς ἐν πετανοῖς,
ὃς ἔλαβεν αἶψα, τηλόθε μεταμαιόμενος, δαφοινὸν ἄγραν ποσίν· κραγέται δὲ
κολοιοὶ ταπεινὰ νέμονται.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_333"></span>[116:334](1130026.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p47"></span> \[Compare Carlyle’s lecture on
Cromwell and Napoleon in *Heroes and Hero-Worship*.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 4:25-27](1130027)
