[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130133)  [Next](1130135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p2"></span>[Philemon i.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#017)<span id="v.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p3"></span>“If thou count me therefore a partner,
receive him as myself. If he hath wronged thee at all, or oweth thee
aught, put that to mine account; I Paul write it with mine own hand, I
will repay it: that I say not to thee how thou owest unto me even thine
own self besides.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>No</span> procedure is so apt to gain a
hearing, <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) as not to ask for
everything at once. For see after how many praises, after how much
preparation he hath introduced this great matter. After having said that
he is “my son,” that he is a partaker of the Gospel, that he is “my
bowels,” that thou receivest him back “as a brother,” and “hold him as a
brother,” then he has added “as myself.” And Paul was not ashamed to do
this. For he who was not ashamed to be called the servant of the
faithful, but confesses that he was such, much more would he not refuse
this. But what he says is to this effect. If thou art of the same mind
with me, if thou runnest upon the same terms, <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) if thou considerest me a friend,
receive him as myself.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p7"></span>“If he hath wronged thee at all.” See where
and when he has introduced the mention of the injury; last, after having
said so many things in his behalf. For since the loss of money is
particularly apt to annoy men, that he might not accuse him of this,
(for it was most likely that it was spent,) then he brings in this, and
says, “If he hath wronged thee.” He does not say, If he has stolen
anything; but what? “If <span id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span
id="v.vi.iv-Page_555"></span>he hath wronged thee.” At the same time he
both confessed the offense, and not as if it were the offense of a
servant, but of a friend against a friend, making use of the expression
of “wrong” rather than of theft.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p8"></span>“Put that to mine account,” he says, that
is, reckon the debt to me, “I will repay it.” Then also with that
spiritual pleasantry,

<span id="v.vi.iv-p9"></span>“I Paul write <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) it with mine own hand.” At once
movingly and pleasantly; if when Paul did not refuse to execute a bond
for him, he should refuse to receive him! This would both shame Philemon
into compliance, and bring Onesimus out of trouble. “I write it,” he
says, “with mine own hand.” Nothing is more affectionate than these
“bowels,” nothing more earnest, nothing more zealous. See what <span
id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) great concern he bestows in behalf
of one man. “Albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even
thine own self besides.” Then that it might not appear insulting to him,
whom he requests, if he had not the confidence to ask and obtain in
behalf of a theft, he in some measure relieves this, saying, “That I say
not unto thee how thou owest to me even thine own self besides.” Not
only thine own things, but thyself also. And this proceeded from love,
and was according to the rule of friendship, and was a proof of his
great confidence. See how he everywhere provides for both, that he may
ask with great security, and that this may not seem a sign of too
little <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) confidence in him.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p13"></span>[Philem.
20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020)<span id="v.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>.
“Yea, brother.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p14"></span>What is, “Yea, brother”? Receive him, he
says. For this we must understand though unexpressed. For dismissing all
pleasantry, he again pursues his former considerations, that is, serious
ones. And yet even these are serious. For the things that proceed from
Saints are of themselves serious, even when they are pleasantry.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p15"></span>“Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in
the Lord, refresh my heart in Christ.” <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572)

<span id="v.vi.iv-p17"></span>That is, thou grantest the favor to the
Lord, not to me. “My heart,” that is, toward thyself.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p18"></span>[Philem.
21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021)<span id="v.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>.
“Having confidence in thy obedience, I write unto thee.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p19"></span>What stone would not these things have
softened? What wild beast would not these things have rendered mild, and
prepared to receive him heartily? After having borne witness to him by
so many great testimonies of his goodness, he is not ashamed again to
excuse himself. He says, Not barely requesting it, nor as commanding it,
nor arbitrarily, but “having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto
thee.” What he had said at the beginning, “having confidence,” that he
also says here in the sealing up of his letter.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p20"></span>“Knowing that thou wilt also do more than
I say.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p21"></span>At the same time in saying this he excited
him. For he would have been ashamed, though for nothing else, if having
such credit with him as this, that he would do more than he said,—he
should not do so much.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p22"></span>[Philem.
22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022)<span id="v.vi.iv-p22.1"></span>.
“But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your
prayers I shall be given unto you.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p23"></span>This also was the part of one who was
exceedingly confident—or rather this too was in behalf of Onesimus, that
not being indifferent, but knowing that he upon his return would know
the things relating to him, they might lay aside all remembrance of the
wrong, and might the rather grant the favor. For great was the influence
and the honor of Paul residing among them, of Paul in his age, of Paul
after imprisonment. Again, it is a proof of their love that he says that
they pray; and to attribute to them so much as that they pray for “him.”
For although I be now in danger, yet nevertheless you will see me if ye
pray for it.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p24"></span>[Philem.
23](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023)<span id="v.vi.iv-p24.1"></span>.
“Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, saluteth thee.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p25"></span>He was sent by the Colossians, so that
from this it appears that Philemon was also at Colossæ. And he calls him
his “fellow-prisoner,” showing that he also was in much tribulation, so
that if not on his own account, yet on account of the other, it was
right that he should be heard. For he that is in tribulation, and
overlooks himself, and is concerned for others, deserves to be heard.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p26"></span>And he puts him to shame from another
consideration, if his countryman is a fellow-prisoner with Paul and
suffers affliction with him, and he himself does not grant him a favor
in behalf of his own servant. And he has added, “my fellow-prisoner in
Christ Jesus,” instead of on account of Christ.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p27"></span>[Philem.
24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024)<span id="v.vi.iv-p27.1"></span>.
“Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-workers.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p28"></span>Why then does he put Luke last? And yet he
elsewhere says, “Only Luke is with me” ([2 Tim. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.iv-p28.1"></span>.),
and “Demas,” he says, was one of those who “forsook him, having loved
the present world.” ([2 Tim. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010)<span id="v.vi.iv-p28.2"></span>.)
All these things, although they are mentioned elsewhere, yet
nevertheless ought not to be passed over here without enquiry, nor ought
we merely to hear them as things of course. But how comes he to say that
he who forsook him salutes them? For <span id="page_556">p. 556</span>
<span id="v.vi.iv-Page_556"></span>“Erastus,” he says, “abode at
Corinth.” ([2 Tim. iv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020)<span
id="v.vi.iv-p28.3"></span>.) He adds Epaphras, both as known to them,
and being of their country. And Mark, as being himself also an admirable
man. Why then does he number Demas with these? Perhaps it was after this
that he became more remiss, when he saw the dangers multiplied. But Luke
being last became first. And from these indeed he salutes him, urging
him the more to obedience, and calls them his fellow-laborers, and in
this way shames him into granting the request.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p29"></span>[Philem.
25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025)<span id="v.vi.iv-p29.1"></span>.
“The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.”

<span id="v.vi.iv-p30"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.vi.iv-p30.1"></span>Moral.</span> He hath closed his Epistle with
a prayer. And indeed prayer is a great good, salutary, and preservative
of our souls. But it is great when we do things worthy of it, and do not
render ourselves unworthy. And thou too, therefore, when thou goest to
the priest, and he shall say to thee, “The Lord will have mercy on thee,
my son,” do not confide in the word only, but add also works. Do acts
worthy of mercy, God will bless thee, my son, if indeed thou doest
things worthy of blessing. He will bless thee, if thou showest mercy to
thy neighbor. For the things which we wish to obtain from God, of those
we ought first to impart to our neighbors. But if we deprive our
neighbors of them, how can we wish to obtain them? “Blessed,” He says,
“are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.” ([Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="v.vi.iv-p30.2"></span>.)
For if men show mercy to such, much more will God, but to the unmerciful
by no means. “For he shall have judgment without mercy to him that hath
showed no mercy.” ([Jas. ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)<span
id="v.vi.iv-p30.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.iv-p31"></span>An excellent thing is mercy! Why then hast
thou not done it to another? Dost thou wish to be pardoned, when thou
offendest? why then dost thou not thyself pardon him who has offended
thee? But thou comest to God, asking of Him the kingdom of heaven, and
thou thyself dost not give money when it is begged of thee. For this
cause we do not obtain mercy, because we do not show mercy. But why? you
say. Is not this also a part of mercy, to show mercy to the unmerciful?
Nay! <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573) For he that treated with
the greatest kindness the hard-hearted cruel man, that had done
numberless ills to his neighbor, how should he be merciful? What then,
say you? Hath not the Laver saved us, who had committed infinite evils?
It hath delivered us from them, not that we should commit them again,
but that we may not commit them. For “how shall we,” it is said, “that
are dead to sin, live any longer therein”? ([Rom. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span id="v.vi.iv-p32.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.iv-p33"></span>“What then? shall we sin because we are
not under the law? God forbid.” ([Rom.
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)<span id="v.vi.iv-p33.1"></span>.)
For this cause God hath delivered thee from those sins that thou
mightest no more run back to that dishonor. Since even physicians
relieve their feverish patients from their heat, not that they may abuse
their health to their injury and disorder, (since it would be better to
be sick, if one was about to use his health only that he might confine
himself again to his bed,) but having learnt the evils that arise from
sickness, they may no longer fall into the same, that they may the more
securely preserve their health, that they may do everything that
conduces to its preservation.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p34"></span>How then? you say: what is the
lovingkindness of God, if He is not about to save the bad? For
oftentimes I hear many talking in this way, that He is the Friend of
man, and will by all means save all. That we may not therefore vainly
deceive ourselves, (for I remember that I made a promise of this kind to
you,) come let us to-day move this argument. I lately discoursed with
you about Hell, and I deferred my argument upon the lovingkindness of
God. It is proper therefore to-day to resume it. That there will, then,
be a hell, we have, as I think, sufficiently proved, bringing forward
the deluge, and former evils, and arguing that it is not possible that
He who performed these things should leave the men of the present age
unpunished. For if thus He chastised those who sinned before the Law, He
will not let those go unpunished who after grace have committed greater
wickedness. It has been questioned therefore how is He good? how
merciful to man, if at least He punishes? and we have deferred the
argument, that we might not overwhelm your ears with a multitude of
words.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p35"></span>Come, to-day let us discharge the debt,
and show how good is God, even in punishing. For this discourse would be
suitable for us in opposition to the heretics. Let us therefore pay
earnest heed to it. God, standing in no need of anything from us, yet
created us. For that He stood in need of us, is manifest from His having
made us after a long time. For He might have made us long ago, if He had
needed us. For if He Himself was, even without us, and we were made in
later times, He made us, not needing us.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p36"></span>He made the Heaven, the earth, the sea,
all things that exist, for our sake. Tell me, are not these marks of
goodness? And many things one might mention. But to cut short the
matter, “He maketh the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust.” ([Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="v.vi.iv-p36.1"></span>.)
Is not this a mark of goodness? No, you say. For I said once in
conversing with a Marcionite, Are not these things a mark of goodness?
and he answered, If <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="v.vi.iv-Page_557"></span>He did not call men to account for their
sins, it were a mark of goodness. But if He calls them to account, it is
not goodness. That man, however, is not now present. But come, let us
repeat what was then said, and more beside. For I, out of my
superfluity, show that if He did not call men to account, He would not
be good; but because He does call them to account, therefore He is good.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p37"></span>For, say, if He did not call us to
account, would human life then have endured? Should we not then have
fallen into the state of beasts? For if when there is this fear
impending over us, and the giving account, and judgments, we have gone
beyond fishes in devouring one another, we have thrown wolves and lions
into the shade in ravaging one another’s possessions; if He did not call
us to account, and we were persuaded of this, with how great tumult and
confusion would life be filled? What would be the fabled labyrinth after
this, compared with the perplexities of the world? Would you not see
numberless indecencies and disorders? For who then would have respected
his father any more? Or who would have spared his mother? Who would have
left unattempted any pleasure, any wickedness? And that the matter is
so, I will endeavor to show you from one house only. How? You who raise
these questions and who have servants; if I could make it manifest to
these, that if they should destroy the family of their masters, <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574) if they should insult their
persons, if they should plunder everything, if they should turn things
upside down, if they should treat them as enemies, they would not
threaten them, nor correct them, nor punish them, nor even grieve them
with a word, would this be any proof of goodness? I maintain that this
is the extreme of cruelty, not only because the wife and children are
betrayed by this unreasonable kindness, but because the slaves
themselves are destroyed before them. For they will be drunkards,
wanton, dissolute, and more irrational than any beasts. Is this, tell
me, a proof of goodness, to trample upon the noble nature of the soul,
and to destroy both themselves and others beside? Seest thou that to
call men to account is a proof of great goodness? But why do I speak of
slaves, who more readily fall into these sins? But let a man have sons,
and let him permit them to do everything they will, and let him not
punish them; will they not be worse than anything? tell me. In the case
of men then, it is a mark of goodness to punish, and of cruelty not to
punish, and is it not so in the case of God? So that because He is good,
therefore He has prepared a hell.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p39"></span>And do you wish that I should speak of
another instance of God’s goodness? It is not only this, but that He
does not suffer the good to become bad. For if they were destined to
meet with the same things, they would all be bad. But now this also does
not a little console the good. For hear the Prophet, saying, “The
righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance upon the ungodly, he
shall wash his hands in the blood of the sinner.” ([Ps. lviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span id="v.vi.iv-p39.1"></span>.)
Not rejoicing on account of it, God forbid! but fearing lest he should
suffer the same things, he will render his own life more pure. This then
is a mark of His great care. Yes, you say, but He ought only to
threaten, and not to punish also. But if He does punish, and still you
say it is a matter of threat, and on that account become more slothful,
if it were really but a threat, would you not become more supine? If the
Ninevites had known it was a matter of threat, they would not have
repented. But because they repented, they cause the threat to stop at
words only. Dost thou wish it to be a threat only? Thou hast the
disposal of that matter. Become a better man, and it stops only at the
threat. But if, which be far from thee! thou despiseth the threat, thou
wilt come to the experience of it. The men before <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575) the flood, if they had feared the
threat, would not have experienced the execution of it. And we, if we
fear the threat, shall not expose ourselves to experience the reality.
God forbid we should. And may the merciful God grant that we all
henceforth, having been brought to sound mind, may obtain those
unspeakable blessings. Of which may we all be thought worthy, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now
and for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[554:1568](1130134.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p5"></span> παραινεῖν.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[554:1569](1130134.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p6"></span> ἐπὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς, perhaps “for the same
prize.”

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[555:1570](1130134.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p10"></span> \[ἔγραψα, the epistolary aorist.—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[555:1571](1130134.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p11"></span> Colb. “what entreaty he makes.”

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[555:1572](1130134.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p12"></span> The Editor has ventured to insert μὴ from
Raphelius’ conjecture. Old Lat. omits the former negative. If the common
text (“too much confidence”) is right, “security” means confidence in
Philemon, but that is indifferent Greek.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[555:1573](1130134.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p16"></span> So the best <span class="c16"><span
id="v.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>mss</span>. and most Fathers for ἐνκυρί& 251·.
Hemsterhusius quoted in New Par. defends the Vulgate *Ego te fruar in
Domino* for the former clause, giving it a general sense; Beza has *hunc
fructum*. \[A.V. “my bowels in the Lord”; R.V. “my heart in
Christ.”—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[556:1574](1130134.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p32"></span> The negative is understood in “for.”

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[557:1575](1130134.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p38"></span> δεσποτείαν.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[557:1576](1130134.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="v.vi.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p40"></span> So Sav. al. “of.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes of Subjects](1130135)
