[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130029)  [Next](1130031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p2"></span>[Eph.
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032), [Eph.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>[Ephesians iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032)<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p2.3"></span>
and v. 1, 2</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p3"></span>“And be ye kind one to another, tender
hearted, forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ forgave you.
Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children; and walk in love,
even as Christ also loved you, and gave Himself up for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God for an odor of a sweet smell.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>The</span> events which are past have
greater force than those which are yet to come, and appear to be both
more wonderful and more convincing. And hence accordingly Paul founds
his exhortation upon the things which have already been done for us,
inasmuch as they, on Christ’s account, have a greater force. For to say,
<span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-Page_129"></span>“Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven”
([Matt. vi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>.), and “if ye forgive not, ye shall in
nowise be forgiven” ([Matt. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p4.3"></span>.),—this addressed to men of
understanding, and men who believe in the things to come, is of great
weight; but Paul appeals to the conscience not by these arguments only,
but also by things already done for us. In the former way we may escape
punishment, whereas in this latter we may have our share of some
positive good. Thou imitatest Christ. This alone is enough to recommend
virtue, that it is “to imitate God.” This is a higher principle than the
other, “for He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and the unjust.” ([Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p4.4"></span>.) Because he does not merely say that we
are “imitating God,” but that we do so in those things wherein we
receive ourselves such benefits. He would have us cherish the tender
heart of fathers towards each other. For by heart, here, is meant
lovingkindness and compassion. For inasmuch as it cannot be that, being
men, we shall avoid either giving pain or suffering it, he does the next
thing, he devises a remedy,—that we should forgive one another. And yet
there is no comparison. For if thou indeed shouldest at this moment
forgive any one, he will forgive thee again in return; whereas to God
thou hast neither given nor forgiven anything. And thou indeed art
forgiving a fellow-servant; whereas God is forgiving a servant, and an
enemy, and one that hates Him.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p5"></span>“Even as God,” saith he, “also in
Christ forgave you.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>And this, moreover, contains a high
allusion. Not simply, he would say, hath He forgiven us, and at no risk
or cost, but at the sacrifice of His Son; for that He might forgive
thee, He sacrificed the Son; whereas thou, oftentimes, even when thou
seest pardon to be both without risk and without cost, yet dost not
grant it.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p7"></span>“Be ye therefore imitators of God as
beloved children; and walk in love, even as Christ also loved you, and
gave Himself up for us an offering and sacrifice to God for an odor of a
sweet smell.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p8"></span>That thou mayest not then think it an
act of necessity, hear how He saith, that “He gave Himself up.” As thy
Master loved thee, love thou thy friend. Nay, but neither wilt thou be
able so to love; yet still do so as far as thou art able. Oh, what can
be more blessed than a sound like this! Tell me of royalty or whatever
else thou wilt, there is no comparison. Forgive another, and thou art
“imitating God,” thou art made like unto God. It is more our duty to
forgive trespasses than debts of money; for if thou forgive debts, thou
hast not “imitated God”; whereas if thou shalt forgive trespasses, thou
art “imitating God.” And yet how shalt thou be able to say, “I am poor,
and am not able to forgive it,” that is, a debt, when thou forgivest not
that which thou art able to forgive, that is, a trespass? And surely
thou dost not deem that in this case there is any loss. Yea, is it not
rather wealth, is it not abundance, is it not a plentiful store?

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p9"></span>And behold yet another and a nobler
incitement: <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) —“as beloved
children,” saith he. Ye have yet another cogent reason to imitate Him,
not only in that ye have received such good at His hands, but also in
that ye are called His children. And since not all children imitate
their fathers, but those which are beloved, therefore he saith, “as
beloved children.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p11"></span>[Eph.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p11.1"></span>. “Walk in love.” <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p13"></span>Behold, here, the groundwork of all!
So then where this is, there is no “wrath, no anger, no clamor, no
railing,” but all are done away. Accordingly he puts the chief point
last. Whence wast thou made a child? Because thou wast forgiven. On the
same ground on which thou hast had so vast a privilege vouch-safed thee,
on that selfsame ground forgive thy neighbor. Tell me, I say, if thou
wert in prison, and hadst ten thousand misdeeds to answer for, and some
one were to bring thee into the palace; or rather to pass over this
argument, suppose thou wert in a fever and in the agonies of death, and
some one were to benefit thee by some medicine, wouldest thou not value
him more than all, yea and the very name of the medicine? For if we thus
regard occasions and places by which we are benefited, even as our own
souls, much more shall we the things themselves. Be a lover then of
love; for by this art thou saved, by this hast thou been made a son. And
if thou shalt have it in thy power to save another, wilt thou not use
the same remedy, and give the advice to all, “Forgive, that ye may be
forgiven”? Thus to incite one another, were the part of grateful, of
generous, and noble spirits.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p14"></span>“Even as Christ also,” he adds,
“loved you.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p15"></span>Thou art only sparing friends, He
enemies. So then far greater is that boon which cometh from our Master.
For how in our case is the “even as” preserved. Surely it is clear that
it will be, by our doing good to our enemies.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p16"></span>“And gave Himself up for us an
offering and a sacrifice to God for an odor of a sweet smell.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p17"></span>Seest thou that to suffer for one’s
enemies is “a sweet-smelling savor,” and an “acceptable <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-Page_130"></span>sacrifice”? And if thou shalt die,
then wilt thou be indeed a sacrifice. This it is to “imitate God.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p18"></span>[Eph.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>. “But fornication, and all uncleanness
or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as becometh
saints.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p19"></span>He has spoken of the bitter passion,
of wrath; he now comes to the lesser evil: for that lust is the lesser
evil, hear how Moses also in the law says, first, “Thou shalt do no
murder” ([Ex. xx. 13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>.), which is the work of wrath, and then,
“Thou shalt not commit adultery” ([Ex. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>.), which is of lust. For as
“bitterness,” and “clamor,” and “all malice,” and “railing,” and the
like, are the works of the passionate man, so likewise are “fornication,
uncleanness, covetousness,” those of the lustful; since avarice and
sensuality spring from the same passion. <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) But just as in the former case he took
away “clamor” as being the vehicle of “anger,” so now does he “filthy
talking” and “jesting” as being the vehicle of lust; for he proceeds,

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p21"></span>[Eph.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p21.1"></span>. “Nor filthiness, nor foolish talking,
or jesting, which are not befitting; but rather giving of thanks.”

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p22"></span>Have no witticisms, no obscenities,
either in word or in deed, and thou wilt quench the flame—“let them not
even be named,” saith he, “among you,” that is, let them not anywhere
even make their appearance. This he says also in writing to the
Corinthians. “It is actually reported that there is fornication among
you” ([1 Cor. v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p22.1"></span>.); as much as to say, Be ye all pure.
For words are the way to acts. Then, that he may not appear a forbidding
kind of person and austere, and a destroyer of playfulness, he goes on
to add the reason, by saying, “which are not befitting,” which have
nothing to do with us—“but rather giving of thanks.” What good is there
in uttering a witticism? thou only raisest a laugh. Tell me, will the
shoemaker ever busy himself about anything which does not belong to or
*befit* his trade? or will he purchase any tool of that kind? No, never.
Because the things we do not need, are nothing to us.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p23"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.1"></span>Moral.</span> Let there not be one idle
word; for from idle words we fall also into foul words. The present is
no season of loose merriment, but of mourning, of tribulation, and
lamentation: and dost thou play the jester? What wrestler on entering
the ring neglects the struggle with his adversary, and utters
witticisms? The devil stands hard at hand, “he is going about roaring”
([1 Pet. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.2"></span>.) to catch thee, he is moving
everything, and turning everything against thy life, and is scheming to
force thee from thy retreat, he is grinding his teeth and bellowing, he
is breathing fire against thy salvation; and dost thou sit uttering
witticisms, and “talking folly,” and uttering things “which are not
befitting.” Full nobly then wilt thou be able to overcome him! We are in
sport, beloved. Wouldest thou know the life of the saints? Listen to
what Paul saith. “By the space of three years I ceased not to admonish
every one night and day with tears.” ([Acts xx.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.3"></span>.) And if so great was the zeal he
exerted in behalf of them of Miletus and Ephesus, not making pleasant
speeches, but introducing his admonition with tears, what should one say
of the rest? But hearken again to what he says to the Corinthians. “Out
of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many
tears.” ([2 Cor. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.4"></span>.) And again, “Who is weak, and I am not
weak?” “Who is made to stumble, and I burn not?” ([2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.5"></span>.) And hearken again to what he says
elsewhere, desiring every day, as one might say, to depart out of the
world. “For indeed we that are in this tabernacle do groan” ([2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.6"></span>.); and dost thou laugh and play? It is
war-time, and art thou handling the dancers’ instruments? Look at the
countenances of men in battle, their dark and contracted mien, their
brow terrible and full of awe. Mark the stern eye, the heart eager and
beating and throbbing, their spirit collected, and trembling and
intensely anxious. All is good order, all is good discipline, all is
silence in the camps of those who are arrayed against each other. They
speak not, I do not say, an impertinent word, but they utter not a
single sound. Now if they who have visible enemies, and who are in
nowise injured by words, yet observe so great silence, dost thou who
hast thy warfare, and the chief of thy warfare in words, dost thou leave
this part naked and exposed? Or art thou ignorant that it is here that
we are most beset with snares? Art thou amusing and enjoying thyself,
and uttering witticisms and raising a laugh, and regarding the matter as
a mere nothing? How many perjuries, how many injuries, how many filthy
speeches have arisen from witticisms! “But no,” ye will say,
“pleasantries are not like this.” Yet hear how he excludes all kinds of
jesting. It is a time now of war and fighting, of watch and guard, of
arming and arraying ourselves. The time of laughter can have no place
here; for that is of the world. Hear what Christ saith: “The world shall
rejoice, but ye shall be sorrowful.” ([John xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p23.7"></span>.) Christ was crucified for thy ills, and
dost thou laugh? He was buffeted, and endured so great sufferings
because of thy calamity, and the tempest that had overtaken thee; and
dost thou play the reveler? And how wilt thou not then rather provoke
Him?

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p24"></span>But since the matter appears to some
to be one of indifference, which moreover is difficult <span
id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span id="iii.iv.xviii-Page_131"></span>to
be guarded against, let us discuss this point a little, to show you how
vast an evil it is. For indeed this is a work of the devil, to make us
disregard things indifferent. First of all then, even if it were
indifferent, not even in that case were it right to disregard it, when
one knows that the greatest evils are both produced and increased by it,
and that it oftentimes terminates in fornication. However, that it is
not even indifferent is evident from hence. Let us see then whence it is
produced. Or rather, let us see what sort of a person a saint ought to
be:—gentle, meek, sorrowful, mournful, contrite. The man then who deals
in jests is no saint. Nay, were he even a Greek, such an one would be
scorned. These are things allowed to those only who are on the stage.
Where filthiness is, there also is jesting; where unseasonable laughter
is, there also is jesting. Hearken to what the Prophet saith, “Serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice with trembling.” ([Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p24.1"></span>.) Jesting renders the soul soft and
indolent. It excites the soul unduly, and often it teems with acts of
violence, and creates wars. But what more? In fine, hast thou not come
to be among men? then “put away childish things.” ([1 Cor. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p24.2"></span>.) Why, thou wilt not allow thine own
servant in the market place to speak an impertinent word: and dost thou
then, who sayest thou art a servant of God, go uttering thy witticisms
in the public square? It is well if the soul that is “sober” be not
stolen away; but one that is relaxed and dissolute, who cannot carry
off? It will be its own murderer, and will stand in no need of the
crafts or assaults of the devil.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p25"></span>But, moreover, in order to understand
this, look too at the very name. <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369)
It means the versatile man, the man of all complexions, the unstable,
the pliable, the man that can be anything and everything. But far is
this from those who are servants to the Rock. Such a character quickly
turns and changes; for he must needs mimic both gesture and speech, and
laugh and gait, and everything, aye, and such an one is obliged to
invent jokes: for he needs this also. But far be this from a Christian,
to play the buffoon. Farther, the man who plays the jester must of
necessity incur the signal hatred of the objects of his random ridicule,
whether they be present, or being absent hear of it.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p27"></span>If the thing is creditable, why is it
left to mountebanks? What, dost thou make thyself a mountebank, and yet
art not ashamed? Why is it ye permit not your gentlewomen to do so? Is
it not that ye set it down as a mark of an immodest, and not of a
discreet character? Great are the evils that dwell in a soul given to
jesting; great is the ruin and desolation. Its consistency is broken,
the building is decayed, fear is banished, reverence is gone. A tongue
thou hast, not that thou mayest ridicule another man, but that thou
mayest give thanks unto God. Look at your merriment-makers, <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) as they are called, those buffoons.
These are your jesters. Banish from your souls, I entreat you, this
graceless accomplishment. It is the business of parasites, of
mountebanks, of dancers, of harlots; far be it from a generous, far be
it from a highborn soul, aye, far too even from slaves. If there be any
one who has lost respect, if there be any vile person, that man is also
a jester. To many indeed the thing appears to be even a virtue, and this
truly calls for our sorrow. Just as lust by little and little drives
headlong into fornication, so also does a turn for jesting. It seems to
have a grace about it, yet there is nothing more graceless than this.
For hear the Scripture which says, “Before the thunder goeth lightning,
and before a shamefaced man shall go favor.” <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) Now there is nothing more shameless
than the jester; so that his mouth is not full of favor, but of pain.
Let us banish this custom from our tables. Yet are there some who teach
it even to the poor! O monstrous! they make men in affliction play the
jester. Why, where shall not this pest be found next? Already has it
been brought into the Church itself. Already has it laid hold of the
very Scriptures. Need I say anything to prove the enormity of the evil?
I am ashamed indeed, but still nevertheless I will speak; for I am
desirous to show to what a length the mischief has advanced, that I may
not appear to be trifling, or to be discoursing to you on some trifling
subject; that even thus I may be enabled to withdraw you from this
delusion. And let no one think that I am fabricating, but I will tell
you what I have really heard. A certain person happened to be in company
with one of those who pride themselves highly on their knowledge (now I
know I shall excite a smile, but still I will say it notwithstanding);
and when the platter was set before him, he said, “Take and eat,
children, lest your belly be angry!” <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) And again, others say, “Woe unto thee,
Mammon, and to him that hath thee not;” <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) and many like enormities has jesting
introduced; as when they say, “Now is there no nativity.” <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) And this I say to show the enormity of
this base temper; for these are the expressions of a soul destitute of
all reverence. And are not these things enough to call down
thunderbolts? And one might find many other <span id="page_132">p.
132</span> <span id="iii.iv.xviii-Page_132"></span>such things which
have been said by these men.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p33"></span>Wherefore, I entreat you, let us
banish the custom universally, and speak those things which become us.
Let not holy mouths utter the words of dishonorable and base men. “For
what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity, or what communion hath
light with darkness?” ([2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p33.1"></span>.) Happy will it be for us, if, having
kept ourselves aloof from all such foul things, we be thus able to
attain to the promised blessings; far indeed from dragging such a train
after us, and sullying the purity of our minds by so many. For the man
who will play the jester will soon go on to be a railer, and the railer
will go on to heap ten thousand other mischiefs on himself. When then we
shall have disciplined these two faculties of the soul, anger and desire
(vid. Plat. Phædr. cc. 25, 34), and have put them like well-broken
horses under the yoke of reason, then let us set over them the mind as
charioteer, that we may “gain the prize of our high calling” ([Philip.
iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p33.2"></span>.); which God grant that we may all
attain, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with Whom, together with the Holy
Ghost, be unto the Father, glory, might, and honor, now, and ever, and
throughout all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_366"></span>[129:367](1130030.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p10"></span> \[“Now to be God’s beloved child,
and not to become like the loving Father,—how contradictory were
this!”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_367"></span>[129:368](1130030.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p12"></span> \[“And walk in love”: “The καί
annexes that wherein this imitation of God must consist, namely, that
‘love’ is the element in which their life-work was to take place, love
such as Christ also has displayed towards us.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_368"></span>[130:369](1130030.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p20"></span> \[“Sensuality” and “covetousness”
are the two cardinal vices of the heathen which are to be avoided by
Christians.”—Meyer on iv. 19.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_369"></span>[131:370](1130030.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p26"></span> \[“εὐτραπελία, from εὐτράπελος,
which is derived from εὖ and τρέπεσθαι, ‘that which easily turns,’ and
in this way adapts itself to the moods and conditions of those with whom
at the moment it may deal.”—Trench, *Synonyms of N.T*. 1 series, p.
167.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_370"></span>[131:371](1130030.htm#fr_370) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p28"></span> \[γελωτοποιούς, literally,
“laugh-makers.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_371"></span>[131:372](1130030.htm#fr_371) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p29"></span> \[πρὸ βροντῆς κατασπεύδει ἀστραπή,
καὶ πρὸ αἰσχυντηροῦ προελεύσεται χάρις.—[Ecclesiasticus
32.10](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p29.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_372"></span>[131:373](1130030.htm#fr_372) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p30"></span> Δράξασθε, παιδία, μή ποτε ὀργισθῇ
κοιλία.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[131:374](1130030.htm#fr_373) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p31"></span> οὐαί σοι, μαμωνᾶ, καὶ τῷ μὴ ἐχοντί
σε.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[131:375](1130030.htm#fr_374) <span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p32"></span> ῎Αρτι οὐκ ἔστι γένεσις. vid. Suicer,
*Thesaurus*, voc. γένεσις, n. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 5:5,6](1130031)
