[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130055)  [Next](1130057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.xv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.xv-p2.2"></span>[Philippians iv.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p3"></span>“Rejoice in the Lord alway: again I will
say, Rejoice. Let your forbearance be known unto all men. The Lord is at
hand. In nothing be anxious; but in everything by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.
And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall guard your
hearts and your thoughts through Christ Jesus.”

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p4"></span>“<span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>Blessed <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) </span> are they that mourn,” and “woe
unto them that laugh” ([Matt. 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004.md),
[Luke 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>.), saith Christ. How then saith Paul,
“Rejoice in the Lord alway”? “Woe to them that laugh,” said Christ, the
laughter of this world which ariseth from the things which are present.
He blessed also those that mourn, not simply for the loss of relatives,
but those who are pricked at heart, who mourn their own faults, and take
count of their own sins, or even those of others. This joy is not
contrary to that grief, but from that grief it too is born. For he who
grieveth for his own faults, and confesseth them, rejoiceth. Moreover,
it is possible to grieve for our own sins, and yet to rejoice in Christ.
Since then they were afflicted by their sufferings, “for to you it is
given not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him” ([Philip.
i. 29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p5.2"></span>.), therefore he saith, “Rejoice in the
Lord.” For this can but mean, If you exhibit such a life that you may
rejoice. Or when your communion with God is not hindered, rejoice. Or
else the word “in” may stand for “with”: <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) as if he had said, with the Lord.
“Alway; again I will say, Rejoice.” These are the words of one who
brings comfort; as, for example, he who is in God rejoiceth alway. Yea
though he be afflicted, yea whatever he may suffer, such a man alway
rejoiceth. Hear what Luke saith, that “they returned from the presence
of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to be scourged
for His name.” ([Acts v. 41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>.) If scourging and bonds, which seem to be
the most grievous of all things, bring forth joy, what else will be able
to produce grief in us?

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p7"></span>“Again I will say, Rejoice.” Well hath he
repeated. For since the nature of the things brought forth grief, he
shows by repeating, that they should by all means rejoice.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p8"></span>“Let your forbearance be known unto all
men.” He said above, “Whose god is the belly, and whose glory is in
their shame,” and that they “mind earthly things.” ([Philip. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>..md)
It was probable that they would be at enmity with the wicked; he
therefore exhorted them to have nothing in common with them, but to use
them with all forbearance, and that not only their brethren, but also
their enemies and opposers. “The Lord is at hand, <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) in nothing be anxious.” For why, tell
me? do they ever rise in opposition? And if ye see them living in
luxury, why are ye in affliction? Already the judgment is nigh; shortly
will they give account of their actions. Are ye in affliction, and they
in luxury? But these things shall shortly receive their end. Do they
plot against you, and threaten you? “In nothing be anxious.” The
judgment is already at hand, when these things shall be reversed. “In
nothing be anxious.” If ye are kindly affected toward those who prepare
evil against you, yet it shall not at last turn out to their profit.
Already the recompense is at hand, if poverty, if death, if aught else
that is terrible be upon you. “But in everything, by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto
God.” There is this for one consolation, “the Lord is at hand.” And
again, “I will be with you alway, even unto the end of the world.”
([Matt. xxviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>.) Behold another consolation, a medicine
which healeth grief, and distress, and all that is painful. And what is
this? Prayer, thanksgiving in all things. And so He wills that our
prayers should not simply <span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xv-Page_247"></span>be requests, but thanksgivings too for
what we have. For how should he ask for future things, who is not
thankful for the past? “But in everything by prayer and supplication.”
Wherefore we ought to give thanks for all things, even for those which
seem to be grievous, for this is the part of the truly thankful man. In
the other case the nature of the things demands it; but this springs
from a grateful soul, and one earnestly affected toward God. God
acknowledgeth these prayers, but others He knoweth not. Offer up such
prayers as may be acknowledged; for He disposeth all things for our
profit, though we know it not. And this is a proof that it greatly
profiteth, namely, that we know it not. “And the peace of God which
passeth all understanding shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in
Christ Jesus.” What meaneth this? “The peace of God” which He hath
wrought toward men, surpasseth all understanding. For who could have
expected, who could have hoped, that such good things would have come?
They exceed all man’s understanding, not his speech alone. For His
enemies, for those who hated Him, for those who determined to turn
themselves away, for these, he refused not to deliver up His Only
Begotten Son, that He might make peace with us. This peace then, i.e.
the reconciliation, the love of God, shall guard your hearts and your
thoughts.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p10"></span>For this is the part of a teacher, not
only to exhort, but also to pray, and to assist by supplication, that
they may neither be overwhelmed by temptations, nor carried about by
deceit. As if he had said, May He who hath delivered you in such sort as
mind cannot comprehend, may He Himself guard you, and secure you, so
that you suffer no ill. Either he means this, or that that peace of
which Christ saith, “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you”
([John xiv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>.): this shall guard you, for this peace
exceedeth all man’s understanding. How? When he tells us to be at peace
with our enemies, with those who treat us unjustly, with those who are
at war and enmity toward us; is it not beyond man’s understanding? But
rather let us look to the former. If the peace surpasseth all
understanding, much more doth God Himself, who giveth peace, pass all
understanding, not ours only, but also that of Angels, and the Powers
above. What meaneth “in Christ Jesus”? Shall guard us in Him, so that ye
may remain firm, and not fall from His faith.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p11"></span>[Phil.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>.
“Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are just.” What is “Finally”? It stands for,
“I have said all.” It is the word of one that is in haste, and has
nothing to do with present things.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p12"></span>“Finally, brethren, whatsoever things
are honorable, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things.”

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p13"></span><span id="iv.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>Ver.
9. “The things which ye both learned and received, and heard and saw in
me.”

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p14"></span>What meaneth, “whatsoever things are
lovely”? Lovely to the faithful, lovely to God. “Whatsoever things are
true.” Virtue is really true, vice is falsehood. For the pleasure of it
is a falsehood, and its glory is falsehood, and all things of the world
are falsehood. “Whatsoever things are pure.” This is opposed to the
words “who mind earthly things.” “Whatsoever things are honorable.” This
is opposed to the words “whose god is their belly.” “Whatsoever things
are just,” i.e. saith he, <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md)
“whatsoever things are of good report.” “If there be any virtue, if
there be any praise.” Here he willeth them to take thought of those
things too which regard men. “Think on these things,” saith he. Seest
thou, that he desires to banish every evil thought from our souls; for
evil actions spring from thoughts. “The things which ye both learned and
received.” This is teaching, in all his exhortations to propose himself
for a model: as he saith in another place, “even as ye have us for an
ensample.” ([Philip. iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p15.1"></span>.) And again here, “What things ye learned
and received,” i.e. have been taught by word of mouth, “and heard and
saw in me”: both in respect of my words and actions and conduct. Seest
thou, how about everything he lays these commands on us? For since it
was not possible to make an accurate enumeration of all things, of our
coming in, and going out, and speech, and carriage, and intercourse (for
of all these things it is needful that a Christian should have thought),
he said shortly, and as it were in a summary, “ye heard and saw in me.”
I have led you forward both by deeds and by words. <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) “These things do,” not only in words,
but *do* them also. “And the God of peace shall be with you,” i.e. ye
shall be in a calm, in great safety, ye shall suffer nothing painful,
nor contrary to your will. For when we are at peace with Him, and we are
so through virtue, much more will He be at peace with us. For He who so
loved us, as to show favor to us even against our will, will He not, if
He sees us <span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xv-Page_248"></span>hastening toward Him, Himself yet much
more exhibit His love toward us?

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p17"></span>Nothing is such an enemy of our nature
as vice. And from many things it is evident, how vice is at enmity with
us, and virtue friendly toward us. What will ye? That I should speak of
fornication? It makes men subject to reproach, poor, objects of
ridicule, despicable to all, just as enemies treat them. Ofttimes it
hath involved men in disease and danger; many men have perished or been
wounded in behalf of their mistresses. And if fornication produces these
things, much rather doth adultery. But doth almsgiving so? By no means.
But as a loving mother setteth her son in great propriety, in good
order, in good report, and gives him leisure to engage in necessary
work, thus alms-giving doth not release us nor lead us away from our
necessary work, but even renders the soul more wise. For nothing is more
foolish than a mistress.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p18"></span>But what willest thou? To look upon
covetousness? It too treats us like an enemy. And how? It makes us hated
by all. It prepareth all men to vaunt themselves against us; both those
who have been treated unjustly by us, and those who have not, who share
the grief of the former, and are in fear for themselves. All men look
upon us as their common foes, as wild beasts, as demons. Everywhere are
there innumerable accusations, plots against us, envyings, all which are
the acts of enemies. But justice, on the contrary, makes all men
friends, all men sociable, all men well disposed towards us, by all men
prayers are made in our behalf; our affairs are in perfect safety, there
is no danger, there is no suspicion. But sleep also fearlessly comes
over us with perfect safety, no care is there, no lamenting.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p19"></span>How much better this sort of life is!
And what? Is it best to envy, or to rejoice with one another? Let us
search out all these things, and we shall find that virtue, like a truly
kind mother, places us in safety, while vice is a treacherous thing, and
full of danger. For hear the prophet, who saith, “The Lord is a
stronghold of them that fear Him, and His covenant is to show them.”
([Ps. xxv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xv-p19.1"></span>, Sept.) He feareth no one, who is not
conscious to himself of any wickedness; on the contrary, he who liveth
in crime is never confident, but trembles at his domestics, and looks at
them with suspicion. Why say, his domestics? He cannot bear the tribunal
of his own conscience. Not only those who are without, but his inward
thoughts affect him likewise, and suffer him not to be in quiet. What
then, saith Paul? Ought we to live dependent on praise? He said not,
look to praise, but do praiseworthy actions, yet not for the sake of
praise.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p20"></span>“Whatsoever things are true,” for the
things we have been speaking of are false. “Whatsoever things are
honorable.” That which is “honorable” belongs to external virtue, that
which is “pure” to the soul. Give no cause of stumbling, saith he, nor
handle of accusation. Because he had said, “Whatsoever things are of
good report,” lest you should think that he means only those things
which are so in the sight of men, he proceeds, “if there be any virtue,
and if there be any praise, think on these things”—do these things. He
wills us ever to be in these things, to care for these things, to think
on these things. For if we will be at peace with each other, God too
will be with us, but if we raise up war, the God of peace will not be
with us. For nothing is so hostile to the soul as vice. That is, peace
and virtue place it in safety. Wherefore we must make a beginning on our
part, and then we shall draw God toward us.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p21"></span>God is not a God of war and fighting.
Make war and fighting to cease, both that which is against Him, and that
which is against thy neighbor. Be at peace with all men, consider with
what character God saveth thee. “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they
shall be called sons of God.” ([Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p21.1"></span>..md)
Such always imitate the Son of God: do thou imitate Him too. Be at
peace. The more thy brother warreth against thee, by so much the greater
will be thy reward. For hear the prophet who saith, “With the haters of
peace I was peaceful.” ([Ps. cxx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p21.2"></span>,
Sept.) This is virtue, this is above man’s understanding, this maketh us
near God; nothing so much delighteth God as to remember no evil. This
sets thee free from thy sins, this looseth the charges against thee: but
if we are fighting and buffeting, we become far off from God: for
enmities are produced by conflict, and from enmity springs remembrance
of evil.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p22"></span>Cut out the root, and there will be no
fruit. Thus shall we learn to despise the things of this life, for there
is no conflict, none, in spiritual things, but whatever thou seest,
either conflicts or envy, or whatever a man can mention, all these
spring from the things of this life. Every conflict hath its beginning
either in covetousness, or envy, or vainglory. If therefore we are at
peace, we shall learn to despise the things of the earth. Hath a man
stolen our money? He hath not injured us, only let him not steal our
treasure which is above. Hath he hindered thy glory? Yet not that which
is from God, but that which is of no account. For this is no glory, but
a mere name of glory, or rather a shame. Hath he stolen thy honor?
Rather not thine but his own. For as he who committeth injustice doth
not so much inflict as receive injustice, thus too he who plots against
his neighbor, first destroyeth himself.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p23"></span><span id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xv-Page_249"></span>For “he who diggeth a pit for his
neighbor, falleth into it.” ([Prov. xxvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p23.1"></span>..md)
Let us then not plot against others, lest we injure ourselves. When we
supplant the reputation of others, let us consider that we injure
ourselves, it is against ourselves we plot. For perchance with men we do
him harm, if we have power, but we injure ourselves in the sight of God,
by provoking Him against us. Let us not then harm ourselves. For as we
injure ourselves when we injure our neighbors, so by benefiting them we
benefit ourselves. If then thy enemy harm thee, he hath benefited thee
if thou art wise, and so requite him not with the same things, but even
do him good. But the blow, you say, remains severe. Consider then that
thou dost not benefit, but punishest him, and benefitest thyself, and
quickly you will come to do him good. What then? Shall we act from this
motive? We ought not to act on this motive, but if thy heart will not
hear other reason, induce it, saith he, <span
id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) even by this, and thou wilt quickly
persuade it to dismiss its enmity, and wilt for the future do good to
thine enemy as to a friend, and wilt obtain the good things which are to
come, to which God grant that we may all attain in Christ Jesus. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_670"></span>[246:671](1130056.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p5"></span> \[“Happy” would be more exact, but
“blessed” has a fixed association with the passage quoted from the
Sermon on the Mount.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_671"></span>[246:672](1130056.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p6"></span> \[Chrys. had little notion of scientific
precision in the use or interpretation of language. The word ἐν, “in,”
sometimes introduces the instrument, where we in English say “with”; but
it would be hard to find any passage in which it is clearly equivalent
to σύν, “with,” i.e. in company with, in connection with.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_672"></span>[246:673](1130056.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p9"></span> \[It is evident from the connection that
Chrys. connects “the Lord is at hand” with what follows, and not (as
Meyer wrongly states) with what precedes. Yet recent commentators
generally connect it with what precedes, and are pretty certainly
right.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_673"></span>[247:674](1130056.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p15"></span> \[These are hasty jottings by Chrys. or
a reporter, and might easily be altered in copying. He can hardly have
meant to define “just” by “of good report,” yet so the Greek stands; or
else (as in some documents) he defines “of good report” by “if there be
any virtue,” etc. The abridgment in the Catena may have caught the real
meaning. It omits “whatsoever thing are just,” and puts together the
three remaining clauses as the occasion of the remark which follows. Or
perhaps “i.e. saith he” is a corrupt addition, and all four clauses
should be simply taken together; for the remark applies to them
all.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_674"></span>[247:675](1130056.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p16"></span> \[All of Field’s <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>mss</span>. here insert
“For nothing is such an enemy of our nature as vice,” which, however,
seems here out of place, and fits well below, where it is placed by the
altered text.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_675"></span>[249:676](1130056.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p24"></span> i.e. St. Paul, [Rom. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p24.1"></span>,
on which passage see St. Chrys., who there fully states this view,
perhaps the only one that fully explains the difficulty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 4:10-14](1130057.md)
