[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130031)  [Next](1130033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_137"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Homily XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.xx-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iii.iv.xx-p2.2"></span>[Eph.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p3"></span>“Look then carefully how ye walk, not as
unwise, but as wise; redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Wherefore be ye not foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord
is.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p4.1"></span>He</span> is still cleansing away the root of
bitterness, still cutting off the very groundwork of anger. <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) For what is he saying? “Look carefully
how ye walk.” “They are sheep in the midst of wolves,” and he charges
them to be also “as doves.” For “ye shall be harmless,” saith he, “as
doves.” ([Matt. x. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p5.3"></span>.) Forasmuch then as they were both amongst
wolves, and were besides commanded not to defend themselves, but to
suffer evil, they needed this admonition. <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) Not indeed but that the former was
sufficient to render them stronger; <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) but now that there is besides the
addition of the two, reflect how exceedingly it is heightened. Observe
then here also, how carefully he secures them, by saying, “Look how ye
walk.” Whole cities were at war with them; yea, this war made its way
also into houses. They were divided, father against son, and son against
father, mother against daughter, and daughter against mother. What then?
Whence these divisions? They heard Christ say, “He that loveth father or
mother more than me, is not worthy of me.” ([Matt. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p7.1"></span>.)
Lest therefore they should think that he was without reason introducing
wars and fightings, (since there was likely to be much anger produced,
if they on their part were to retaliate,) to prevent this, he says, “See
carefully how ye walk.” That is to say, “Except the Gospel
message, <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) give no other handle on
any score whatever, for the hatred which you will incur.” Let this be
the only ground of hatred. Let no one have any other charge to make
against you; but show all deference and obedience, whenever it does no
harm to the message, whenever it does not stand in the way of godliness.
For it is said, “Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom custom.” ([Rom. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>.)
For when amongst the rest of the world they shall see us forbearing,
they will be put to shame.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p9"></span>“Not as unwise, but as wise, <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) redeeming the time.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p11"></span>It is not from any wish that you should
be artful, and versatile, that he gives this advice. But what he means
is this. The time is not yours. At present ye are strangers, and
sojourners, and foreigners, and aliens; seek not honors, seek not glory,
seek not authority, nor revenge; bear all things, and in this way,
“redeem the time”; <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) give up many
things, anything they may require. Imagine now, I say, a man had a
magnificent house, and persons were to make their way in, on purpose to
murder him, and he were to give a large sum, and thus to rescue himself.
Then we should say, he has redeemed himself. So also hast thou a large
house, and a true faith in thy keeping. They will come to take all away.
Give whatever they may demand, only preserve the principal thing, I mean
the faith.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p13"></span>“Because the days,” saith he, “are
evil.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p14"></span>What is the evil of the day? The evil of
the day ought to belong to the day. What is the evil of a body? Disease.
And what again the evil of the soul? Wickedness. What is the evil of
water? Bitterness. And the evil of each particular thing, is with
reference to that nature of it which is affected by the evil. If then
there is an evil in the day, it ought to belong to the day, to the
hours, to the day-light. So also Christ saith, “Sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof.” ([Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p14.1"></span>.)
And from this expression we shall understand the other. In what sense
then does he call “the days evil”? In what sense the “time” evil? It is
not the essence of the thing, not the things as so created, but it is
the things transacted in them. In the same way as we are in the habit of
saying, “I have passed a disagreeable and wretched day.” <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) And yet how could it be disagreeable,
except from the circumstances which took place in it? Now the events
which take place in it are, good things from God, but evil things from
bad men. So then of the evils which happen in the times, men are the
creators, and hence it is that the times are said to be evil. And thus
we also call the times evil.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p16"></span>[Eph.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p16.1"></span>.
“Wherefore,” <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) he adds, “be ye
<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_138"></span>not foolish, but understand what the will
of the Lord is; and be not drunk with wine, wherein is riot.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p18"></span>For indeed intemperance in this renders
men passionate and violent, and hot-headed, and irritable and savage.
Wine has been given us for cheerfulness, not for drunkenness. Whereas
now it appears to be an unmanly and contemptible thing for a man not to
get drunk. And what sort of hope then is there of salvation? What?
contemptible, tell me, not to get drunk, where to get drunk ought of all
things in the world to be most contemptible? For it is of all things
right for even a private individual to keep himself far from
drunkenness; but how much more so for a soldier, a man who lives amongst
swords, and bloodshed, and slaughter: much more, I say, for the soldier,
when his temper is sharpened by other causes also, by power, by
authority, by being constantly in the midst of stratagems and battles.
Wouldest thou know where wine is good? Hear what the Scripture saith,
“Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto the
bitter in soul.” ([Prov. xxxi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p18.1"></span>.) And justly, because it can mitigate
asperity and gloominess, and drive away clouds from the brow. “Wine
maketh glad the heart of man” ([Ps. civ.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p18.2"></span>.), says the Psalmist. How then does wine
produce drunkenness? For it cannot be that one and the same thing should
work opposite effects. Drunkenness then surely does not arise from wine,
but from intemperance. Wine is bestowed upon us for no other purpose
than for bodily health; but this purpose also is thwarted by immoderate
use. But hear moreover what our blessed Apostle writes and says to
Timothy, “Use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake, and thine often
infirmities.” <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p20"></span>This is the reason why God has formed
our bodies in moderate proportions, and so as to be satisfied with a
little, from thence at once instructing us that He has made us adapted
to another life. And that life He would fain have bestowed upon us even
from the very beginning; but since we rendered ourselves unworthy of it,
He deferred it; and in the time during which He deferred it, not even in
that does He allow us immoderate indulgence; for a little cup of wine
and a single loaf is enough to satisfy a man’s hunger. And man the lord
of all the brute creation has He formed so as to require less food in
proportion than they, and his body small; thereby declaring to us
nothing else than this, that we are hastening onward to another life.
“Be not drunk,” says he, “with wine, wherein is riot”; for it does not
save <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) but it destroys; and that,
not the body only, but the soul also.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p22"></span>[Eph.
5.18-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p22.1"></span>. “But be filled <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) with the Spirit; speaking one to
another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody with your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always for all things
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God even the Father; subjecting
yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p24"></span>Dost thou wish, he says, to be cheerful,
dost thou wish to employ the day? I give thee spiritual drink; for
drunkenness even cuts off the articulate sound of our tongue; it makes
us lisp and stammer, and distorts the eyes, and the whole frame
together. Learn to sing psalms, and thou shalt see the delightfulness of
the employment. For they who sing psalms are filled with the Holy
Spirit, as they who sing satanic songs are filled with an unclean
spirit.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p25"></span>What is meant by “with your hearts to
the Lord”? It means, with close attention and understanding. For they
who do not attend closely, merely sing, uttering the words, whilst their
heart is roaming elsewhere.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p26"></span>“Always,” he says, “giving thanks for
all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ unto God even the
Father, subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p27"></span>That is, “let your requests be made
known unto God, with thanksgiving” ([Philip. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p27.1"></span>.);
for there is nothing so pleasing to God, as for a man to be thankful.
But we shall be best able to give thanks unto God, by withdrawing our
souls from the things before mentioned, and by thoroughly cleansing them
by the means he has told us.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p28"></span>“But be filled,” says he, “with the
Spirit.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p29"></span>And is then this Spirit within us? Yes,
indeed, within us. For when we have driven away lying, and bitterness,
and fornication, and uncleanness, and covetousness, from our souls, when
we are become kind, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, when there is
no jesting, when we have rendered ourselves worthy of it, what is there
to hinder the Holy Spirit from coming and lighting upon us? And not only
will He come unto us, but He will fill our hearts; and when we have so
great a light kindled within us, then will the way of virtue be no
longer difficult to attain, but will be easy and simple.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p30"></span>“Giving thanks always,” <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) he says, “for all things.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p32"></span><span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_139"></span>What then? Are we to give thanks for
everything that befalls us? Yes; be it even disease, be it even penury.
For if a certain wise man gave this advice in the Old Testament, and
said, “Whatsoever is brought upon thee take cheerfully, and be patient
when thou art changed to a low estate” ([Ecclesiasticus
2.4](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p32.1"></span>.); much more ought this to be the case in
the New. Yes, even though thou know not the word, give thanks. For this
is thanksgiving. But if thou give thanks when thou art in comfort and in
affluence, in success and in prosperity, there is nothing great, nothing
wonderful in that. What is required is, for a man to give thanks when he
is in afflictions, in anguish, in discouragements. Utter no word in
preference to this, “Lord, I thank thee.” And why do I speak of the
afflictions of this world? It is our duty to give God thanks, even for
hell <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) itself, for the torments
and punishments of the next world. For surely it is a thing beneficial
to those who attend to it, when the dread of hell is laid like a bridle
on our hearts. Let us therefore give thanks not only for blessings which
we see, but also for those which we see not, and for those which we
receive against our will. For many are the blessings He bestows upon us,
without our desire, without our knowledge. And if ye believe me not, I
will at once proceed to make the case clear to you. For consider, I
pray, do not the impious and unbelieving Gentiles ascribe everything to
the sun and to their idols? But what then? Doth He not bestow blessings
even upon them? Is it not the work of His providence, that they both
have life, and health, and children, and the like? And again they that
are called Marcionites, <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) and the
Manichees, do they not even blaspheme Him? But what then? Does He not
bestow blessings on them every day? Now if He bestows blessings on them
that know them not, much more does he bestow them upon us. For what else
is the peculiar work of God if it be not this, to do good to all
mankind, alike by chastisements and by enjoyments? Let us not then give
thanks only when we are in prosperity, for there is nothing great in
this. And this the devil also well knows, and therefore he said, “Doth
Job fear God for nought? Hast Thou not made an hedge about him and about
all that he hath on every side? Touch all that he hath; no doubt, he
will renounce Thee to Thy face!” ([Job
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p34.1"></span>.) However, that cursed one gained no
advantage; and God forbid he should gain any advantage of us either; but
whenever we are either in penury, or in sicknesses, or in disasters,
then let us increase our thanksgiving; thanksgiving, I mean, not in
words, nor in tongue, but in deeds and works, in mind and in heart. Let
us give thanks unto Him with all our souls. For He loves us more than
our parents; and wide as is the difference between evil and goodness, so
great is the difference between the love of God and that of our fathers.
And these are not my words, but those of Christ Himself Who loveth us.
And hear what He Himself saith, “What man is there of you, who, if his
son shall ask him for a loaf, will give him a stone? If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask
Him?” ([Matt. 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p34.2"></span>.) And again, bear what He saith also
elsewhere: “Can a woman forget her sucking child that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will
not I forget thee, saith the Lord.” ([Isa. xlix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p34.3"></span>.)
For if He loveth us not, wherefore did He create us? Had He any
necessity? Do we supply to Him any ministry and service? Needeth He
anything that we can render? Hear what the Prophet says; “I have said
unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord, I have no good beyond Thee.” ([Ps. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p34.4"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p35"></span>The ungrateful, however, and unfeeling
say, that this were worthy of God’s goodness, that there should be an
equality amongst all. Tell me, ungrateful mortal, what sort of things
are they which thou deniest to be of God’s goodness, and what equality
meanest thou? “Such an one,” thou wilt say, “has been a cripple from his
childhood; another is mad, and is possessed; another has arrived at
extreme old age, and has spent his whole life in poverty; another in the
most painful diseases: are these works of Providence? One man is deaf,
another dumb, another poor, whilst another, impious, yea, utterly
impious, and full of ten thousand vices, enjoys wealth, and keeps
concubines, and parasites, and is owner of a splendid mansion, and lives
an idle life.” <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) And many
instances of the sort they string together, and weave a long account of
complaint against the providence of God.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p37"></span>What then are we to say to them? Now if
they were Greeks, and were to tell us that the universe is governed by
some one or other, we should in turn address to them the self-same
words, “What then, are things without a provi<span id="page_140">p.
140</span> <span id="iii.iv.xx-Page_140"></span>dence? How then is it
that ye reverence gods, and worship genii and heroes? For if there is a
providence, some one or other superintends the whole.” But if any,
whether Christians or Heathen, should be impatient at this, and be
wavering, what shall we say to them? “Why, could so many good things,
tell me, arise of themselves? The daily light? The beautiful order and
the forethought that exist in all things? The mazy dances of the stars?
The equable course of nights and days? The regular gradation of nature
in vegetables, and animals, and men? Who, tell me, is it that ordereth
these? If there were no superintending Being, but all things combined
together of themselves, who then was it that made this vault revolve, so
beautiful, so vast, I mean the sky, and set it upon the earth, nay more,
upon the waters? Who is it that gives the fruitful seasons? Who
implanted so great power in seeds and vegetables? For that which is
accidental is necessarily disorderly; whereas that which is orderly
implies design. For which, tell me, of the things around us that are
accidental, is not full of great disorder, and of great tumult and
confusion? Nor do I speak of things accidental only, but of those also
which imply some agent, but an unskillful agent. For example, let there
be timber and stone, and let there be lime withal; and let a man
unskilled in building take them, and begin building, and set hard to
work; will he not spoil and destroy everything? Again, take a vessel
without a pilot, containing everything which a vessel ought to contain,
without a shipwright; I do not say that it is unequipped and unfinished,
but though well equipped, it will not be able to sail. And could the
vast extent of earth standing on the waters, tell me, ever stand so
firmly, and so long a time, without some power to hold it
together? <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) And can these views
have any reason? Is it not the extreme of absurdity to conceive such a
notion? And if the earth supports the heaven, behold another burden
still; but if the heaven also is borne upon the waters, there arises
again another question. Or rather not another question, for it is the
work of providence. For things which are borne upon the water ought not
to be made convex, but concave. Wherefore? Because the whole body of
anything which is concave is immersed in the waters, as is the case with
a ship; whereas of the convex the body is entirely above, and only the
rim rests upon the surface; so that it requires a resisting body, hard,
and able to sustain it, in order to bear the burden imposed. But does
the atmosphere then support the heaven? Why, that is far softer, and
more yielding even than water, and cannot sustain anything, no, not the
very lightest things, much less so vast a bulk. In fine, if we chose to
follow out the argument of providence, both generally and in detail,
time itself would fail us. For I will now ask him who would start those
questions above mentioned, are these things the result of providence, or
of the want of providence? And if he shall say, that they are not from
providence, then again I will ask, how then did they arise? But no, he
will never be able to give any account at all. And dost thou not know
that?

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p39"></span>Much more then is it thy duty not to
question, not to be over curious, in those things which concern man. And
why not? Because man is nobler than all these, and these were made for
his sake, not he for their sake. If then thou knowest not so much as the
skill and contrivance that are visible in His providence, how shalt thou
be able to know the reasons, where he himself is the subject? Tell me, I
pray, why did God form him so small, so far below the height of heaven,
as that he should even doubt of the things which appear above him? Why
are the northern and southern climes uninhabitable? Tell me, I say, why
is the night made longer in winter and shorter in summer? Why are the
degrees of cold and heat such as they are? Why is the body mortal? And
ten thousand questions besides I will ask thee, and if thou wilt, will
never cease asking. And in one and all thou wilt surely be at a loss to
answer. And thus is this of all things most providential, that the
reasons of things are kept secret from us. For surely, one would have
imagined man to be the cause of all things, were there not this to
humble our understanding.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p40"></span>“But such an one,” you will say, “is
poor, and poverty is an evil. And what is it to be sick, and what is it
to be crippled?” Oh, man, they are nothing. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) One thing alone is evil, that is to
sin; this is the only thing we ought to search to the bottom. And yet we
omit to search into the causes of what are really evils, and busy
ourselves about other things. Why is it that not one of us ever examines
why he has sinned? To sin,—is it then in my power, or is it not in my
power? And why need I go round about me for a number of reasons? I will
seek for the matter within myself. Now then did I ever master my wrath?
Did I ever master my anger, either through shame, or through fear of
man? Then whenever <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_141"></span>I discover this done, I shall discover
that to sin is in my own power. No one examines these matters, no one
busies himself about them. But only according to Job, “Man in a way
altogether different swims upon words.” <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) For why does it concern thee, if such
an one is blind, or such an one poor? God hath not commanded thee to
look to this, but to what thou thyself art doing. For if on the one hand
thou doubtest that there is any power superintending the world, thou art
of all men the most senseless; but if thou art persuaded of this, why
doubt that it is our duty to please God?

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p43"></span>“Giving thanks always,” he says, “for
all things to God.”

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p44"></span>Go to the physician’s, and thou wilt see
him, whenever a man is discovered to have a wound, using the knife and
the cautery. But no, in thy case, I say not so much as this; but go to
the carpenter’s. And yet thou dost not examine his reasons, although
thou understandest not one of the things which are done there, and many
things will appear to thee to be difficulties; as, for instance, when he
hollows the wood, when he alters its outward shape. Nay, I would bring
thee to a more intelligible craft still, for instance, that of the
painter, and there thy head will swim. For tell me, does he not seem to
be doing what he does, at random? For what do his lines mean, and the
turns and bends of the lines? But when he puts on the colors, then the
beauty of the art will become conspicuous. Yet still, not even then wilt
thou be able to attain to any accurate understanding of it. But why do I
speak of carpenters, and painters, our fellow-servants? Tell me, how
does the bee frame her comb, and then shalt thou speak about God also.
Master the handiwork of the ant, the spider, and the swallow, and then
shalt thou speak about God also. Tell me these things. But no, thou
never canst. Wilt thou not cease then, O man, thy vain enquiries? For
vain indeed they are. Wilt thou not cease busying thyself in vain about
many things? Nothing so wise as this ignorance, where they that profess
they know nothing are wisest of all, and they that spend overmuch labor
on these questions, the most foolish of all. So that to profess
knowledge is not everywhere a sign of wisdom, but sometimes of folly
also. For tell me, suppose there were two men, and one of them should
profess to stretch out his lines, and to measure the expanse that
intervenes between the earth and heaven, and the other were to laugh at
him, and declare that he did not understand it, tell me, I pray, which
should we laugh at, him that said he knew, or him that knew not?
Evidently, the man that said that he knew. He that is ignorant,
therefore, is wiser than he that professes to know. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) And what again? If any one were to
profess to tell us how many cups of water the sea contains, and another
should profess his ignorance, is not the ignorance here again wiser than
the knowledge? <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) Surely, vastly
so. And why so? Because that knowledge itself is but intense ignorance.
For he indeed who says that he is ignorant, knows something. And what is
that? That it is incomprehensible to man. <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) Yes, and this is no small portion of
knowledge. Whereas he that says he knows, he of all others knows not
what he says he knows, and is for this very reason utterly ridiculous.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p48"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p48.1"></span>Moral</span>. Alas! how many things are
there to teach us to bridle this unseasonable impertinence and idle
curiosity; and yet we refrain not, but are curious about the lives of
others; as, why one is a cripple, and why another is poor. And so by
this way of reasoning we shall fall into another sort of trifling which
is endless, as, why such an one is a woman? and, why all are not men?
why there is such a thing as an ass? why an ox? why a dog? why a wolf?
why a stone? why wood? and thus the argument will run out to an
interminable length. This in truth is the reason, why God has marked out
limits to our knowledge, and has laid them deep in nature. And mark,
now, the excess of this busy curiosity. For though we look up to so
great a height as from earth to heaven, and are not at all affected by
it; yet as soon as ever we go up to the top of a lofty tower, and have a
mind to stoop over a little, and look down, a sort of giddiness and
dizziness immediately seizes us. Now, tell me the reason of this. No,
thou couldest never find out a reason for it. Why is it that the eye
possesses greater power than other senses, and is caught by more distant
objects? And one might see it by comparison with the case of hearing.
For no one will ever be able to shout so loudly, as to fill the air as
far as the eye can reach, nor to hear at so great a distance. Why are
not all the members of equal honor? Why have not all received one
function and one place? Paul also searched into these questions; or
rather he did not search into them, for he was wise; but where he comes
by chance upon this topic, he says, “Each one of them, hath God set even
as it hath pleased Him.” ([1 Cor. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p48.2"></span>.)
He assigns the whole to His will. And so then let us only “give thanks
for all things.” “Wherefore,” says he, “give thanks for all things.”
This is the part of a well-disposed, of a wise, of an intelligent
servant; the opposite is that of a tattler, and an idler, and a <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_142"></span>busy-body. Do we not see amongst
servants, that those among them who are worthless and good for nothing,
are both tattlers, and triflers and that they pry into the concerns of
their masters, which they are desirous to conceal: whereas the
intelligent and well-disposed look to one thing only, how they may
fulfill their service. He that says much, does nothing: as he that does
much, never says a word out of season. Hence Paul said, where he wrote
concerning widows, “And they learn not only to be idle, but tattlers
also.” ([1 Tim. v. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p48.3"></span>.) Tell me, now, which is the widest
difference, between our age and that of children, or between God and
men? between ourselves compared with gnats, or God compared with us?
Plainly between God and us. Why then dost thou busy thyself to such an
extent in all these questions? “Give thanks for all things.” “But what,”
say you, “if a heathen should ask the question? How am I to answer him?
He desires to learn from me whether there is a Providence, for he
himself denies that there is any being thus exercising foresight.” Turn
round then, and ask him the same question thyself. He will deny
therefore that there is a Providence. Yet that there is a Providence, is
plain from what thou hast said; but that it is incomprehensible, is
plain from those things whereof we cannot discover the reason. For if in
things where men are the disposers, we oftentimes do not understand the
method of the disposition, and in truth many of them appear to us
inconsistent, and yet at the same time we acquiesce, how much more will
this be so in the case of God? However, with God nothing either is
inconsistent, or appears so to the faithful. Wherefore let us “give
thanks for all things,” let us give Him glory for all things.

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p49"></span>“Subjecting <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) yourselves one to another,” he says,
“in the fear of Christ.” For if thou submit thyself for a ruler’s sake,
or for money’s sake, or from respectfulness, much more from the fear of
Christ. Let there be an interchange of service and submission. For then
will there be no such thing as slavish service. Let not one sit down in
the rank of a freeman, and the other in the rank of a slave; rather it
were better that both masters and slaves be servants to one another;—far
better to be a slave in this way than free in any other; as will be
evident from hence. Suppose the case of a man who should have an hundred
slaves, and he should in no way serve them; and suppose again a
different case, of an hundred friends, all waiting upon one another.
Which will lead the happier life? Which with the greater pleasure, with
the more enjoyment? In the one case there is no anger, no provocation,
no wrath, nor anything else of the kind whatever; in the other all is
fear and apprehension. In the one case too the whole is forced, in the
other is of free choice. In the one case they serve one another because
they are forced to do so, in the other with mutual gratification. Thus
does God will it to be; for this He washed His disciples’ feet. Nay
more, if thou hast a mind to examine the matter nicely, there is indeed
on the part of masters a return of service. For what if pride suffer not
that return of service to appear? Yet if the slave on the one hand
render his bodily service, and thou maintain that body, and supply it
with food and clothing and shoes, this is an exchange of service:
because unless thou render thy service as well, neither will he render
his, but will be free, and no law will compel him to do it if he is not
supported. If this then is the case with servants, where is the
absurdity, if it should also become the case with free men. “Subjecting
yourselves in the fear,” saith he, “of Christ.” <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) How great then the obligation, when we
shall also have a reward. But he does not choose to submit himself to
thee? However do thou submit thyself; not simply yield, but submit
thyself. Entertain this feeling towards all, as if all were thy masters.
For thus shalt thou soon have all as thy slaves, enslaved to thee with
the most abject slavery. For thou wilt then more surely make them thine,
when without receiving anything of theirs, thou of thyself renderest
them of thine own. This is “subjecting yourselves one to another in the
fear of Christ,” in order that we may subdue all the passions, be
servants of God, and preserve the love we owe to one another. And then
shall we be able also to be counted worthy of the lovingkindness which
cometh of God, through the grace and mercies of His only-begotten Son,
with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might,
honor, now and forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[137:392](1130032.htm#fr_391) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p5"></span> \[The οὖν rather resumes the general
directions as to how they are to walk (comp. [Eph.
5.9](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>.)
after the digression in [Eph.
5.11-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p5.2"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_392"></span>[137:393](1130032.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p6"></span> \[The text of Field omits the clause,
“they ended this admonition,” leaving the sense obscure and difficult.
This clause is attested by five codices, and we have inserted it with
Savile.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_393"></span>[137:394](1130032.htm#fr_393) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p7"></span> \[And with four of these codices we
prefer the reading εὐσθενεστέρους, “stronger,” to Field’s reading
ἀσθενεστέρους (which is “*weaker*”).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_394"></span>[137:395](1130032.htm#fr_394) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p8"></span> κήρυγμα.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[137:396](1130032.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p10"></span> \[“This is epexegetical of the
preceding words, viewed negatively and positively: ‘presenting
yourselves in your walk, not as unwise, but as wise.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_396"></span>[137:397](1130032.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p12"></span> \[Or rather, “buying up for yourselves
the opportunity”: a participial clause, which gives a modal definition
to the preceding ὡςσοφοὶ, “as wise.” “In this figurative conception the
doing of that for which the point of time is fitted is thought of as the
‘purchase-price by which the καιρός becomes ours.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_397"></span>[137:398](1130032.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p15"></span> \[Compare on [Gal. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p15.1"></span>.
“This clause, ‘because the days are evil,’ supplies a motive for buying
up the opportunity, namely, because moral corruption is now in
vogue.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_398"></span>[137:399](1130032.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p17"></span> \[“This ‘wherefore’ refers to [Eph.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p17.1"></span>.
For this cause, i.e., because ye ought to walk with such exactness,
become not such as do not use the mind aright.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_399"></span>[138:400](1130032.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p19"></span> [1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p19.1"></span>.
Cf. Vol. IX., 335.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[138:401](1130032.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p21"></span> \[σώζει: suggested by the word ἀσωτία
(“riot”) which immediately precedes, and which is derived from σώζω.
Compare ἀσωτία in Thayer’s *N.T. Lexicon*.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_401"></span>[138:402](1130032.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p23"></span> \[“The imperative *passive* finds its
explanation in the possibility of resistance to the Holy Spirit. The
contrast does not lie in οἶνος (wine) and πνεῦμα (spirit), otherwise
these words would have stood at the beginning of their clauses, but in
the two states,—that of intoxication and that of
inspiration.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_402"></span>[138:403](1130032.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p31"></span> \[“This ‘giving thanks always,’ etc.,
is a third modal definition of the ‘Be filled with the spirit,’ likewise
coördinate with the two preceding ones, bringing into prominence,—after
the general ‘singing of praise’ of [Eph.
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p31.1"></span>, which is to take place audibly, as well as
in the heart,—further and in particular, the ‘thanksgiving’ which the
readers have always for all things to render to God.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_403"></span>[139:404](1130032.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p33"></span> \[Meyer says the context limits πάντων
to “blessings.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_404"></span>[139:405](1130032.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p34"></span> \[On these heretics and their
doctrines, see Vol. IX. (this series) p. 65 (notes 3 and 5), and p. 205,
second column.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_405"></span>[139:406](1130032.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p36"></span> \[This difficulty is as old as David.
Chrysostom does not here suggest David’s solution of the problem,—the
spiritual compensations here and hereafter. And Paul could say even to a
slave in his day, “Wast thou called being a slave? Care not for it. Nay,
if thou art even able to be free, make use of thy having been called as
a slave, rather than accept thy freedom.” ([1 Cor. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p36.1"></span>.)
And even Epictetus said something similar. A little below, Chrysostom
touches this higher Theodicy: “One thing alone is evil; that is, to
sin.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_406"></span>[140:407](1130032.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p38"></span> \[On Chrysostom’s geography and
astronomy, see Homily IX., Concerning the Statues, Vol. IX. of this
series, pp. 403, 404, with notes by Rev. W. R. W. Stevens, M.A. Compare
[Ps. xxiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xx-p38.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_407"></span>[140:408](1130032.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p41"></span> \[Compare what is said by Epictetus
concerning his own lameness: “Shall I then, because of one miserable
little leg, find fault with the universe? Shall I not concede that
accident to the existence of general laws, and cheerfully assent to it
for the sake of him who gave it?” And again, concerning his slavery: “He
is a slave whose body is free, but whose soul is bound; and on the
contrary, he is free whose body is bound, but whose soul is
free.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_408"></span>[141:409](1130032.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p42"></span> \[[Job xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p42.1"></span>,
the Sept.: ἄνθρωπος δὲ ἄλλως νήχεται λόγοις; but the Rev. Ver., after
the Hebrew, has: “Vain man is void of understanding.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_409"></span>[141:410](1130032.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p45"></span> \[A striking oxymoron. Compare the
Greek, ὁἀγνοῶν τοῦ ὑποσχομένου εἰδέναι σοφώτερος.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_410"></span>[141:411](1130032.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p46"></span> \[Compare the Greek again: οὐ πάλιν ἡ
ἄγνοια τῆς εἰδήσεώς ἐστι σοφωτέρα;—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_411"></span>[141:412](1130032.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p47"></span> \[Compare, *Unum scio, quod nihil
scio*.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_412"></span>[142:413](1130032.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p50"></span> \[“The words ‘subjecting yourselves one
to another’ still belong to [Eph.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv.xx-p50.1"></span>
as a *fourth* modal definition of ‘Be filled with the Spirit,’ and are
parallel to ‘giving thanks for all things to God,’ thus adding to this
relation toward God the ‘mutual’ relation towards ‘one
another.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_413"></span>[142:414](1130032.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iii.iv.xx-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p51"></span> \[Not the fear of “God,” as Chrysostom,
the *textus receptus* and the Authorized Eng. Version have, but the fear
of “Christ” (as Rev. Ver., Westcott and Hort, and all trustworthy
authorities). That is, Christ is to be “feared” as the “Judge” (Meyer).
Cornelius a Lapide (in Ellicott) says: “Because we reverence Christ and
‘fear’ to offend him”: *quia scilicet Christum reveremur eumque timemus
offendere*.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 5:22-24](1130033)
