[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130068)  [Next](1130070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily XI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.xi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.xi-p2.2"></span>[Col.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p3"></span>“Walk in wisdom toward them that are
without, redeeming the time. Let your speech be always with grace,
seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer each one.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>What</span> Christ said to His disciples, that
doth Paul also now advise. And what did Christ say? “Behold, I send you
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents,
and harmless as doves.” ([Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>.)
That is, be upon your guard, giving them no handle against you. For
therefore it is added, “towards them that are without,” in order that we
may know that against our own members we have no need of so much caution
as against those without. For where brethren are, there are both many
allowances and kindnesses. There is indeed need of caution even here;
but much more without, for it is not the same to be amongst enemies and
foes, and amongst friends.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p5"></span>Then because he had alarmed them, see how
again he encourages them; “Redeeming,” he saith, “the time”: that is,
the present time is short. Now this he said, not wishing them to be
crafty, nor hypocrites, (for this is not a part of wisdom, but of
senselessness,) but what? In matters wherein they harm you not, he
means, give them no handle; as he says also, when writing to the Romans,
“Render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom, honor to whom honor.” ([Rom. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>.) On
account of the Preaching alone have thou war, he saith, let this war
have none other origin. For though they were to become our foes for
other causes besides, yet neither shall we have a reward, and they will
become worse, and will seem to have just complaints against us. For
instance, if we pay not the tribute, if we render not the honors that
are due, if we be not lowly. Seest thou not Paul, how submissive he is,
where he was not likely to harm the Preaching. For hear him saying to
Agrippa, “I think myself happy, because I shall answer for myself this
day before thee, especially because I know thee to be expert in all
customs and questions which are among the Jews.” ([Acts
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>.)
But had he thought it his duty to insult the ruler, he would have
spoiled everything. And hear too those of blessed Peter’s company, how
gently they answer the Jews, saying, “we must obey God rather than men.”
([Acts v. 29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p5.3"></span>.) And yet men who had renounced their own
lives, might both have insulted, and have done anything whatever; but
for this object they had renounced their lives, not that they might win
vainglory, (for that way had been vainglorious,) but that they might
preach and speak all things with boldness. That other course marks want
of moderation.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p6"></span>“Let your speech be always with grace,
seasoned with salt”; that is, that this graciousness may not lapse into
indifferentism. For it is possible to be simply agreeable, it is
possible also to be so with due seemliness. “That ye may know how ye
ought to answer each one.” So that one ought not to discourse alike to
all, Greeks, I mean, and Brethren. By no means, for this were the very
extreme of senselessness.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p7"></span>[Col.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>.
“All my affairs shall Tychicus make known unto you, the beloved brother
and faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p8"></span>Admirable! how great is the wisdom of
Paul! Observe, he doth not put everything into his Epistles, but only
things necessary and urgent. In the first place, being desirous of not
drawing them out to a length; and secondly, to make his messenger more
respected, by his having also somewhat to relate; thirdly, showing his
own affection towards him; for he would not else have entrusted these
communications to him. Then, there were things which ought not to be
declared in writing. “The beloved brother,” he saith. If beloved, he
knew all, and he concealed nothing from him. “And faithful minister and
fellow-servant in the Lord.” If “faithful,” he will speak no falsehood;
if “a fellow-servant,” he hath shared his trials, so <span
id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="iv.iv.xi-Page_310"></span>that he
has brought together from all sides the grounds of trustworthiness.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p9"></span>[Col.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>.
“Whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p10"></span>Here he shows his great love, seeing that
for this purpose he sent him, and this was the cause of his journey; and
so when writing to the Thessalonians, he said, “Wherefore when we could
no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left behind at Athens alone,
and sent Timothy our brother.” ([1 Thess.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>.)
And to the Ephesians he sends this very same person, and for the very
same cause, “That he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts.”
([Eph. 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p10.2"></span>.)
See what he saith, not “that ye might know my estate,” but “that I might
know yours.” So in no place doth he mention what is his own. He shows
that they were in trials too, by the expression, “comfort your hearts.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p11"></span>[Col.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>.
“With Onesimus, the beloved and faithful brother, who is one of you.
They shall make known unto you all things that are done here.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p12"></span>Onesimus is the one about whom, writing
to Philemon, he said, “Whom I would fain have kept with me, that in thy
behalf he might minister unto me in the bonds of the Gospel: but without
thy mind I would do nothing.” ([Phlm.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p12.1"></span>.)
And he adds too the praise of their city, that they might not only
not <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) be ashamed, but even pride
themselves on him. “Who is one of you,” he saith. “They shall make known
unto you all things that are done here.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p14"></span>[Col.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>.
“Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p15"></span>Nothing can surpass this praise. This is
he that was brought up from Jerusalem with him. This man hath said a
greater thing than the prophets; for they call themselves “strangers and
foreigners,” but this one calleth himself even a prisoner. Just like a
prisoner of war he was dragged up and down, <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) and lay at every one’s will to suffer
evil of them, yea rather worse even than prisoners. For those indeed
their enemies, after taking them, treat with much attention, having a
care for them as their own property: but Paul, as though an enemy and a
foe, all men dragged up and down, beating him, scourging, insulting, and
maligning. This was a consolation to those also (to whom he wrote), when
their master even is in such circumstances.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p17"></span>“And Mark, the cousin of Barnabas”; even
this man he hath praised still from his relationship, for Barnabas was a
great man; “touching whom ye received commandments; if he come unto you,
receive him.” Why? would they not have received him? Yes, but he means,
with much attention; and this shows the man to be great. Whence they
received these commandments, he does not say.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p18"></span>[Col.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>.
“And Jesus which is called Justus.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p19"></span>This man was probably a Corinthian. Next,
he bestows a common praise on all, having already spoken that of each
one in particular; “who are of the circumcision: these only are my
fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, men that have been a comfort
unto me.” After having said, “fellow-prisoner”; in order that he may not
therewith depress the soul of his hearers, see how by this expression he
rouseth them up. “Fellow-workers,” he saith, “unto the kingdom of God.”
So that being partakers of the trials, they become partakers of the
kingdom. “Who have been a comfort to me.” He shows them to be great
persons, seeing that to Paul they have been a comfort.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p20"></span>But <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) let us see the wisdom of Paul. “Walk
in wisdom,” he saith, “towards them that are without, redeeming the
time.” ([Col. 4.5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p21.1"></span>.) That is, the time is not yours, but
theirs. Do not then wish to have your own way, <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) but redeem the time. And he said not
simply, “Buy,” but “redeem,” making it yours after another manner. For
it were the part of excessive madness, to invent occasions of war and
enmity. For over and above the undergoing of superfluous and profitless
dangers, there is this additional harm, that the Greeks will not come
over to us. For when thou art amongst the brethren, reason is thou
shouldest be bold; but when without, thou oughtest not to be so.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23"></span>Seest thou how everywhere he speaks of
those without, the Greeks? Wherefore also when writing to Timothy, he
said, “Moreover, he must have good testimony from them that are
without.” ([1 Tim. iii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p23.1"></span>.) And again, “For what have I to do with
judging them that are without.” ([1 Cor. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23.2"></span>.)
“Walk in wisdom,” he saith, “toward them that are without.” For
“without,” they are, even though they live in the same world with us,
seeing they are without the kingdom, and the paternal mansion. And he
comforts them withal, by calling the others “without,” as he said above,
“Your life is hid with Christ in God.” ([Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p24"></span>Then, he saith, seek ye glory, then
honors, then all those other things, but not so now, but give them up to
those without. Next, lest thou think that he is speaking of money, he
adds, <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi-Page_311"></span>“Let your speech be always with grace,
seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer each one.”
That it may not be full of hypocrisy, for this is not “grace,” nor “a
seasoning with salt.” For instance, if it be needful to pay court to any
one without incurring danger, refuse not \[to do so\]; if the occasion
require that thou discourse civilly, think not the doing so flattery, do
everything that pertaineth to honor, so that piety be not injured. Seest
thou not how Daniel payeth court to an impious man? Seest thou not the
three children, how wisely they bore themselves, showing both courage,
and boldness in speaking, and yet nothing rash nor galling, for so it
had not been boldness, but vainglory. “That ye may know,” he saith, “how
ye ought to answer every man.” For the ruler ought to be answered in one
way, the ruled in another, the rich in one way, the poor in another.
Wherefore? Because the souls of those who are rich, and in authority,
are weaker, more inflammable, more fluctuating, so that towards them,
one should use condescension; those of the poor, and the ruled, firmer
and more intelligent, so that to these one should use greater boldness
of speech; looking to one thing, their edification. Not that because one
is rich, another poor, the former is to be honored more, the latter
less, but because of his weakness, let the former be supported, the
latter not so: for instance, when there is no cause for it, do not call
the Greek “polluted,” nor be insulting; but if thou be asked concerning
his doctrine, answer that it is polluted, and impious; but when none
asketh thee, nor forceth thee to speak, it becomes thee not causelessly
to challenge to thee his enmity. For what need is there to prepare for
thyself gratuitous hostilities? Again, if thou art instructing any one;
speak on the subject at present before thee, otherwise be silent. <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) If the speech be “seasoned with salt,”
should it fall into a soul that is of loose texture, it will brace up
its slackness; into one that is harsh, it will smooth its ruggedness.
Let it be gracious, and so neither hard, nor yet weak, but let it have
both sternness and pleasantness therewith. For if one be immoderately
stern, he doth more harm than good; and if he be immoderately
complaisant, he giveth more pain than pleasure, so that everywhere there
ought to be moderation. Be not downcast, and sour visaged, for this is
offensive; nor yet be wholly relaxed, for this is open to contempt and
treading under foot; but, like the bee, culling the virtue of each, of
the one its cheerfulness, of the other its gravity, keep clear of the
fault. For if a physician dealeth not with all bodies alike, much more
ought not a teacher. And yet better will the body bear unsuitable
medicines, than the soul language; for instance, a Greek cometh to thee,
and becomes thy friend; discourse not at all with him on this subject,
until he have become a close friend, and after he hath become so, do it
gradually.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p26"></span>See, when Paul also had come to Athens,
how he discoursed with them. He said not, “O polluted, and
all-polluted”; but what? “Ye men of Athens, in all things I perceive
that ye are somewhat superstitious.” <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) ([Acts xvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p27.1"></span>.)
Again, when to insult was needful, he refused not; but with great
vehemency he said to Elymas, “O full of all guile and all villainy, son
of the devil, enemy of all righteousness.” For as to have insulted those
had been senselessness, so not to have insulted this one had been
softness. Again, art thou brought unto a ruler on a matter of business,
see that thou render him the honors that are his due.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p28"></span>[Col.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p28.1"></span>.
“They shall make known unto you,” he saith, “all things that are done
here.” Why didst thou not come with them, says one? But what is, “They
shall make known unto you all things”? My bonds, that is, and all the
other things that detain me. I then, who pray to see them, who also send
others, should not myself have remained behind, had not some great
necessity detained me. And yet this is not the language of
accusations—yes, of vehement accusation. For the assuring them that he
had both fallen into trials, and was bearing them nobly, is the part of
one who was confirming the fact, and lifting up again their souls.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p29"></span>[Col.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p29.1"></span>.
“With Onesimus,” he saith, “the beloved, and faithful brother.”

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p30"></span>Paul calleth a slave, brother: with
reason; seeing that he styleth himself the servant of the faithful. ([2
Cor. iv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p30.1"></span>.) Bring we down all of us our pride, tread
we under foot our boastfulness. Paul nameth himself a slave, he that is
worth the world, and ten thousands of heavens; and dost thou entertain
high thoughts? He that seizeth all things for spoil as he will, he that
hath the first place in the kingdom of heaven, he that was crowned, he
that ascended into the third heaven, calleth servants, “brethren,” and
“fellow-servants.” Where is your madness? where is your arrogance?

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p31"></span>So trustworthy was Onesimus become, as to
be entrusted even with such things as these.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p32"></span>[Col.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p32.1"></span>.
“And Mark,” he saith, “the cousin of Barnabas, touching whom ye received
commandments, receive him.” Perhaps they had received commandments from
Barnabas.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p33"></span><span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi-Page_312"></span>[Col.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p33.1"></span>.
“Who are of the circumcision.” He represseth the swelling pride of the
Jews, and inspiriteth the souls of these, \[the Colossians,\] because
few of them were of the circumcision, the greater number of the
Gentiles.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p34"></span>“Men that have been,” he saith, “a
comfort unto me.” He shows himself to be set in the midst of great
trials. So that neither is this a small thing. When we comfort the
Saints by presence, by words, by assiduous attendance, when we suffer
adversity together with them, (for he saith, “as bound with those in
bonds”; \[[Heb. xiii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p34.1"></span>.\]) when we make their sufferings ours, we
shall also be partakers in their crowns. Hast thou not been dragged to
the stadium? Hast thou not entered into the lists? It is another that
strips himself, another that wrestles; but if thou be so minded, thou
too shall be a sharer. Anoint him, become his favorer and partisan, from
without the lists shout loudly for him, stir up his strength, refresh
his spirit. It follows that the same things should be done in all other
cases. For Paul stood not in need, but in order to stimulate them he
said these things. Thou therefore in the case of all others, stop the
mouths of those who would abuse such an one, procure favorers for him,
receive him as he cometh forth with great attention, so shalt thou be a
sharer in his crowns, so, in his glory; and if thou do no other thing,
but only hast pleasure in what is done, even thus thou sharest in no
common degree, for thou hast contributed love, the sum of all good
things.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p35"></span>For if they that weep seem to share in
the grief of those in sorrow, and gratify them mightily, and remove the
excess of their woe, much more do they also that rejoice with others,
make their pleasure greater. For how great an evil it is not to have
companions in sorrow, hear the Prophet saying, “And I looked for one to
lament with me, but there was none.” <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) Wherefore Paul also saith, “Rejoice
with them that rejoice; and weep with them that weep.” ([Rom. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p36.2"></span>.)
Increase their pleasure. If thou see thy brother in good esteem, say
not, “the esteem is his, why should I rejoice.” These words are not
those of a brother, but of an enemy. If thou be so minded, it is not
his, but thine. Thou hast the power of making it greater, if thou be not
downcast, but pleased, if thou be cheerful, if joyous. And that it is
so, is evident from this; the envious envy not those only who are in
good esteem, but those as well who rejoice at their good esteem, so
conscious are they that these also are interested in that good esteem;
and these are they who do glory most in it. For the other even blushes
when praised exceedingly; but these with great pleasure pride themselves
upon it. See ye not in the case of athletes, how the one is crowned, the
other is not crowned; but the grief and the joy is amongst the favorers
and disfavorers, <span id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) these are they
that leap, they that caper?

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p38"></span>See how great a thing is the not envying.
The toil is another’s, the pleasure is thine; another wears the crown,
and thou caperest, thou art gay. For tell me, seeing it is another that
hath conquered, why dost thou leap? But they also know well, that what
hath been done is common. Therefore they do not accuse this man <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) indeed, but they try to beat down the
victory; and you hear them saying such words as these, “(There) I
expunged thee,” and, “I beat thee down.” Although the deed was
another’s, still the praise is thine. But if in things without, not to
envy, but to make another’s good one’s own, is so great a good, much
more in the victory of the devil over us he breathes the more furiously,
evidently because we are more pleased. <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) Wicked though he is, and bitter, he
well knows that this pleasure is great. Wouldest thou pain him? Be glad
and rejoice. Wouldest thou gladden him? Be sad-visaged. The pain he has
from thy brother’s victory, thou soothest by thy sadness; thou standest
with him, severed from thy brother, thou workest greater mischief than
he. For it is not the same for one that is an enemy to do the deeds of
an enemy, and for a friend to stand with an enemy; such an one is more
detestable than an enemy. If thy brother have gained good
reputation <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) either by speaking,
or by brilliant <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) or successful
achievement, become thou a sharer in his reputation, show that he is a
member of thine.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p43"></span>“And how?” saith one, “for the reputation
is not mine.” Never speak so. Compress thy lips. If thou hadst been near
me, thou that speakest on that wise, I would have even put my hand over
thy lips: lest the enemy should hear thee. Oftentimes we have enmities
with one another, and we discover them not to our enemies; dost thou
then discover thine to the devil? Say not so, think not so; but the very
reverse: “he is one of my members, the glory passes on to the body.”
“How then is it,” saith one, “that those without are not so minded?”
Because of thy fault: when they see thee counting his pleasure not thine
own, they too count it not thine: were they to see thee appropriating
it, they durst not do so, but thou <span id="page_313">p. 313</span>
<span id="iv.iv.xi-Page_313"></span>wouldest become equally illustrious
with him. Thou hast not gained reputation by speaking; but by sharing in
his joy thou hast gained more renown than he. For if love be a great
thing, and the sum of all, thou hast received the crown this gives; he,
that for oratory, thou, that for exceeding love; he displayed force of
words, but thou by deeds hast cast down envy, hast trodden under foot
the evil eye. So that in reason thou oughtest rather to be crowned than
he, thy contest is the more brilliant; thou hast not only trodden under
foot envy, but thou hast even done somewhat else. He hath one crown
only, but thou two, and those both brighter than his one. What are
these? One, that which thou wonnest against envy, another, which thou
art encircled with by love. For the sharing in his joy is a proof not
only of thy being free from envy, but also of being rooted in love. Him
ofttimes some human passion sorely disquieteth, vainglory for instance;
but thou art free from every passion, for it is not of vainglory that
thou rejoicest at another’s good. Hath he righted up the Church, tell
me? hath he increased the congregation? Praise him; again thou hast a
twofold crown; thou hast struck down envy; thou hast enwreathed thee
with love. Yea, I implore and beseech thee. Wilt thou hear of a third
crown even? Him, men below applaud, thee, the Angels above. For it is
not the same thing, to make a display of eloquence, and to rule the
passions. This praise is for a season, that for ever; this, of men,
that, of God; this man is crowned openly; but thou art crowned in
secret, where thy Father seeth. If it were possible to have peeled off
the body and seen the soul of each, I would have shown thee that this is
more dignified than the other, more resplendent.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p44"></span>Tread we under foot the goads of envy, we
advantage ourselves, beloved, ourselves shall we enwreath with the
crown. He that envieth another fighteth with God, not with him; for when
he seeth him to have grace, and is grieved, and wisheth the Church
pulled down, he fighteth not with him, but with God. For tell me, if one
should adorn a king’s daughter, and by his adorning and gracing her,
gain for himself renown; and another person should wish her to be ill
attired, and him to be unable to adorn her; against whom would he have
been plotting mischief? Against the other? or against her and her
father? So too now, thou that enviest, fightest with the Church, thou
warrest with God. For, since with the good repute of thy brother is
interwoven also the Church’s profit, need is, that if the one be undone,
the other shall be undone also. So that, in this regard also, thou doest
a deed of Satan, seeing thou plottest mischief against the body of
Christ. Art thou pained at this man? Wrongly, when he hath in nothing
wronged thee; yea, much rather, thou art pained at Christ. Wherein hath
He wronged thee, that thou wilt not suffer His body to be decked with
beauty? that thou wilt not suffer His bride to be adorned? Consider, I
pray thee, the punishment, how sore. Thou gladdenest thine enemies; and
him too himself, the man in good esteem, whom through thy envy thou
wishest to grieve, thou dost the rather gladden; thou dost by thine envy
the rather show that he is in good esteem, for otherwise thou wouldest
not have envied him. Thou showest the rather that thou art in
punishment.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p45"></span>I am ashamed indeed to exhort you from
such motives, but seeing our weakness is so great, let us be instructed
even from these, and free ourselves from this destructive passion.
Grievest thou that he is in good esteem? then why swellest thou that
esteem by envying? Wishest thou to punish him? Why then showest thou
that thou art pained? Why punish thyself before him, whom thou wouldest
not have well esteemed? Thereafter double will be his pleasure, and thy
punishment; not only because thou provest him to be great; but because
thou begettest in him yet another pleasure, by punishing thyself; and
again, at what thou art pained, he is pleased, whilst thou enviest. See
how we deal ourselves heavy blows without perceiving it! He is an enemy.
And yet, why an enemy? What wrong hath he done? Still, however, by this
we make our enemy the more illustrious, and thereby punish ourselves the
more. And herein again we punish ourselves, if we have discovered that
he knows it. For perhaps he is not pleased, <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) but we thinking him to be so, are
again pained on that account. Cease then your envying. Why inflictest
thou wounds upon thyself?

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p47"></span>Think we of these things, beloved; of
those two crowns for them that envy not; of those praises from men, of
those from God; of the evils that come of envying; and so shall we be
able to quell the brute, and to be in good esteem before God, and to
obtain the same things with those who are of good esteem. For perhaps we
shall obtain them, and if we obtain them not, it will be for our
advantage; still, even so, we shall be able, if we have lived to the
glory of God, to obtain the good things promised to them that love Him,
through the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_887"></span>[310:888](1130069.htm#fr_887) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p13"></span> Sav. adds οὐκ, but without necessity.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[310:889](1130069.htm#fr_888) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p16"></span> ἤγετο καὶ ἐφέρετο, which is most
properly said of property plundered in war.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[310:890](1130069.htm#fr_889) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p21"></span> The transition here is so sudden, that
one suspects the text; but it may be only that he is catching himself
up, to make a longer comment on the last few verses. \[There may be two
sets of rough notes, prepared for different occasions, with the same
general discussion used in both cases, and the two combined by an
editor. But the suggestion of the Oxford tr. is supported by a similar
practice in several of the Homilies on Acts. Comp. below, on Hom.
xii.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_890"></span>[310:891](1130069.htm#fr_890) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p22"></span> αὐθεντεῖν, i.e. in the world, as men of
the world.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[311:892](1130069.htm#fr_891) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p25"></span> ἐπεὶ σίγα, i.e. since (if it be not so)
be silent.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[311:893](1130069.htm#fr_892) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p27"></span> δεισιδαιμονεστέρους. The word does not
convey quite the reproach which the E.V. does. It may be rendered, “I
see that ye are rather given to the fear of divinities.” \[Or more
probably, “very religious,” as in American App. to Rev. Ver. The
adjective may have either the good or the bad sense; and the comparative
may mean more than a little, “somewhat,” or more than common, “quite,”
“remarkably,” or more than enough, “too.” Only the connection can in
such cases decide, and that is not here conclusive.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_893"></span>[312:894](1130069.htm#fr_893) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p36"></span> E.V. marg. [Ps. lxix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[312:895](1130069.htm#fr_894) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p37"></span> See Tac. An. xiii. 25. The spectators at
theaters and at the games were so eager in their favor toward one or
another as sometimes to cause serious breaches of the peace. The
factions of the Circus in the time of Justinian are described by Gibbon,
c. xi.; see also the massacre of A.D. 501. Tillemont, Hist. des. Emp. t.
vi.; Anastasius, art. x.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[312:896](1130069.htm#fr_895) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p39"></span> τουτῷ, the partisan of the victor.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[312:897](1130069.htm#fr_896) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p40"></span> \[The persons designated as “we” seem to
be conceived as divided into two parts. The altered text has smoothed
down the difficulty: “much more in the victory over the devil. For he
then breathes the more furiously against us, evidently,” &c.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_897"></span>[312:898](1130069.htm#fr_897) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p41"></span> \[Above rendered “good esteem.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_898"></span>[312:899](1130069.htm#fr_898) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p42"></span> ἐπιδεικνύμενος, al. ἐπαινόμενος, “by
being praised.”

<span id="fn_899"></span>[313:900](1130069.htm#fr_899) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p46"></span> The Empress Eudoxia is thought to have
been reflected on in some of the passages against extravagance. This
whole passage probably alludes to the enmity which prevailed at court in
consequence, and these words were probably meant to hint at the real
love of St. Chrysostom for his bitterest enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 4:12,13](1130070)
