[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130075)  [Next](1130077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span
id="iv.v.v-Page_344"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.v.v-p2.2"></span>[1 Thessalonians iv.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p3"></span>“Finally then, brethren, we beseech and
exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that, as ye received of us how ye ought to
walk and to please God, so ye abound more and more. For ye know what
charge we gave you through the Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the will
of God, even your sanctification.”

<span id="iv.v.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.v.v-p4.1"></span>When</span> he has met what was pressing, and
what was upon his hands, and is about henceforth to enter upon things
that are perpetual, and which they ought continually to hear, he adds
this expression, “finally,” that is, always and forever. “We beseech and
exhort you in the Lord.” Strange! He does not even speak of himself as
of sufficient credit to exhort. And yet who was so worthy of credit? But
he takes Christ along with him. We exhort you, he says, by God. Which
also he said to the Corinthians, “God entreats (exhorts) you through
us.” ([2 Cor. v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p4.2"></span>.) “That as ye received of us.” This “received”
is not of words only, but of actions also, viz. “how ye ought to walk,”
and he means thereby the whole conduct of life. “And to please God, that
ye abound more and more.” That is, that by more abounding ye do not stop
at the limit of the commandments, but that you even go beyond them. For
this it is, that “ye abound more and more.” In what preceded he accepts
the marvel of their firm faith, but here he regulates their life. For
this is proficiency, even to go beyond the commandments and the
statutes. For no longer from the constraint of a teacher, but from their
own voluntary choice, is all this performed. For as the earth ought not
to bear only what is thrown upon it, so too ought the soul not to stop
at those things which have been inculcated, but to go beyond them. Do
you see that he has properly said “to go beyond”? For virtue is divided
into these two things, to decline from evil, and to do good. For the
withdrawal from evil is not sufficient for the arrival at virtue, but it
is a kind of path, and a beginning leading thereto; still we have need
of great alacrity. The things therefore to be avoided he tells them in
the order of commandment. And justly. For these things indeed being done
bring punishment, but not being done, yet bring no praise. The acts of
virtue however, such as to give away our goods, and such like, are not
of the order of commandment, he says. But what? “He that is able to
receive, let him receive.” ([Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="iv.v.v-p4.3"></span>..md) It
is profitable, therefore, that as he with much fear and trembling had
given these commandments to them, he also by these letters reminds them
of that his care. Wherefore he does not repeat them, but reminds them of
them.

<span id="iv.v.v-p5"></span>“For ye know,” he says, “what charge we gave
you through our Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the will of God, even
your sanctification.” And observe how he nowhere so vehemently glances
at any other thing, as at this. As elsewhere also he writes to this
effect; “Follow after peace with all men, and the sanctification without
which no man shall see the Lord.” ([Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.v-p5.1"></span>..md) And
why dost thou wonder, if he everywhere writes to his disciples upon this
subject, when even in his Epistle to Timothy he has said, “Keep thyself
pure.” ([1 Tim. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p5.2"></span>.) Also in his second Epistle to the Corinthians
he has said, “In much patience, in fastings, by pureness.” ([2 Cor.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.v-p5.3"></span>..md) And
one may find this in many places, both in this Epistle to the Romans,
and everywhere, and in all his Epistles. For in truth this is an evil
pernicious to all. And as a swine full charged with mire, wherever he
enters, fills all places with his ill odor, and chokes the senses with
dung, so too does fornication; it is an evil not easy to be washed away.
But when some even who have wives practice this, how excessive is the
outrage! “For this,” he says, “is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye abstain from all fornication.” For there are
many forms of disorderly conduct. The pleasures of wantonness are of
many kinds and various, it were not tolerable to mention them. But
having said “from all fornication,” he leaves it to those who know them.

<span id="iv.v.v-p6"></span>[1 Thess.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p6.1"></span>.
“That each one of you know how to possess himself of his own vessel in
sanctification and honor, not in the passion of lust, even as the
Gentiles which know not God.”

<span id="iv.v.v-p7"></span>He says, “That each one of you know how to
possess himself of his own vessel.” It is, then, a matter to be learnt,
and that diligently, not to be wanton. But we possess our vessel, when
it is pure; when it is impure, sin possesses it. And reasonably. For it
does not do the things which we wish, but what sin commands. “Not in the
passion of lust,” he says. Here he shows also the manner, according to
which one ought to be temperate; that we should cut off the passions of
lust. For luxury, and wealth, and idleness, and sloth, and ease, and all
such things, lead us on to irregular lust. “Even as the Gentiles,” he
says, “which know not God.” For such are <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="iv.v.v-Page_345"></span>they who do not expect that
they shall suffer punishment.

<span id="iv.v.v-p8"></span>[1 Thess.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p8.1"></span>.
“That no man transgress, and wrong his brother in the matter.”

<span id="iv.v.v-p9"></span>He has well said, “that no man transgress.”
To each man God has assigned a wife, he has set bounds to nature, that
intercourse with one only: therefore intercourse with another is
transgression, and the taking of more than belongs to one, <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990.md) and robbery; or rather it is more
cruel than any robbery; for we grieve not so much, when our riches are
carried off, as when marriage is invaded. Dost thou call him brother,
and wrongest him, and that in things which are unlawful? Here he speaks
concerning adultery, but above also concerning “all fornication.” For
since he was about to say, “That no man transgress and wrong his
brother,” Do not think, he says, that I say this only in the case of
brethren; you must not have the wives of others at all, nor even women
that have no husbands, and that are common. You must abstain from “all
fornication”; “Because,” he says, “the Lord is an avenger in all these
things.” He exhorted them first, he shamed them, saying, “even as the
Gentiles.” Then from reasonings he showed the impropriety of defrauding
a brother. Afterwards he adds the principal thing; “Because,” he says,
“the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as also we forewarned you
and testified.” For we do not these things without being punished,
neither do we enjoy so much pleasure, as we undergo punishment.

<span id="iv.v.v-p11"></span>[1 Thess.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p11.1"></span>.
“For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification.”

<span id="iv.v.v-p12"></span>Because he had said “his brother,” and had
also added, that God is the avenger, showing that even if an unbeliever
has suffered this, he who has done it shall suffer punishment, he says,
it is not as avenging him that He punishes thee, but because thou hast
insulted Himself. He Himself called thee, thou hast insulted Him who
called thee. On this account, he has added,

<span id="iv.v.v-p13"></span>[1 Thess.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p13.1"></span>.
“Therefore he that rejecteth, rejecteth not man, but God, who giveth His
Holy Spirit unto you.”

<span id="iv.v.v-p14"></span>So that even if thou shouldest defile the
Empress, he says, or even thine own handmaid, that hath a husband, the
crime is the same. Why? Because He avenges not the persons that are
injured, but Himself. For thou art equally defiled, thou hast equally
insulted God; for both the one and the other is adultery, as both the
one and the other is marriage. And though thou shouldest not commit
adultery, but fornication, though the harlot has no husband, yet
nevertheless God avenges, for He avenges Himself. For thou dost this
act, not despising the man, <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991.md) so
much as God. And it is manifest from this, that thou doest it concealing
it from man, but thou pretendest that God doth not see thee. For tell
me, if one who was thought worthy of the purple, and of infinite honor
from the king (Emperor), and was commanded to live suitably to the
honor, should go and defile himself with any woman; whom has he
insulted? her, or the king who gave him all? She indeed is insulted too,
but not equally.

<span id="iv.v.v-p16"></span>Wherefore, I beseech you, let us guard
against this sin. For as we punish women, when, being married to us,
they give themselves to others, so also are we punished, though not by
the Roman laws, yet by God. For this also is adultery. For not only is
adultery committed in doing so by her who is married to another, but by
him also, who is yoked to a wife. Attend carefully to what I say. For
although what is said is offensive to many, it is necessary to be said,
to set the matter right for the future. Not only is this adultery, when
we defile a woman who is married to a man; but if we ourselves being
married to a woman defile one who is free and disengaged, the matter is
adultery. For what, if she with whom the adultery is committed is not
bound? Yet art thou bound. Thou hast transgressed the law. Thou hast
injured thine own flesh. For tell me, wherefore dost thou punish thy
wife, if she commit fornication with a man who is loosed, and has not a
wife? Because it is adultery. Why? Yet he who defiled her has not a
wife, but she is bound to a husband. Well then, thou also art bound to a
wife; so that in like manner thy offence also is adultery. For it is
said, “Every one that putteth away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, maketh her an adulteress: and whosoever shall marry her
when she is put away, committeth adultery.” ([Matt. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)<span id="iv.v.v-p16.1"></span>..md) If
he who marries her who is divorced commits adultery, he who, with a wife
of his own, defiles himself also with that other—it is manifest to every
one. But perhaps to you who are men, enough has been said on this
subject. For concerning them that are such, Christ says, “Their worm
will not die and the fire will not be quenched.” ([Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="iv.v.v-p16.2"></span>..md)
But for the sake of the young it is necessary to speak to you, not to
the young themselves so much, but to you. For these things are suitable
not to them only, but also to you. And how? I will now tell you. He who
has not learnt to commit fornication, will neither know how to commit
adultery. But he who walloweth among harlots, will quickly also arrive
at the other, and will defile himself, if not with the married, yet with
those who are disengaged.

<span id="iv.v.v-p17"></span><span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="iv.v.v-Page_346"></span>What then do I advise, so as to extirpate
the roots? So many of you as have young sons, and are bringing them up
to a worldly life, <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992.md) quickly draw
them under the yoke of marriage. For since whilst he is yet young
desires trouble him, for the time before marriage, by admonitions,
threats, fears, promises, and numberless other methods restrain them.
But at the season of marriage, let no one defer it. Behold, I speak the
words of a match-maker, that you should let your sons marry. But I am
not ashamed to speak thus, since not even Paul was ashamed to say,
“Defraud ye not one the other” ([1 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.v-p18.1"></span>..md),
which seems more shameful than what I have said; yet he was not ashamed.
For he did not pay heed to words, but to the acts that were set right by
words. When thy son is grown up, before he enters upon warfare, or any
other course of life, consider of his marriage. And if he sees that thou
wilt soon take a bride for him, and that the time intervening will be
short, he will be able to endure the flame patiently. But if he
perceives that thou art remiss and slow, and waitest until he shall
acquire a large income, and then thou wilt contract a marriage for him,
despairing at the length of the time, he will readily fall into
fornication. But alas! the root of evils here also is the love of money.
For since no one cares how far his son shall be sober and modest, but
all are mad for gold, for this reason no one makes this a matter of
concern. Wherefore I exhort you first to regulate well their souls. If
he find his bride chaste, and know that body alone, then will both his
desire be vehement, and his fear of God the greater, and the marriage
truly honorable, receiving bodies pure and undefiled; and the offspring
will be full-charged with blessing, and the bride and bridegroom will
comply with one another, for both being inexperienced in the manners of
others, they will submit to one another. But one that begins when
younger to wax wanton, and to have experience of the ways of harlots,
for the first and second evening will praise his own wife; but after
that he will soon fall back into that wantonness, seeking that dissolute
and disorderly laughter, the words that are full of base import, the
dissolute deportment, <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993.md) and all
the other indecency, which it is not tolerable that we should mention.
But a woman of free estate would not endure to make such exhibitions,
nor to tarnish herself. For she was espoused to her husband to be his
partner in life, and for the procreation of children, not for the
purposes of indecency and laughter; that she might keep the house, and
instruct him also to be grave, not that she might supply to him the fuel
of fornication.

<span id="iv.v.v-p20"></span>But the gestures <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994.md) of a harlot seem to you agreeable. I
know it. For the Scripture says, “The lips of a strange woman drop
honey.” ([Prov. v. 3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p21.2"></span>.) For on this account I take all this trouble,
that ye may have no experience of that honey, for it straightway turns
into gall. And this also the Scripture says, “Who for a season is smooth
to thy throat, but afterwards thou shalt find her more bitter than gall,
and sharper than a two-edged sword.” ([Prov.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p21.3"></span>,
Sept.) What sayest thou? Bear with me speaking somewhat impure, if I may
say so—and expressing myself as one shameless and unblushing. For I do
not submit to this willingly, but on account of those who are shameless
in their actions, I am compelled to speak this sort of words. And many
such we see even in the Scriptures. For even Ezekiel, reproaching
Jerusalem, utters many such things, and is not ashamed. And justly. For
he did not say them from his own inclination, but from his concern. For
although the words seem to be indecent, yet his aim is not indecent, but
even highly becoming one who wishes to banish uncleanness from the soul.
For if the shameless soul does not hear the very words, it is not
affected. For a physician wishing to remove a putrid sore, first thrusts
his fingers into the wound, and if he does not first defile his healing
hands, he will not be able to cure it. So it is with me. Unless I first
defile my mouth, that heals your passions, I shall not be able to heal
you. But rather neither is my mouth defiled, nor his hands. Why then?
Because the uncleanness is not that of nature, nor from our own
body, <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995.md) as neither in that case
from his hands, but from what is another’s. But if where the body is
another’s, he does not refuse to dip his own hands, tell me, shall we
refuse, where it is our own body? For you are our body, sickly indeed
and impure, but ours nevertheless.

<span id="iv.v.v-p23"></span>What then is this which I say, and for
which I have made so long a digression? A garment indeed which your
slave wears, you would not choose ever to wear, being disgusted on
account of its filth, but you would rather go naked than make use of it.
But a body that is unclean and filthy, and which is used not only by
your slave, but by numberless others, that will you abuse, and not be
disgusted? Are you ashamed at hearing this? But be ashamed of the
actions, not of the words. And I pass over all other things, the
rudeness, and the corruption of their manners, the servility and
illiberality of the <span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="iv.v.v-Page_347"></span>rest of their life. Tell me, should you and
your servant go to the same woman? and I wish it were only your servant,
and not, it may be, the executioner! And yet you could not bear to take
the executioner by the hand; but her who has been made one body with him
you kiss and embrace, and do not shudder, nor fear! Are, you not
ashamed? are you not abashed? are you not pierced with anguish?

<span id="iv.v.v-p24"></span>I said indeed to your fathers, that they
ought early to lead you to marriage: but nevertheless neither are you
without liability to punishment. For if there were not other young men
also, more numerous than you, living in chastity, both formerly, and
now, there would perhaps be some excuse for you. But if there are, how
can you say, that we were not able to restrain the flame of lust? For
they, who have been able, are your accusers, in that they are partakers
of the same nature. Hear Paul saying, “Follow after peace…and the
sanctification, without which no man shall see the Lord.” ([Heb. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.v-p24.1"></span>..md) Is
not this threat sufficient to terrify you? Do you see others continuing
altogether in chastity, and in gravity passing their lives; and cannot
you command yourself even so long as the period of youth? Do you see
others ten thousand times overcoming pleasure, and cannot you once
refrain? With your leave, I will tell you the cause. For youth is not
the cause, since then all young men would be dissolute. But we thrust
ourselves into the fire. For when you go up to the theater, and sit
feasting your eyes with the naked limbs of women, for the time indeed
you are delighted, but afterwards, you have nourished thence a mighty
fever. When you see women exhibited as it were in the form of their
bodies and spectacles and songs containing nothing else but irregular
loves: such a woman, it is said, loved such a man, and not obtaining
him, hanged herself; and unlawful loves having mothers for their object;
when you receive these things by hearing also, and through women, and
through figures, yea, and even through old men, (for many there put
masks upon their faces, and play the parts of women,) tell me, how will
you be able to continue chaste afterwards, these narratives, these
spectacles, these songs occupying your soul, and dreams of this sort
henceforth succeeding. For it is the nature of the soul for the most
part to raise visions of such things, as it wishes for and desires in
the daytime. Therefore when you there both see base actions, and hear
baser words, and receive indeed the wounds but do not apply the
remedies, how will not the sore naturally be increased? how will not the
disease become more intense; and in a much greater degree than in our
bodies? For if we were willing, our will admits of correction more
easily than our bodies. For there indeed drugs, and physicians, and time
are required, but here it is sufficient having but the will, to become
both good and bad. So that you have rather admitted the disorder. When
therefore we gather to us indeed the things that injure, but pay no
regard to the things that benefit, how can there ever be any health?

<span id="iv.v.v-p25"></span>On this account Paul said, “even as the
Gentiles who knew not God.” Let us be ashamed, let us be afraid, if the
Gentiles, that know not God, are often chaste. Let us turn for shame,
when we are worse than they. It is easy to achieve chastity, if we will,
if we withdraw ourselves from those things that are injurious, since it
is not even easy to avoid fornication, if we will not. For what is more
easy than to walk in the market-place? but from the excess of laziness
it is become difficult, not only in the case of women, but sometimes
even in that of men. What is more easy than to sleep? but we have made
even this difficult. Many however of the rich toss themselves through a
whole night, from their not waiting for the need of sleep, and then
sleeping. And in short nothing is difficult, when men are willing; as
nothing is easy, when they are unwilling; for we are masters of all
these things. On this account the Scripture says, “If ye be willing and
hear me.” ([Isa. i. 19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p25.1"></span>, Sept.) And again, “If ye be unwilling, and
hear not.” ([Isa. 1.20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p25.2"></span>.) So that all depends upon being willing or
unwilling. On this account we both are punished and are praised. But may
it be ours, being of those who are praised, to obtain the promised
blessings, by the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_990"></span>[345:991](1130076.htm#fr_990.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p10"></span> πλεονεξία, E.V. “covetousness.” \[The
corresponding verb is here inadequately translated “wrong.” It
designates a man who is not content with his own wife, but takes
possession of his brother’s.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_991"></span>[345:992](1130076.htm#fr_991.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p15"></span> ἐκεῖνον, i.e. the husband.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[346:993](1130076.htm#fr_992.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p18"></span> \[i.e. not designing them to religious
celibacy.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_993"></span>[346:994](1130076.htm#fr_993.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p19"></span> σχήματα διακεκλασμένα. See on [1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p19.1"></span>,
Hom. iv., where he advises the wife to please her husband by modesty and
simplicity.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[346:995](1130076.htm#fr_994.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p21"></span> \[One <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.v.v-p21.1"></span>ms</span>. has “words,” which seems to suit the
connection better.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_995"></span>[346:996](1130076.htm#fr_995.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p22"></span> Downes would read στόματος, “mouth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians 4:9,10](1130077.md)
