[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130008)  [Next](1130010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p2"></span>[Gal.
4.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p3"></span>“But I say, that so long as the heir is
a child, he differeth nothing from a bond-servant, though he is lord of
all; but is under guardians and stewards, until the term appointed of
the father. So we also when we were children, were held in bondage under
the rudiments of the world.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>The</span> word “child” in this place
denotes not age but understanding; <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md)
meaning that God had from the beginning designed for us these gifts,
but, as we yet continued childish, He let us be under the elements of
the world, that is, new moons and sabbaths, for these days are regulated
by the course of sun and moon. <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) If
then also now they bring you under law they do nothing else but lead you
backward now in the time of your perfect age and maturity. And see what
is the consequence of observing days; the Lord, the Master of the house,
the Sovereign Ruler, is thereby reduced to the rank of a servant.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p7"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>.
“But when the fulness of the time came God sent forth His Son, born of a
woman, under the Law that he might redeem them which were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p8"></span>Here he states two objects and effects
of the Incarnation, deliverance from evil and supply of good, things
which none could compass but Christ. They are these; deliverance from
the curse of the Law, and promotion to sonship. Fitly does he say, that
we might “receive,” “\[be paid,\]” implying that it was due; <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) for the promise was of old time made for
these objects to Abraham, as the Apostle has himself shown at great
length. And how does it appear that we have become sons? he has told us
one mode, in that we have put on Christ who is the Son; and now he
mentions another, in that we have received the Spirit of adoption.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p10"></span>[Gal.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>
“And because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. So that thou art no longer a bond-servant,
but a son; and if a son, then an heir through God.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p11"></span>Had not we been first made sons, we
could not have called Him Father. If then grace hath made us freemen
instead of slaves, men <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_31"></span>instead of children, heirs and sons
instead of aliens, is it not utter absurdity and stupidity to desert
this grace, and to turn away backwards?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p12"></span>[Gal.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>.
“Howbeit at that time not knowing God, ye were bondage to them which by
nature are no gods. <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) But now,
that ye have come to know God, or rather to be known of God, how turn ye
back again to the weak and beggarly rudiments whereunto ye desire to be
in bondage over again.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p14"></span>Here turning to the Gentile believers
he says that it is an idolatry, this rigid observance of days, and now
incurs a severe punishment. To enforce this, and inspire them with a
deeper anxiety, he calls the elements “not by nature Gods.” And his
meaning is,—Then indeed, as being benighted and bewildered, ye lay
grovelling upon the earth, but now that ye have known God or rather are
known of Him, how great and bitter will be the chastisement ye draw upon
you, if, after such a treatment, ye relapse into the same disease. It
was not by your own pains that ye found out God, but while ye continued
in error, He drew you to Himself. He says “weak and beggarly rudiments,”
in that they avail nothing towards the good things held out to us.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p15"></span>[Gal.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>. “Ye observe days, and months, and
seasons, and years.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p16"></span>Hence is plain that their teachers were
preaching to them not only circumcision, but also the feast-days and
new-moons.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p17"></span>[Gal.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>. “I am afraid of you, lest by any means I
have bestowed labor upon you in vain.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p18"></span>Observe the tender compassion of the
Apostle; they were shaken and he trembles and fears. And hence he has
put it so as thoroughly to shame them, “I have bestowed labor upon you,”
saying, as it were, make not vain the labors which have cost me sweat
and pain. By saying “I fear,” and subjoining the word “lest,” he both
inspires alarm, and encourages good hope. He says not “I have labored in
vain,” but “lest,” which is as much as to say, the wreck has not
happened, but I see the storm big with it; so I am in fear, yet not in
despair; ye have the power to set all right, and to return into your
former calm. Then, as it were stretching out a hand to them thus
tempest-tost, <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) he brings himself
into the midst, saying,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p20"></span>[Gal.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>. “I beseech you, brethren, be as I am; for
I am as you are.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p21"></span>This is addressed to his Jewish
disciples, and he brings his own example forward, to induce them thereby
to abandon their old customs. Though you had none other for a pattern,
he says, to look at me only would have sufficed for such a change, and
for your taking courage. Therefore gaze on me; I too was <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) once in your state of mind, especially
so; I had a burning zeal for the Law; yet afterwards I feared not to
abandon the Law, to withdraw from that rule of life. And this ye know
full well how obstinately I clung hold of Judaism, and how with yet
greater force I let it go. He does well to place this last in order: for
most men, though they are given a thousand reasons, and those just ones,
are more readily influenced by that which is like their own case, and
more firmly hold to that which they see done by others.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p23"></span>[Gal.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>. “Ye did me no wrong.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p24"></span>Observe how he again addresses them by
a title of honor, which was a reminder moreover of the doctrine of
grace. Having chid them seriously, and brought things together from all
quarters, and shown their violations of the Law, and hit them on many
sides, he gives in and conciliates them speaking more tenderly. For as
to do nothing but conciliate causes negligence, so to be constantly
talked at with sharpness sours a man; so that it is proper to observe
due proportion everywhere. See then how he excuses to them what he has
said, and shows that it proceeded not simply because he did not like
them, but from anxiety. After giving them a deep cut, he pours in this
encouragement like oil; and, showing that his words were not words of
hate or enmity, he reminds them of the love which they had evinced
toward him, mixing his self-vindication with praises. Therefore he says,
“ye did me no wrong.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p25"></span>[Gal.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>. “But ye know that because of an infirmity
of the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you the first time. And that
which was a temptation in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p26"></span>Not to have injured one is indeed no
great thing, for no man whatever would choose to hurt wantonly and
without object to annoy another who had never injured him. But for you,
not only have ye not injured me, but ye have shown me great and
inexpressible kindness, and it is impossible that one who has been
treated with such attention should speak thus from any malevolent
motive. My language then cannot be caused by ill-will; it follows, that
it proceeds <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_32"></span>from affection and solicitude. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) “Ye did me no wrong; ye know that
because of an infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you.”
What can be gentler than this holy soul, what sweeter, or more
affectionate! And the words he had already used, arose not from an
unreasoning anger, nor from a passionate emotion, but from much
solicitude. And why do I say, ye have not injured me? Rather have ye
evinced a great and sincere regard for me. For “ye know,” he says, “that
because of an infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you; and
that which was a temptation to you in my flesh ye despised not, nor
rejected.” What does he mean? While I preached to you, I was driven
about, I was scourged, I suffered a thousand deaths, yet ye thought no
scorn of me; for this is meant by “that which was a temptation to you in
my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected.” <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) Observe his spiritual skill; in the
midst of his self-vindication, he again appeals to their feelings by
showing what he had suffered for their sakes. This however, says he, did
not at all offend you, nor did ye reject me on account of my sufferings
and persecutions; or, as he now calls them, his infirmity and
temptation.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p30"></span>[Gal.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>. “But ye received me as an Angel of God.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p31"></span>Was it not then absurd in them to
receive him as an Angel of God, when he was persecuted and driven about,
and then not to receive him when pressing on them what was fitting?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p32"></span>[Gal.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>. “Where then is that gratulation of
yourselves? for I bear you witness, that, if possible, ye would have
plucked out your eyes, and given them to me. So then am I become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth?”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p33"></span>Here he shows perplexity and amazement,
and desires to learn of themselves the reason of their change. Who, says
he, hath deceived you, and caused a difference in your disposition
towards me? Are ye not the same who attended and ministered to me,
counting me more precious than your own eyes? what then has happened?
whence this dislike? whence this suspicion? Is it because I have told
you the truth? You ought on this very account to pay me increased honor
and attention; instead of which “I am become your enemy, because I tell
you the truth,”—for I can find no other reason but this. Observe too
what humbleness of mind appears in his defence of himself; he proves not
by his conduct to them, but by theirs to him that his language could not
possibly have proceeded from unkind feeling. For he says not; How is it
supposable that one, who has been scourged and driven about, and
ill-treated a thousand things for your sakes, should now have schemes
against you? But he argues from what they had reason to boast of,
saying, How can one who has been honored by you, and received as an
Angel, repay you by conduct the very opposite?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p34"></span>[Gal.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p34.1"></span>. “They zealously seek you in no good way;
nay, they desire to shut you out that ye may seek them.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p35"></span>It is a wholesome emulation <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) which leads to an imitation of virtue,
but an evil one, which seduces from virtue him who is in the right path.
And this is the object of those persons, who would deprive you of
perfect knowledge, <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) and impart to
you that which is mutilated and spurious, and this for no other purpose
than that they may occupy the rank of teachers, and degrade you, who now
stand higher than themselves, to the position of disciples. For this is
the meaning of the words “that ye may seek them.” But I, says he, desire
the reverse, that ye may become a model for them, and a pattern of a
higher perfection: a thing which actually happened when I was present
with you. Wherefore he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p38"></span>[Gal.
4.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p38.1"></span>. “But it is good to be zealously sought in
a good matter at all times, and not only when I am present with you.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p39"></span>Here he hints that his absence had been
the cause of this, and that the true blessing was for disciples to hold
right opinions not only in the presence but also in the absence of their
master. But as they had not arrived at this point of perfection, he
makes every effort to place them there.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p40"></span>[Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p40.1"></span>. “My little children, <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) of whom I am again in travail until
Christ be formed in you.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p42"></span>Observe his perplexity and
perturbation, “Brethren, I beseech you:” “My little children, of whom I
am again in travail:” He resembles a mother trembling for her children.
“Until Christ be formed in you.” Behold his paternal tenderness, behold
this despondency worthy of an Apostle. Observe what a wail he utters,
far more piercing than of a woman in travail;—Ye have defaced the
likeness, ye have destroyed the kinship, ye have changed the form, ye
need <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_33"></span>another regeneration and
refashioning; <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) nevertheless I
call you children, abortions and monsters though ye be. However, he does
not express himself in this way, but spares them, unwilling to strike,
and to inflict wound upon wound. Wise physicians do not cure those who
have fallen into a long sickness all at once, but little by little, lest
they should faint and die. And so is it with this blessed man; for these
pangs were more severe in proportion as the force of his affection was
stronger. And the offense was of no trivial kind. And as I have ever
said and ever will say, even a slight fault mars the appearance and
distorts the figure of the whole.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p45"></span>[Gal.
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p45.1"></span>. “Yea, I could wish to be present with you
now, and to change my voice.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p46"></span>Observe his warmth, his inability to
refrain himself, and to conceal these his feelings; such is the nature
of love; nor is he satisfied with words, but desires to be present with
them, and so, as he says, to change his voice, that is, to change to
lamentation, to shed tears, to turn every thing into mourning. For he
could not by letter show his tears or cries of grief, and therefore he
ardently desires to be present with them.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p47"></span>[Gal.
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p47.1"></span>. “For I am perplexed about you.” I know
not, says he, what to say, or what to think. How is it, that ye who by
dangers, which ye endured for the faith’s sake, and by miracles, which
ye performed through faith, had ascended to the highest heaven, should
suddenly be brought to such a depth of degradation as to be drawn aside
to circumcision or sabbaths, and should rely wholly upon Judaizers?
Hence in the beginning he says, “I marvel that ye are so quickly
removing,” and here, “I am perplexed about you,” as if he said, What am
I to speak? What am I to utter? What am I to think? I am bitterly
perplexed. And so he must needs weep, as the prophets do when in
perplexity; for not only admonition but mourning also is a form in which
solicitous attention is often manifested. And what he said in his speech
to those at Miletus, “By the space of three years I ceased not to warn
every one…with tears,” he says here also, “and to change my voice.”
([Acts xx. 31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p47.2"></span>.) When we find ourselves overcome by
perplexity and helplessness which come contrary to expectation, we are
driven to tears; and so Paul admonished them sharply, and endeavored to
shame them, then in turn soothed them, and lastly he wept. And this
weeping is not only a reproof but a blandishment; it does not exasperate
like reproof, nor relax like indulgent treatment, but is a mixed remedy,
and of great efficacy in the way of exhortation. Having thus softened
and powerfully engaged their hearts by his tears, he again advances to
the contest, <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) and lays down a
larger proposition, proving that the Law itself was opposed to its being
kept. Before, he produced the example of Abraham, but now (what is more
cogent) he brings forward the Law itself enjoining them not to keep
itself, but to leave off. So that, says he, you must abandon the Law, if
you would obey it, for this is its own wish: this however he does not
say expressly, but enforces it in another mode, mixing up with it an
account of facts.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p49"></span>[Gal.
4.21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p49.1"></span>. “Tell me,” he says, “ye that desire to be
under the Law, do ye not hear the Law?” <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p51"></span>He says rightly, “ye that desire,” for
the matter was not one of a proper and orderly succession of things but
of their own unseasonable contentiousness. It is the Book of Creation
which he here calls the Law, which name he often gives to the whole Old
Testament.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p52"></span>[Gal.
4.22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p52.1"></span>. “For it is written, ([Gen. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p52.2"></span>.) that Abraham had two sons, one by the
hand-maid and the other by the freewoman.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p53"></span>He returns again to Abraham, not in the
way of repetition, but, inasmuch as the Patriarch’s fame was great among
the Jews, to show that the types had their origin from thence, and that
present events were pictured aforetime in him. Having previously shown
that the Galatians were sons of Abraham, now, in that the Patriarch’s
sons were not of equal dignity, one being by a bondwoman, the other by a
free-woman, he shows that they were not only his sons, but sons in the
same sense as he that was freeborn and noble. Such is the power of
Faith.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p54"></span>[Gal.
4.23](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p54.1"></span>. “Howbeit the son by the handmaid is born
after the flesh; but the son by the freewoman is born through promise.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p55"></span>What is the meaning of “after the
flesh?” Having said that Faith united us to Abraham, and it having
seemed incredible to his hearers, that those who were not begotten by
Abraham should be called his sons, he proves that this paradox had
actually happened long ago; for that Isaac, born not according to the
order of nature, nor the law of marriage, nor the power of the flesh,
was yet truly his own son. He was the issue of bodies that were dead,
and of a womb that was dead; his conception was not by the flesh, nor
his birth by the seed, for the womb was dead both through age and
barren<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_34"></span>ness, but the Word of God fashioned Him.
Not so in the case of the bondman; He came by virtue of the laws of
nature, and after the manner of marriage. Nevertheless, he that was not
according to the flesh was more honorable than he that was born after
the flesh. Therefore let it not disturb you that ye are not born after
the flesh; for from the very reason that ye are not so born, are ye most
of all Abraham’s kindred. The being born after the flesh renders one not
more honorable, but less so, for a birth not after the flesh is more
marvellous and more spiritual. And this is plain from the case of those
who were born of old time; Ishmael, for instance, who was born according
to the flesh, was not only a bondman, but was cast out of his father’s
house; but Isaac, who was born according to the promise, being a true
son and free, was lord of all.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p56"></span>[Gal.
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p56.1"></span>. “Which things contain an allegory.” <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p59"></span>Contrary to usage, he calls a type an
allegory; his meaning is as follows; this history not only declares that
which appears on the face of it, but announces somewhat farther, whence
it is called an allegory. And what hath it announced? no less than all
the things now present.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p60"></span>[Gal.
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p60.1"></span>. “For these women,” he says, “are two
covenants; one from mount Sinai, bearing children unto bondage, which is
Hagar.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p61"></span>“These:” who? the mothers of those
children, Sarah and Hagar; and what are they? Two covenants, two laws.
As the names of the women were given in the history, he abides by this
designation of the two races, showing how much follows from the very
names. How from the names?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p62"></span>[Gal.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p62.1"></span>. “Now this Hagar is Mount Sinai in
Arabia:”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p63"></span>The bond-woman was called Hagar, and
“Hagar” is the word for Mount Sinai in the language of that
country. <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) So that it is necessary
that all who are born of the Old Covenant should be bondmen, for that
mountain where the Old Covenant was delivered hath a name in common with
the bondwoman. And it includes Jerusalem, for this is the meaning of,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p65"></span>[Gal.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p65.1"></span>. “And answereth to Jerusalem that now is.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p66"></span>That is, it borders on, and is
contiguous to it. <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p68"></span>[Gal.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p68.1"></span>. “For she is in bondage with her
children.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p69"></span>What follows from hence? Not only that
she was in bondage and brought forth bondmen, but that this Covenant is
so too, whereof the bondwoman was a type. For Jerusalem is adjacent to
the mountain of the same name with the bondwoman, and in this mountain
the Covenant was delivered. Now where is the type of Sarah?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p70"></span>[Gal.
4.26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p70.1"></span>. “But Jerusalem that is above is free.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p71"></span>Those therefore, who are born of her
are not bondmen. Thus the type of the Jerusalem below was Hagar, as is
plain from the mountain being so called; but of that which is above is
the Church. Nevertheless he is not content with these types, but adds
the testimony of Isaiah to what he has spoken. Having said that
Jerusalem which is above “is our Mother,” and having given that name to
the Church, he cites the suffrage of the Prophet in his favor,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p72"></span>[Gal.
4.27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p72.1"></span>. “Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not,
break forth and cry, thou that travailest not, for more are the children
of the desolate than of her which hath the husband.” ([Isa. liv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.iv-p72.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p73"></span>Who is this who before was “barren,”
and “desolate?” Clearly it is the Church of the Gentiles, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) that was before deprived of the
knowledge of God? Who, “she which hath the husband?” plainly the
Synagogue. Yet the barren woman surpassed her in the number of her
children, for the other embraces one nation, but the children of the
Church have filled the country of the Greeks and of the Barbarians, the
earth and sea, the whole habitable world. Observe how Sarah by acts, and
the Prophet by words, have described the events about to befal us.
Observe too, that he whom Isaiah called barren, Paul hath proved to have
many children, which also happened typically in the case of Sarah. For
she too, although barren, became the mother of a numerous progeny. This
however does not suffice Paul, but he carefully follows out the mode
whereby the barren woman became a mother, that in this particular
likewise the type might harmonize with the truth. Wherefore he adds

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p75"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_35"></span>[Gal.
4.28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p75.1"></span>. “Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are
children of promise.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p76"></span>It is not merely that the Church was
barren like Sarah, or became a mother of many children like her, but she
bore them in the way Sarah did. As it was not nature but the promise of
God which rendered Sarah a mother, \[for the word of God which said, “At
the time appointed I will return unto thee, and Sarah shall have a son,”
([Gen. xviii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p76.1"></span>.) this entered into the womb and formed
the babe,\] so also in our regeneration it is not nature, but the Words
of God spoken by the Priest, <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md)
(the faithful know them,) which in the Bath of water as in a sort of
womb, form and regenerate him who is baptized.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p78"></span>Wherefore if we are sons of the barren
woman, then are we free. But what kind of freedom, it might be objected,
is this, when the Jews seize and scourge the believers, and those who
have this pretence of liberty are persecuted? for these things then
occurred, in the persecution of the faithful. Neither let this disturb
you, he replies, this also is anticipated in the type, for Isaac, who
was free, was persecuted by Ishmael the bondman. Wherefore he adds,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p79"></span>[Gal.
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#030.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p79.1"></span>. “But as then he that was born after the
flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
Howbeit what saith the Scripture? ([Gen. xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p79.2"></span>.) Cast out the handmaid and her son: for
the son of the handmaid shall not inherit with the son of the
freewoman.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p80"></span>What! does all this consolation consist
in showing that freemen are persecuted by bond-men? By no means, he
says, I do not stop here, listen to what follows, and then, if you be
not pusillanimous under persecution, you will be sufficiently comforted.
And what is it that follows? “Cast out the son of the handmaid, for he
shall not inherit with the son of the freewoman.” Behold the reward of
tyranny for a season, and of reckleness out of season! the son is cast
out of his father’s house, and becomes, together with his mother, an
exile and a wanderer. And consider too the wisdom of the remark; for he
says not that he was cast forth merely because he persecuted, but that
he should not be heir. For this punishment was not exacted from him on
account of his temporary persecution, (for that would have been of
little moment, and nothing to the point,) but he was not suffered to
participate in the inheritance provided for the son. And this proves
that, putting the persecution aside, this very thing had been typified
from the beginning, and did not originate in the persecution, but in the
purpose of God. Nor does he say, “the son of Abraham shall not be heir,”
but, “the son of the handmaid,” distinguishing him by his inferior
descent. Now Sarah was barren, and so is the Gentile Church; <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) observe how the type is preserved in
every particular, as the former, through all the by-gone years,
conceived not, and in extreme old age became a mother, so the latter,
when the fulness of time is come, brings forth. And this the prophets
have proclaimed, saying, “Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break
forth and cry, thou that travailest not; for more are the children of
the desolate than of her which hath the husband.” And hereby they intend
the Church; for she knew not God, but as soon as she knew Him, she
surpassed the fruitful synagogue. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p83"></span>[Gal.
4.31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p83.1"></span>. “Wherefore, brethren, we are not children
of a handmaid but of the freewoman.”

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p84"></span>He turns and discusses this on all
sides, desiring to prove that what had taken place was no novelty, but
had been before typified many ages ago. How then can it be otherwise
than absurd for those who had been set apart so long and who had
obtained freedom, willingly to subject themselves to the yoke of
bondage?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p85"></span>Next he states another inducement to
them to abide in his doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[30:98](1130009.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p5"></span> \[“This reference of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>νήπιος</span> to mental
immaturity is quite in opposition to the context.”—Meyer. “The heir in
his nonage represents the Jewish people and the state of the world
before Christ.”—Schaff. So Meyer: “The <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>κληρονόμος νήπιος</span> represents the
Christians as a body regarded in their earlier pre-Christian
condition.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_98"></span>[30:99](1130009.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p6"></span> \[This interpretation is rejected by
Schaff, Meyer, Ellicott, Lightfoot *et al*. Schaff says: “‘Elements’
here represents the religion before Christ as an elementary religion
full of external rites and ceremonies. \* \* Comp. [Gal.
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>, for a specimen.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_99"></span>[30:100](1130009.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p9"></span> \[“The proposition here (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>πό</span>) simply means
to receive from or at the hands of anyone.”—Meyer.—But Lightfoot holds
that <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p9.3"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p9.4"></span>πο λάβωμεν</span> cannot
be the same as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p9.5"></span>λάβωμεν</span>, the simple verb.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_100"></span>[31:101](1130009.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p13"></span> \[“It is clear from the context that
here the apostle is not speaking of the Jewish race alone but of the
heathen world also before Christ. He distinctly refers to their previous
idolatrous worship ([Gal. 4.8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>.) and describes their adoption of Jewish
ritualism as a ‘return’ to the weak and beggarly discipline of
childhood. \* \* \* Heathenism had been in respect to the ‘ritualistic’
element, which is the meeting-point of Judaism and heathenism, a
disciplinary training like Judaism. They were made up of precepts and
ordinances, as opposed to ‘grace’ and ‘promise,’ and in an imperfect way
they might do the same work. They might by multiplying transgression and
begetting a conviction of it prepare the way for liberty in
Christ.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_101"></span>[31:102](1130009.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p19"></span> \[“Paul in the following paragraph
([Gal. 4.12-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>.) interrupts his argument for a moment by
an affectionate appeal to the feelings of the Galatians.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_102"></span>[31:103](1130009.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p22"></span> \[“<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>Εγενόμην</span> must be supplied in the
second clause and not <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p22.3"></span>ἢ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p22.4"></span>μην</span>as Chrysostom would understand:
Become as I, free from Judaism, for I also have become as you. For when
I abandoned Judaism I became as a Gentile and put myself on the same
footing with you.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_103"></span>[32:104](1130009.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p27"></span> \[“‘Ye did me no wrong’ probably
means: I have no personal ground of complaint.”—Schaff and
Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_104"></span>[32:105](1130009.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p28"></span> \[“‘On account of some weakness of the
flesh,’ means he was compelled by reason of bodily weakness to make a
stay there which did not form part of his plan, and during that forced
sojourn he preached there.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p29"></span>“He was detained there by some bodily
infirmity or sickness and was thus induced to preach the
Gospel.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_105"></span>[32:106](1130009.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p36"></span> \[This word does not here mean “they
vie with you,” as Chrysostom interprets it, but “they zealously seek you
or pay court to you,” ([1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p36.1"></span>.).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_106"></span>[32:107](1130009.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p37"></span> \[“They desire to shut you out” (not
from a state of true knowledge, as Chrysostom interprets) but “from
other teachers,” anti-judaizing teachers, (according to Meyer) or from
me (Paul) and so virtually from Christ Himself (according to Schaff) or
from Christ (Lightfoot).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_107"></span>[32:108](1130009.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p41"></span> \[“A mode of address common in St.
John but nowhere else found in St. Paul.”—Lightfoot. “It expresses
Paul’s tenderness and their feebleness.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_108"></span>[33:109](1130009.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p43"></span> \[“I travailed with you once in
bringing you to Christ. By your relapse you have renewed a mother’s
pangs in me.”—Lightfoot.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p44"></span>“‘Until Christ be formed in you,’ is
not an inversion of the metaphor he has begun with, but means, ‘till you
have taken the form of Christ as the embryo develops into the child.’”—
Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_109"></span>[33:110](1130009.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p48"></span> \[The digression which contains his
“affectionate appeal” (see note above) ends with [Gal.
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p48.1"></span>, after which he resumes—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_110"></span>[33:111](1130009.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p50"></span> \[“The Apostle resumes his argument
for the superiority of the Gospel over the Law and illustrates the
difference of the two by an allegorical interpretation of the history of
Hagar and Sarah.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_111"></span>[34:112](1130009.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p57"></span> \[“The story of Hagar and Sarah has
another (namely a figurative, typical) meaning besides (not instead of)
the literal or historical. Paul does not deny the fact but makes it the
bearer of a general idea which was more fully expressed in two
covenants. He uses allegorical here in a sense similar to the word
“typical” in [1 Cor. x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p57.1"></span>.”—Schaff.—G.A.\]

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p58"></span>\[See on this difficult passage
Schaff’s *Excursus in Com.* and Lightfoot’s *Excursus* xiii. *Com.* p.
368.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_112"></span>[34:113](1130009.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p64"></span> \[So Meyer: “In Arabia the name Hagar
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p64.1"></span>τὸ ῞Αγαρ</span>)
signifies Mt. Sinai.” But Schaff says: “It cannot be satisfactorily
proven that the name Hagar was an Arabic designation for Mt. Sinai, as
the testimonies of Chrysostom and the traveler Harant are isolated and
unconfirmed. The shorter reading, ‘For Sinai is a mountain in Arabia’
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p64.2"></span>το γὰρ Σινᾶ ὄρος
ἐστίν ἐν τῇ ᾽Αραβί& 139·</span>) given by the Sinaitic and other <span
class="c16"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p64.3"></span>mss.</span> and preferred
by Lachmann, Tischendorf and Lightfoot (*Excursus* p. 361 of *Com.*) is
quite intelligible and easily gives rise to the longer reading.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_113"></span>[34:114](1130009.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p67"></span> \[“This interpretation of Chrysostom
is hardly the right one. The subject of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p67.1"></span>συνστοιχεῖ</span> is Hagar and not Mt.
Sinai—a view which runs counter to the context. It means that Hagar
belongs to the same category with the present Jerusalem, is like it in
that she was a bondwoman as Jerusalem with its children is also in
bondage.” Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_114"></span>[34:115](1130009.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p74"></span> \[“Against this view of Chrysostom it
may be urged that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.1"></span>ἣ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.2"></span>τις ἐστὶ μήτηρ ἡμῶν</span> (which is our
mother) is proved by (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.3"></span>γὰρ</span>). The passage of the O.T. quoted
in [Gal. 4.27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.4"></span> and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.5"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p74.6"></span>μῶν</span> includes ‘all’
Christians.”—Meyer. (See his long and good note *in loc*.)—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_115"></span>[35:116](1130009.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p77"></span> \[“Chrysostom assumes the prevailing
conception of a real priesthood and sacrifice, baptismal regeneration,
etc.”—Schaff, *Prolegomena*, p. 8.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_116"></span>[35:117](1130009.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p81"></span> \[See note above on this
interpretation.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_117"></span>[35:118](1130009.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p82"></span> \[“Before the emergence of the
Christian people of God, the heavenly Jerusalem was still unpeopled,
childless, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p82.1"></span>στεῖρα</span>, ‘barren,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.iv-p82.2"></span>οὐ τίκτουσα</span> ‘not
bearing,’ and so like Sarah before she became the mother of Isaac. But
with the emergence of the Christian people of God this heavenly
Jerusalem has become a fruitful mother richer in children than the
Jerusalem that now is.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians 5:1](1130010.md)
