[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130116)  [Next](1130118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="v.iv.v-Page_492"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.v-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv.v-p2.2"></span>[2 Timothy ii.
11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p3"></span>“It is a faithful saying: for if we be dead
with Him, we shall also live with Him: if we suffer, we shall also reign
with Him: if we deny Him, He also will deny us: if we believe not, yet
He abideth faithful: He cannot deny Himself. Of these things put them in
remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about
words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.1"></span>Many</span> of the weaker sort of men give up
the effort of faith, and do not endure the deferring of their hope. They
seek things present, and form from these their judgment of the future.
When therefore their lot here was death, torments, and chains, and yet
he says, they shall come to eternal life, they would not have believed,
but would have said, “What sayest thou? When I live, I die; and when I
die, I live? Thou promisest nothing on earth, and dost thou give it in
heaven? Little things thou dost not bestow; and dost thou offer great
things?” That none therefore may argue thus, he places beyond doubt the
proof of these things, laying it down beforehand already, and giving
certain signs. For, “remember,” he says, “that Jesus Christ was raised
from the dead”; that is, rose again after death. And now showing the
same thing he says, “It is a faithful saying,” that he who has attained
a heavenly life, will attain eternal life also. Whence is it “faithful”?
Because, he says, “If we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him.”
For say, shall we partake with Him in things laborious and painful; and
shall we not in things beneficial? But not even a man would act thus,
nor, if one had chosen to suffer affliction and death with him, would he
refuse to him a share in his rest, if he had attained it. But how are we
“dead with Him”? This death he means both of that in the Laver, and that
in sufferings. For he says, “Bearing about in the body the dying of the
Lord Jesus” ([2 Cor. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p4.2"></span>.); and, “We are buried with Him by baptism into
death” ([Rom. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p4.3"></span>.); and, “Our old man is crucified with Him”;
and, “We have been planted together in the likeness of His death.”
([Rom. 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.v-p4.4"></span>..md) But
he also speaks here of death by trials: and that more especially, for he
was also suffering trials when he wrote it. And this is what he says,
“If we have suffered death on His account, shall we not live on His
account? This is not to be doubted. ‘If we suffer, we shall also reign
with Him,’” not absolutely, we shall reign, but “if we suffer,” showing
that it is not enough to die once, (the blessed man himself died daily,)
but there was need of much patient endurance; and especially Timothy had
need of it. For tell me not, he says, of your first sufferings, but that
you continue to suffer.

<span id="v.iv.v-p5"></span>Then on the other side he exhorts him, not
from the good, but from the evil. For if wicked men were to partake of
the same things, this would be no consolation. And if having endured
they were to reign with Him, but not having endured were not indeed to
reign with Him, but were to suffer no worse evil, though this were
terrible, yet it would not be enough to affect most men with concern.
Wherefore he speaks of something more dreadful still. If we deny Him, He
will also deny us. So then there is a retribution not of good things
only, but of the contrary. And consider what it is probable that he will
suffer, who is denied in that kingdom. “Whosoever shall deny Me, him
will I also deny.” ([Matt. x. 33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p5.1"></span>.) And the retribution is not equal, though it
seems so expressed. For we who deny Him are men, but He who denies us is
God; and how great is the distance between God and man, it is needless
to say.

<span id="v.iv.v-p6"></span>Besides, we injure ourselves; Him we cannot
injure. And to show this, he has added, “If we believe not, He abideth
faithful: He cannot deny Himself”: that is, if we believe not that He
rose again, He is not injured by it. He is faithful and unshaken,
whether we say so or not. If then He is not at all injured by our
denying Him, it is for nothing else than for our benefit that He desires
our confession. For He abideth the same, whether we deny Him or not. He
cannot deny Himself, that is, His own Being. We may say that He is not;
though such is not the fact. It is not in His nature, it is not possible
for Him not to be, that is, to go into nonentity. <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365.md) His subsistence always abides,
always is. Let us not therefore be so affected, as if we could gratify
or could injure Him. But lest any one should think that Timothy needed
this advice, he has added,

<span id="v.iv.v-p8"></span>“Of these things put them in remembrance,
charging them before the Lord, that they strive <span id="page_493">p.
493</span> <span id="v.iv.v-Page_493"></span>not about words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.” It is an overawing thing
to call God to witness what we say, for if no one would dare to set at
nought the testimony of man when appealed to, much less when the appeal
is to God. If any one, for instance, entering into a contract, or making
his will, chooses to call witnesses worthy of credit, would any transfer
the things to those who are not included? Surely not. And even if he
wishes it, yet fearing the credibility of the witnesses, he avoids it.
What is “charging them before the Lord”? he calls God to witness both
what was said, and what was done.

<span id="v.iv.v-p9"></span>“That they strive not about words to no
profit;” and not merely so, but “to the subverting of the hearers.” Not
only is there no gain from it, but much harm. “Of these things then put
them in remembrance,” and if they despise thee, God will judge them. But
why does he admonish them not to strive about words? He knows that it is
a dainty <span id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366.md) thing, and that the
human soul is ever prone to contend and to dispute about words. To guard
against this, he has not only charged them “not to strive about words,”
but to render his discourse more alarming, he adds, “to the subverting
of the hearers.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p11"></span>[2 Tim.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p11.1"></span>.
“Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p12"></span>Everywhere this “not being ashamed”! And
why is he ever so careful to guard him against shame? Because it was
natural for many to be ashamed both of Paul himself, as being a
tent-maker, and of the preaching, since its teachers perished. For
Christ had been crucified, himself was about to be beheaded, Peter was
crucified with his head downwards, and these things they suffered from
audacious and despicable men. Because such men were in power, he says,
“Be not ashamed”; that is, fear not to do anything tending to godliness,
though it be necessary to submit to slavery or any other suffering. For
how does any one become approved? By being “a workman that needeth not
to be ashamed.” As the workman is not ashamed of any work, so neither
should he be ashamed who labors in the Gospel. He should submit to
anything.

<span id="v.iv.v-p13"></span>“Rightly dividing the word of truth.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p14"></span>This he hath well said. For many distort
it, and pervert it in every way, and many additions are made to it. He
has not said directing it, but “rightly dividing,” that is, cut away
what is spurious, with much vehemence assail it, and extirpate it. With
the sword of the Spirit cut off from your preaching, as from a thong,
whatever is superfluous and foreign to it.

<span id="v.iv.v-p15"></span>[2 Tim.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p15.1"></span>.
“And shun profane novelties of speech.” <span
id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367.md)

<span id="v.iv.v-p17"></span>For they will not stop there. For when
anything new has been introduced, it is ever producing innovations, and
the error of him who has once left the safe harbor is infinite, and
never stops.

<span id="v.iv.v-p18"></span>“For they will increase unto more
ungodliness,” he says,

<span id="v.iv.v-p19"></span>[2 Tim.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p19.1"></span>.
“And their word will eat as doth a canker.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p20"></span>It is an evil not to be restrained, not
curable by any medicine, it destroys the whole frame. He shows that
novelty of doctrine is a disease, and worse than a disease. And here he
implies that they are incorrigible, and that they erred not weakly but
willfully.

<span id="v.iv.v-p21"></span>“Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus,”

<span id="v.iv.v-p22"></span>[2 Tim.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p22.1"></span>.
“Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is
past already, and overthrow the faith of some.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p23"></span>He has well said, “They will increase unto
more ungodliness.” For it appears indeed to be a solitary evil, but see
what evils spring out of it. For if the Resurrection is already past,
not only do we suffer loss in being deprived of that great glory, but
because judgment is taken away, and retribution also. For if the
Resurrection is past, retribution also is past. The good therefore have
reaped persecutions and afflictions, and the wicked have not been
punished, nay verily, they live in great pleasure. <span
id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368.md) It were better to say that there is
no resurrection, than that it is already past.

<span id="v.iv.v-p25"></span>“And overthrow,” he says, “the faith of
some.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p26"></span>“Of some,” not of all. For if there is no
resurrection, faith is subverted. Our preaching is vain, nor is Christ
risen; and if He is not risen, neither was He born, nor has He ascended
into heaven. Observe how this error, while it seems to oppose the
doctrine of the Resurrection, draws after it many other evils. What
then, says one, ought we to do nothing for those who are
subverted? <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369.md)

<span id="v.iv.v-p28"></span>[2 Tim.
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p28.1"></span>.
“Nevertheless,” he says, “the foundation of God standeth sure, having
this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are His. And, Let every one that
nameth the name of the Lord <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370.md)
depart from iniquity.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p30"></span>He shows that even before they were
subverted, they were not firm. For otherwise, they <span
id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span id="v.iv.v-Page_494"></span>would not
have been overthrown at the first attack, as Adam <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371.md) was firm before the commandment.
For those who are fixed not only are not harmed through deceivers, but
are even admired.

<span id="v.iv.v-p32"></span>And he calls it “sure,” and a “foundation”;
so ought we to adhere to the faith; “having this seal, The Lord knoweth
them that are His.” What is this? He has taken it from
Deuteronomy; <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372.md) that is, Firm
souls stand fixed and immovable. But whence are they manifest? From
having these characters inscribed upon their actions, from their being
known by God, and not perishing with the world, and from their departing
from iniquity.

<span id="v.iv.v-p34"></span>“Let every one,” he says, “that nameth the
name of the Lord depart from iniquity.”

<span id="v.iv.v-p35"></span>These are the distinguishing marks of the
foundation. As <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373.md) a foundation
is shown to be firm, and as letters are inscribed upon a stone that the
letters may be significant. But these letters are shown by works,
“Having,” he says, “this seal” fixed thereon, “Let every one that nameth
the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.” Thus if any one is
unrighteous, he is not of the foundation. So that this too is of the
seal, not to do iniquity.

<span id="v.iv.v-p37"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.v-p37.1"></span>Moral.</span> Let us not therefore put off from
us the royal seal and token, that we may not be of those who are not
sealed, that we may not be unsound, that we may be firmly grounded, that
we may be of the foundation, and not carried to and fro. This marks them
that are of God, that they depart from iniquity. For how can any one be
of God Who is just, if he does iniquity, if by his works he opposes Him,
if he insults Him by his misdeeds? Again we are speaking against
injustice, and again we have many that are hostile to us. For this
affection, like a tyrant, has seized upon the souls of all, and, what is
worse, not by necessity nor violence, but by persuasion and gentle
insinuation, and they are grateful for their slavery. And this is indeed
the misery; for if they were held by constraint and not by love, they
would soon depart. And whence is it, that a thing which is most bitter,
appears to be sweet? whence is it that righteousness, which is a most
sweet thing, becomes bitter? It is the fault of our senses. Thus some
have thought honey bitter, and have taken with pleasure other things
that were noxious. And the cause is not in the nature of things, but in
the perverseness of the sufferers. The judging faculty of the soul <span
id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374.md) is disordered. <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375.md) Just as a balance, if its beam be
unsteady, <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376.md) moves round, and
does not show accurately the weight of things placed in it; so the soul,
if it has not the beam of its own thoughts fixed, and firmly riveted to
the law of God, being carried round and drawn down, will not be able to
judge aright of actions.

<span id="v.iv.v-p41"></span>For if any one will examine carefully, he
will perceive the great bitterness of injustice, not to those who suffer
it, but to those who practice it, and to these more than to the others.
And let us not speak of things future, but for the present of things
here. Hath it not battles, judgments, condemnation, ill will, abuse?
what is more bitter than these? Hath it not enmities, and wars, and
accusations? what is more bitter than these? Hath it not conscience
continually scourging and gnawing us? If it were possible, I could wish
to draw out from the body the soul of the unrighteous man, and you would
see it pale and trembling, ashamed, hiding its head, anxiously fearful,
and self-condemned. For should we sink down into the very depths of
wickedness, the judging faculty of the mind <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377.md) is not destroyed, but remains
unbribed. And no one pursues injustice thinking it to be good, but he
invents excuses, and has recourse to every artifice of words to shift
off the accusation. But he cannot get it off his conscience. Here indeed
the speciousness of words, the corruption of rulers, and multitudes of
flatterers, is often able to throw justice into the shade, but within,
the conscience <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378.md) has nothing of
this sort, there are no flatterers there, no wealth to corrupt the
judge. For the faculty of judging is naturally implanted in us by God,
and what comes from God cannot be so corrupted. But uneasy slumbers,
thick-coming fancies, and the frequent recollections of guilt, destroy
our repose. Has any one, for instance, unjustly deprived another of his
house? not only is he that is robbed rendered unhappy, but the man who
robbed him. If he is persuaded of a future judgment, (if indeed any one
is so persuaded,) he groans exceedingly, and is in misery. But if he
believes not in futurity, yet he blushes for shame; or rather there is
no man, whether Greek, Jew, or heretic, who is not afraid of a judgment
to come.

<span id="v.iv.v-p51"></span><span id="page_495">p. 495</span> <span
id="v.iv.v-Page_495"></span>And although he is not a philosopher with
respect to futurity; yet he fears and trembles at what may befall him
here, lest he may have some retribution in his property, his children,
his family, or his life. For many such visitations God inflicts. For
since the doctrine of the Resurrection is not sufficient to bring all
men to reason, He affords even here many proofs of His righteous
judgment, and exhibits them to the world. One who has gained wrongfully
is without children, another falls in war, another is maimed in his
body, another loses his son. He considers these things, on these his
imagination dwells, and he lives in continual fear.

<span id="v.iv.v-p52"></span>Know you not what the unrighteous suffer?
Is there no bitterness in these things? And were there nothing of this
sort, do not all condemn him, and hate and abhor him, and think him less
rational than a beast, even those who are themselves unrighteous? For if
they condemn themselves, much more do they condemn another, calling him
rapacious, fraudulent, a pestilent fellow. What pleasure then can he
enjoy? He has only the heavier care and anxiety to preserve his gains,
and the being more anxious and troubled. For the more wealth any one
gets about him, the more painful watchfulness does he store up for
himself. Then what are the curses of those whom he has wronged, their
pleadings against him? <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379.md) And
what, if sickness should befall him? For it is impossible for one, who
has fallen into sickness, however atheistically he may be inclined, not
to be anxious about these things, not to be thoughtful, when he is
unable to do anything. For as long as we are here, the soul enjoying
itself, does not tolerate painful thoughts: but when it is about to take
its flight from the body, then a greater fear constrains it, as entering
into the very portals of judgment. Even robbers, whilst they are in
prison, live without fear, but when they are brought to the very curtain
of the court, <span id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380.md) they sink with
terror. For when the fear of death is urgent, like a fire consuming all
things besides, it obliges the soul to philosophize, and to take thought
for futurity. The desire of wealth, the love of gain, and of bodily
pleasures, no longer possesses it. These things passing away like
clouds, leave the judging faculty clear, and grief entering in softens
the hard heart. For nothing is so opposite to philosophy, as a life of
pleasure; nor, on the other hand, is anything so favorable to philosophy
as affliction. Consider what the covetous man will then be. For, “an
hour of affliction,” it is said, “maketh a man forget much pleasure.”
([Ecclesiasticus 2.27](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#027.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p54.1"></span>.) What will then be his state, when he
considers those whom he has robbed, and injured, and defrauded, when he
sees others reaping the fruits of his grasping, and himself going to pay
the penalty? For it cannot, indeed it cannot be, that when fallen into
sickness he should not reflect upon these things. For often the soul of
itself is distracted with agony and terror. What a bitterness is this,
tell me! And with every sickness these things must be endured. And what
will he not suffer when he sees others punished or put to death?

<span id="v.iv.v-p55"></span>These things await him here. And as to what
he must undergo hereafter, it is not possible to say what punishment,
what vengeance, what torments, what racks are reserved for him There.
These things we declare. “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.”
([Luke viii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#008.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p55.1"></span>.) We are for ever discoursing of these things,
not willingly, but of necessity. For we could wish there were no
obligation to mention such things at all. But since it must be, we would
at least, by a little medicine, deliver you from your disease, and
restore you to health. But whilst you remain in this sickness, it would
show a mean and weak spirit, not to say cruelty and inhumanity, to
desist from the healing treatment. For if when physicians despair of our
bodies, we beseech them not to neglect us, not to cease to our last
breath applying whatever is in their power, shall we not much more
exhort ourselves? For perhaps when we have come to the very gates of
Hell, the vestibule of wickedness itself, it may be possible to recover,
to renew our strength, to lay hold on eternal life! How many, who have
heard ten times and remained insensible, have afterwards at one hearing
been converted! Or rather, not at one hearing; for though they seemed
insensible at the ten discourses, yet they gained something, and
afterwards showed all at once abundant fruit. For as a tree may receive
ten strokes, and not fall; then afterwards be brought down all at once
by a single blow: yet it is not done by that one blow, but by the ten
which made that last successful. And this is known to him who sees the
root, though he who takes his view of the trunk above knows it not. So
it is in this case. And thus often, when physicians have applied many
remedies, no benefit is perceived; but afterwards some one comes in and
effects an entire cure. Yet it is not the work of him alone, but of
these who have already reduced the disorder. So that, if now we do not
bring forth the fruits of hearing the word, yet hereafter we shall. For
that we shall bring them forth, I am fully persuaded. For it is not,
indeed it is not possible that such eager desire, such a love of
hearing, should fail of its effect. God forbid! But may we all, having
become worthy of the admonitions of Christ, obtain the everlasting
blessings, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[492:1366](1130117.htm#fr_1365.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p7"></span> <span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.v-p7.1"></span>ms</span>. Aug. has ἡμεῖς κᾂν λέγωμεν ὅτι οὐκ
ἔστιν (εἰ καὶ πρᾶγμα οὕτως ἔχει οὐδὲ γὰρ οἰδαμεν τί τὴν οὐσίαν ἐστὶν)
ὅμως οὐκ ἔχει φύσιν μὴ εἶναι· τουτέστιν, οὐ δυνατὸν εἰς τὸ μὴ εἶναι
χωρῆσαι, which may be thus rendered by reading τὴν οὐσίαν τί for τί τὴν
οὐσίαν. “Though we may say that He is not, if such statement means
anything, (for we do not know what ‘being’ is,) yet He hath it not in
His nature not to be, that is, He cannot pass into nonentity.” Or
reading only τὸ πρᾶγμα, “if the case is really so, (in some sense,) in
that we do not know what He is in essence,” &c. But Hales was perhaps
right in finding no meaning in the words.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[493:1367](1130117.htm#fr_1366.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p10"></span> λίχνον.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[493:1368](1130117.htm#fr_1367.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p16"></span> Gr. καινοφωνίας, for κενοφωνίας.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[493:1369](1130117.htm#fr_1368.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p24"></span> Old Lat. here has, “so then the just have
suffered tribulations and griefs in vain. But that is so far from being
the truth, that contrariwise even in this life the good are fed with
their own hopes, and have a foretaste of eternal felicity, persevering
always with a serene and tranquil spirit, and the wicked, persecuted by
the scourge of their own conscience, begin to suffer even here what they
are to suffer for ever.” But this seems an interpolation. See, however,
on [Rom. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p24.1"></span>, Hom. ix.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[493:1370](1130117.htm#fr_1369.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p27"></span> al. “Thus much of those who are subverted;
but of those who are not so, what says he?”

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[493:1371](1130117.htm#fr_1370.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p29"></span> E.V. “of Christ.”

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[494:1372](1130117.htm#fr_1371.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p31"></span> So Sav., but B. and one Lat., “as neither
Adam.” Another Lat. has “neither was Adam before the attack”; as he says
on [Rom. vii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p31.1"></span>, Hom. xii. “neither was the Tree the cause.”

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[494:1373](1130117.htm#fr_1372.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p33"></span> [Num. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p33.1"></span>?

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[494:1374](1130117.htm#fr_1373.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p36"></span> Downes prefers the reading of <span
class="c16"><span id="v.iv.v-p36.1"></span>ms</span>. Aug., “Such an
one, as a foundation, is firmly fixed, having this seal stamped on him.
Well said he, ‘seal.’ For as when one writes on a stone, one writes that
the characters may signify somewhat, so he that hath these characters in
himself is made manifest by works. ‘And let,’” &c., which seems better.

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[494:1375](1130117.htm#fr_1374.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p38"></span> ψυχῆς.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[494:1376](1130117.htm#fr_1375.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p39"></span> B. reads Νοσεῖ, which Hales had
conjectured. Sav. has Νόει, “consider the judging faculty.”

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[494:1377](1130117.htm#fr_1376.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p40"></span> παρασαλευομένην. He seems to mean, “liable
to slip toward one side.”

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[494:1378](1130117.htm#fr_1377.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p42"></span> τοῦ νοῦ, which he seems to distinguish
here from the soul. See [Rom. 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md), [1
Cor. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.iv.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[494:1379](1130117.htm#fr_1378.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p43"></span> “In the corrupted currents of this world

<span id="v.iv.v-p44"></span>Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice,

<span id="v.iv.v-p45"></span>And oft ‘tis seen, the wicked prize itself

<span id="v.iv.v-p46"></span>Buys out the law: but ‘tis not so above—

<span id="v.iv.v-p47"></span>There is no shuffling—there the action lies

<span id="v.iv.v-p48"></span>In its true nature–and we ourselves
compell’d

<span id="v.iv.v-p49"></span>E’en in the teeth and forehead of offense

<span id="v.iv.v-p50"></span>To give in evidence.”—Hamlet, [Act
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#000.md)<span id="v.iv.v-p50.1"></span>
sc. 3.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[495:1380](1130117.htm#fr_1379.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p53"></span> ἐντυχίαι.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[495:1381](1130117.htm#fr_1380.md) <span
id="v.iv.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p54"></span> παραπέτασμα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy 2:20,21](1130118.md)
