[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130009)  [Next](1130011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-Page_36"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>[Gal.
5.1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p3"></span>*“With freedom did Christ set us free;
stand fast therefore* <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) *.”*

<span id="iii.iii.v-p6"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p6.1"></span>Have</span> ye wrought your own deliverance,
that ye run back again to the dominion ye were under before? It is
Another who hath redeemed you, it is Another who hath paid the ransom
for you. Observe in how many ways he leads them away from the error of
Judaism; by showing, first, that it was the extreme of folly for those,
who had become free instead of slaves, to desire to become slaves
instead of free; secondly, that they would be convicted of neglect and
ingratitude to their Benefactor, in despising Him who had delivered, and
loving him who had enslaved them; thirdly, that it was impossible. For
Another having once for all redeemed all of us from it, the Law ceases
to have any sway. By the word, “stand fast,” he indicates their
vacillation.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p7"></span>[Gal.
5.1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.
“And be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p8"></span>By the word “yoke” he signifies to them
the burdensomeness of such a course, and by the word “again” he points
out their utter senselessness. Had ye never experienced this burden, ye
would not have deserved so severe a censure, but for you who by trial
have learnt how irksome this yoke is, again to subject yourself to it,
is justly unpardonable.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p9"></span>[Gal.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.v-p9.1"></span>.
“Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye receive circumcision, Christ
will profit you nothing.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p10"></span>Lo, what a threat! reasonably then did
he anathematize even angels. How then shall Christ profit them nothing?
for he has not supported this by argument, but only declared it, the
credence due to his authority, compensating, as it were, for all
subsequent proof. Wherefore he sets out by saying, “Behold, I Paul say
unto you,” which is the expression of one who has confidence in what he
asserts. We will subjoin what we can ourselves as to how Christ shall
profit nothing them who are circumcised.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p11"></span>He that is circumcised is circumcised
for fear of the Law, and he who fears the Law, distrusts the power of
grace, and he who distrusts can receive no benefit from that which is
distrusted. Or again thus, he that is circumcised makes the Law of
force; but thus considering it to be of force and yet transgressing it
in the greater part while keeping it in the lesser, he puts himself
again under the curse. But how can he be saved who submits himself to
the curse, and repels the liberty which is of Faith? If one may say what
seems a paradox, such an one believes neither Christ nor the Law, but
stands between them, desiring to benefit both by one and the other,
whereas he will reap fruit from neither. Having said that Christ shall
profit them nothing, he lays down the proof <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) of it shortly and sententiously, thus:

<span id="iii.iii.v-p13"></span>[Gal.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.v-p13.1"></span>.
“Yea, I testify again <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) to every
man that receiveth circumcision that he is a debtor to do the whole
Law.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p15"></span>That you may not suppose that this is
spoken from ill-will <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) , I say not
to you alone, he says, but to every one who receiveth circumcision, that
he is a debtor to do the whole Law. The parts of the Law are linked one
to the other. As he who from being free has enrolled himself as a slave,
no longer does what he pleases, but is bound by all the laws of slavery,
so in the case of the Law, if you take upon you a small portion of it,
and submit to the yoke, you draw down upon yourself its whole
domination. And so it is in a worldly inheritance: he who touches no
part of it, is free from all matters which are consequent on the
heirship to the deceased, but if he takes a small portion, though not
the whole, yet by that part he has rendered himself liable for every
thing. And this occurs in the Law, <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-Page_37"></span>not only in the way I have mentioned, but
in another also, for Legal observances are linked together. For example;
Circumcision has sacrifice connected with it, and the observance of
days; sacrifice again has the observance both of day and of place; place
has the details of endless purifications; purifications involve a
perfect swarm of manifold observances. For it is unlawful for the
unclean to sacrifice, to enter the holy shrines, to do any other such
act. Thus the Law introduces many things even by the one commandment. If
then thou art circumcised, but not on the eighth day, or on the eighth
day, but no sacrifice is offered, or a sacrifice is offered, but not in
the prescribed place, or in the prescribed place, but not the accustomed
objects, or if the accustomed objects, but thou be unclean, or if clean
yet not purified by proper rules, every thing is frustrated.
Wherefore <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) he says, “that he is a
debtor to the whole Law.” Fulfil not a part, but the whole, if the Law
is of force; but if it be not of force, not even a part.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p18"></span>[Gal.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.v-p18.1"></span>.
“Ye are severed from Christ, ye who would be justified by the Law; ye
are fallen away from grace.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p19"></span>Having established his point, he at
length declares their danger of the severest punishment. When a man
recurs to the Law, which cannot save him, and falls from grace, what
remains but an inexorable retribution, the Law being powerless, and
grace rejecting him?

<span id="iii.iii.v-p20"></span>Thus having aggravated their alarm, and
disquieted their mind, and shown them all the shipwreck they were about
to suffer, he opens to them the haven of grace which was near at hand.
This is ever his wont, and he shows that in this quarter salvation is
easy and secure, subjoining the words,

<span id="iii.iii.v-p21"></span>[Gal.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii.v-p21.1"></span>.
“For we through the Spirit by faith wait for the hope of
righteousness.” <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p23"></span>We need none of those legal observances,
he says; faith suffices to obtain for us the Spirit, and by Him
righteousness, and many and great benefits.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p24"></span>[Gal.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.v-p24.1"></span>.
“For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor
uncircumcision; <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) but faith
working through love.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p26"></span>Observe the great boldness with which he
now encounters them; Let him that hath put on Christ, he says, no longer
be careful about such matters. Having before said that Circumcision was
hurtful, how is it that he now considers it indifferent? It is
indifferent as to those who had it previously to the Faith, but not as
to those who are circumcised after the Faith was given. Observe too the
view in which he places it, by setting it by the side of Uncircumcision;
it is Faith that makes the difference. As in the selection of wrestlers,
whether they be hook-nosed or flat-nosed, black or white, is of no
importance in their trial, it is only necessary to seek that they be
strong and skilful; so all these bodily accidents do not injure one who
is to be enrolled under the New Covenant, nor does their presence assist
him.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p27"></span>What is the meaning of “working through
love?” <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) Here he gives them a hard
blow, by showing that this error had crept in because the love of Christ
had not been rooted within them. For to believe is not all that is
required, but also to abide in love. It is as if he had said, Had ye
loved Christ as ye ought, ye would not have deserted to bondage, nor
abandoned Him who redeemed you, nor treated with contumely Him who gave
you freedom. Here he also hints at those who have plotted against them,
implying that they would not have dared to do so, had they felt
affection towards them. He wishes too by these words to correct their
course of life.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p30"></span>[Gal.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.v-p30.1"></span>.
“Ye were running well; who did hinder you?” <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p32"></span>This is not an interrogation, but an
expression of doubt and sorrow. How hath such a course been cut short?
who hath been able to do this? ye who were superior to all and in the
rank of teachers, have not even continued in the position of disciples.
What has happened? who could do this? these are rather the words of one
who is exclaiming and lamenting, as he said before, “Who did bewitch
you?” ([Gal. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p32.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p33"></span>[Gal.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii.v-p33.1"></span>.
“This persuasion came not of him that calleth you.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p34"></span>He who called you, called you not to
such fluctuations, he did not lay down a Law, that you should judaize.
Then, that no one might object, “Why do you thus magnify and aggravate
the matter by your words; one commandment only of the Law have we kept,
and yet you make this great outcry?” hear how he terrifies them, not by
things present but future in these words:

<span id="iii.iii.v-p35"></span>[Gal.
5.9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii.v-p35.1"></span>.
“A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p36"></span>And thus this slight error, he says, if
not cor<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-Page_38"></span>rected, will have power (as the leaven has
with the lump) to lead you into complete Judaism.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p37"></span>[Gal.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p37.1"></span>. “I have confidence to you-ward in the
Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p38"></span>He does not say, “ye are not minded,”
but, “ye will not be minded;” that is, you will be set right. And how
does he know this? he says not “I know,” but “I trust in God, and
invoking His aid in order to your correction, I am in hopes;” and he
says, not merely, “I have confidence in the Lord,” but, “I have
confidence towards you in the Lord.” Every where he connects complaint
with his praises; here it is as if he had said, I know my disciples, I
know your readiness to be set right. I have good hopes, partly because
of the Lord who suffers nothing, however trivial, to perish, partly
because of you who are quickly to recover yourselves. At the same time
he exhorts them to use diligence on their own parts, it not being
possible to obtain aid from God, if our own efforts are not contributed.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p39"></span>[Gal.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p39.1"></span>. “But he that troubleth you shall bear his
judgment, whosoever he be.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p40"></span>Not only by words of encouragement, but
by uttering a curse or a prophecy against their teachers, he applies to
them an incentive. And observe that he never mentions the name of these
plotters, that they might not become more shameless. His meaning is as
follows. Not because “ye will be none otherwise minded,” are the authors
of your seduction relieved from punishment. They shall be punished; for
it is not proper that the good conduct of the one should become an
encouragement to the evil disposition of the other. This is said that
they might not make a second attempt upon others. And he says not
merely, “he that troubleth,” but, “whosoever he be,” in the way of
aggravation.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p41"></span>[Gal.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p41.1"></span>. “But I, brethren, if I still preach
circumcision, why am I still persecuted?”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p42"></span>Observe how clearly he exonerates
himself from the charge, <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) that in
every place he judaized and played the hypocrite in his preaching. Of
this he calls them as witnesses; for ye know, he says, that my command
to abandon the Law was made the pretext for persecuting me. “If I still
preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? for this is the only
charge which they of the Jewish descent have to bring against me. Had I
permitted them to receive the Faith, still retaining the customs of
their fathers, neither believers nor unbelievers would have laid snares
for me, seeing that none of their own usages were disturbed. What then!
did he not preach circumcision? did he not circumcise Timothy? Truly he
did. How then can he say, “I preach it not?” Here observe his accuracy;
he says not, “I do not perform circumcision,” but, “I preach it not,”
that is, I do not bid men so to believe. Do not therefore consider it
any confirmation of your doctrine, for though I circumcised, I did not
preach circumcision.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p45"></span>[Gal.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p45.1"></span>. “Then hath the stumbling block of the
cross been done away.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p46"></span>That is, if this which ye assert be
true, the obstacle, the hindrance, is removed; for not even the Cross
was so great an offence to the Jews, as the doctrine that their father’s
customs ought not to be obeyed. When they brought Stephen before the
council, they said not that this man adores the Crucified, but that he
speaks “against this holy place and the Law.” ([Acts vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013)<span id="iii.iii.v-p46.1"></span>.)
And it was of this they accused Jesus, that He broke the Law. Wherefore
Paul says, If Circumcision be conceded, the strife you are involved in
is appeased; hereafter no enmity to the Cross and our preaching remains.
But why do they bring this charge against us, while waiting day after
day to murder us? it is because I brought an uncircumcised man into the
Temple ([Acts xxi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p46.2"></span>.) that they fell upon me. Am I then, he
says, so senseless, after giving up the point of Circumcision, vainly
and idly to expose myself to such injuries, and to place such a
stumbling-block before the Cross? For ye observe, that they attack us
for nothing with such vehemence as about Circumcision. Am I then so
senseless as to suffer affliction for nothing at all, and to give
offence to others? He calls it the offence of the Cross, because it was
enjoined by the doctrine of the Cross; and it was this which principally
offended the Jews, and hindered their reception of the Cross, namely,
the command to abandon the usages of their fathers.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p47"></span>[Gal.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p47.1"></span>. “I would that they which unsettle you,
would even cut themselves off.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p48"></span>Observe how bitterly he speaks here
against their deceivers. <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) At the
outset he directed his charge against those who were deceived, and
called them foolish, once and again. Now, having sufficiently corrected
and instructed them, he turns to their deceivers. And you should remark
his wisdom in the manner in which he <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>
<span id="iii.iii.v-Page_39"></span>admonishes and chastens the former
as his own children, and as capable of receiving correction, but their
deceivers he cuts off, as aliens and incurably depraved. And this he
does, partly, when he says, “he shall bear his judgment whosoever he
be;” partly when he utters the imprecation against them, “I would that
they which unsettle you would even cut themselves off.” And he says well
“that unsettle you.” For they had compelled them to abandon their own
fatherland, their liberty, and their heavenly kindred, and to seek an
alien and foreign one; they had cast them out of Jerusalem which is
above and free, and compelled them to wander forth as captives and
emigrants. On this account he curses them; and his meaning is as
follows, For them I have no concern, “A man that is heretical after the
first and second admonition refuse.” ([Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii.v-p50.2"></span>.)
If they will, let them not only be circumcised, but mutilated. Where
then are those who dare to mutilate themselves <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) ; seeing that they draw down the
Apostolic curse, and accuse the workmanship of God, and take part with
the Manichees? For the latter call the body a treacherous thing, and
from the evil principle; and the former by their acts give countenance
to these wretched doctrines, cutting off the member as being hostile and
treacherous. Ought they not much rather to put out the eyes, for it is
through the eyes that desire enters the soul? But in truth neither the
eye nor any other part of us is to blame, but the depraved will only.
But if you will not allow this, why do you not mutilate the tongue for
blasphemy, the hands for rapine, the feet for their evil courses, in
short, the whole body? For the ear enchanted by the sound of a flute
hath often enervated the soul; and the perception of a sweet perfume by
the nostrils hath bewitched the mind, and made it frantic for pleasure.
Yet this would be extreme wickedness and satanic madness. The evil
spirit, ever delighting in slaughter, hath seduced them to crush the
instrument, as if its Maker had erred, whereas it was only necessary to
correct the unruly passion of the soul. How then does it happen, one may
say, that when the body is pampered, lust is inflamed? Observe here too
that it is the sin of the soul, for to pamper the flesh is not an act of
the flesh but of the soul, for if the soul choose to mortify it, it
would possess absolute power over it. But what you do is just the same
as if one seeing a man lighting a fire, and heaping on fuel, and setting
fire to a house, were to blame the fire, instead of him who kindled it,
because it had caught this heap of fuel, and risen to a great height.
Yet the blame would attach not to the fire but to the one who kindled
it; for it was given for the purpose of dressing food, affording light,
and other like ministries, not for burning houses. In like manner desire
is implanted for the rearing of families and the ensuring of life, not
for adultery, or fornication, or lasciviousness; that a man may become a
father, not an adulterer; a lawful husband, not a seducer; leaving heirs
after him, not doing damage to another man’s. For adultery arises not
from nature, but from wantonness against nature, which prescribes the
use not the misuse. These remarks I have not made at random, but as a
prelude to a dispute, as skirmishing against those who assert that the
workmanship of God is evil, and who neglecting the sloth of the soul,
madly inveigh against the body, and traduce our flesh, whereof Paul
afterwards discourses, accusing not the flesh, but devilish thoughts.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p52"></span>[Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p52.1"></span>. “For ye, brethren, were called for
freedom; only use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p53"></span>Henceforward he appears to digress <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) into a moral discourse, but in a new
manner, which does not occur in any other of his Epistles. For all of
them are divided into two parts, and in the first he discusses doctrine,
in the last the rule of life, but here, after having entered upon the
moral discourse, he again unites with it the doctrinal part. For this
passage has reference to doctrine in the controversy with the
Manichees. <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) What is the meaning
of, “Use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh?” Christ hath
delivered us, he says, from the yoke of bondage, He hath left us free to
act as we will, not that we may use our liberty for evil, but that we
may have ground for receiving a higher reward, advancing to a higher
philosophy. Lest any one should suspect, from his calling the Law over
and over again a yoke of bondage, and a bringing on of the curse, that
his object in enjoining an abandonment of the Law, was that one might
live lawlessly, he corrects this notion, and states his object to be,
not that our course of life might be lawless, but that our philosophy
might surpass the Law. For the bonds of the Law are broken, and I say
this not that our standard may be lowered, but that it may be exalted.
For both he who commits fornication, and he who leads a virgin life,
pass the bounds of the Law, but not in the same direction; the one is
led away to the worse, the other is elevated to the better; the one
transgresses the Law, the other transcends it. <span id="page_40">p.
40</span> <span id="iii.iii.v-Page_40"></span>Thus Paul says that Christ
hath removed the yoke from you, not that ye may prance and kick, but
that though without the yoke ye may proceed at a well-measured pace. And
next he shows the mode whereby this may be readily effected; and what is
this mode? he says,

<span id="iii.iii.v-p57"></span>[Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p57.1"></span>. “But through love be servants one to
another.” <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p60"></span>Here again he hints that strife and
party-spirit, love of rule and presumptousness, had been the causes of
their error, for the desire of rule is the mother of heresies. By
saying, “Be servants one to another,” he shows that the evil had arisen
from this presumptuous and arrogant spirit, and therefore he applies a
corresponding remedy. As your divisions arose from your desire to
domineer over each other, “serve one another;” thus will ye be
reconciled again. However, he does not openly express their fault, but
he openly tells them its corrective, that through this they may become
aware of that; as if one were not to tell an immodest person of his
immodesty, but were continually to exhort him to chastity. He that loves
his neighbor as he ought, declines not to be servant to him more humbly
than any servant. As fire, brought into contact with wax, easily softens
it, so does the warmth of love dissolve all arrogance and presumption
more powerfully than fire. Wherefore he says not, “love one another,”
merely, but, “be servants one to another,” thus signifying the intensity
of the affection. When the yoke of the Law was taken off them that they
might not caper off and away another was laid on, that of love, stronger
than the former, yet far lighter and pleasanter; and, to point out the
way to obey it, he adds;

<span id="iii.iii.v-p61"></span>[Gal.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p61.1"></span>. “For the whole law is fulfilled in one
word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p62"></span>Seeing that they made so much of the
Law, he says, “If you wish to fulfill it, do not be circumcised, for it
is fulfilled not in circumcision but in love.” Observe how he cannot
forget his grief, but constantly touches upon what troubled him, even
when launched into his moral discourse.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p63"></span>[Gal.
5.15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p63.1"></span>. “But if ye bite and devour one another,
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p64"></span>That he may not distress them, he does
not assert this, though he knew it was the case, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) but mentions it ambiguously. For he
does not say, “Inasmuch as ye bite one another,” nor again does he
assert, in the clause following, that they shall be consumed by each
other; but “take heed that ye be not consumed one of another,” and this
is the language of apprehension and warning, not of condemnation. And
the words which he uses are expressly significant; he says not merely,
“ye bite,” which one might do in a passion, but also “ye devour,” which
implies a bearing of malice. To bite is to satisfy the feeling of anger,
but to devour is a proof of the most savage ferocity. The biting and
devouring he speaks of are not bodily, but of a much more cruel kind;
for it is not such an injury to taste the flesh of man, as to fix one’s
fangs in his soul. In proportion as the soul is more precious than the
body, is damage to it more serious. “Take heed that ye be not consumed
one of another.” For those who commit injury and lay plots, do so in
order to destroy others; therefore he says, Take heed that this evil
fall not on your own heads. For strife and dissensions are the ruin and
destruction as well of those who admit as of those who introduce them,
and eats out every thing worse than a moth does.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p66"></span>[Gal.
5.16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p66.1"></span>. “But I say, Walk by the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p67"></span>Here he points out another <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) path which makes duty easy, and
secures what had been said, a path whereby love is generated, and which
is fenced in by love. For nothing, nothing I say, renders us so
susceptible of love, as to be spiritual, and nothing is such an
inducement to the Spirit to abide in us, as the strength of love.
Therefore he says, “Walk by the Spirit and ye shall not fulfil the lust
of the flesh:” having spoken of the cause of the disease, he likewise
mentions the remedy which confers health. And what is this, what is the
destruction of the evils we have spoken of, but the life in the Spirit?
hence he says, “Walk by the Spirit and ye shall not fulfil the lust of
the flesh.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p70"></span>[Gal.
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p70.1"></span>. “For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh, for these are contrary the one to the
other: that ye may not do the things that ye would.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p71"></span>Here some make the charge that the
Apostle has divided man into two parts, and that he states the essence
of which he is compounded to be conflicting with itself, and that the
body has a contest with the soul. But this is not so, most certainly;
for by “the flesh,” he does not mean the body; if he did, what would be
the sense of the clause immediately following, “for it lusteth,” he
says, “against the Spirit?” yet the body moves not, but is moved, is not
an agent, but is acted upon. How then does it <span id="page_41">p.
41</span> <span id="iii.iii.v-Page_41"></span>lust, for lust belongs to
the soul not to the body, for in another place it is said, “My soul
longeth,” ([Ps. lxxxiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p71.1"></span>.) and, “Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I
will even do it for thee,” ([1 Sam. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#004)<span id="iii.iii.v-p71.2"></span>.)
and, “Walk not according to the desires of thy heart,” and, “So panteth
my soul.” ([Ps. xlii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p71.3"></span>.) Wherefore then does Paul say, “the flesh
lusteth against the Spirit?” he is wont to call the flesh, not the
natural body but the depraved will, as where he says, “But ye are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit,” ([Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="iii.iii.v-p71.4"></span>.)
and again, “They that are in the flesh cannot please God.” What then? Is
the flesh to be destroyed? was not he who thus spoke clothed with flesh?
such doctrines are not of the flesh, but from the Devil, for “he was a
murderer from the beginning.” ([John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="iii.iii.v-p71.5"></span>.)
What then is his meaning? it is the earthly mind, slothful and careless,
that he here calls the flesh, and this is not an accusation of the body,
but a charge against the slothful soul. The flesh is an instrument, and
no one feels aversion and hatred to an instrument, but to him who abuses
it. For it is not the iron instrument but the murderer, whom we hate and
punish. But it may be said that the very calling of the faults of the
soul by the name of the flesh is in itself an accusation of the body.
And I admit that the flesh is inferior to the soul, yet it too is good,
for that which is inferior to what is good may itself be good, but evil
is not inferior to good, but opposed to it. Now if you are able to prove
to me that evil originates from the body, you are at liberty to accuse
it; but if your endeavor is to turn its name into a charge against it,
you ought to accuse the soul likewise. For he that is deprived of the
truth is called “the natural man.” ([1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p71.6"></span>.) <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)
and the race of demons “the spirits of wickedness.” ([Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iii.iii.v-p72.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p73"></span>Again, the Scripture is wont to give the
name of the Flesh to the Mysteries of the Eucharist, and to the whole
Church, calling them the Body of Christ. ([Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="iii.iii.v-p73.1"></span>.)
Nay, to induce you to give the name of blessings to the things of which
the flesh is the medium, you have only to imagine the extinction of the
senses, and you will find the soul deprived of all discernment, and
ignorant of what it before knew. For if the power of God is since “the
creation of the world clearly seen, being perceived through the things
that are made,” ([Rom. i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p73.2"></span>.) how could we see them without eyes? and
if “faith cometh of hearing,” ([Rom. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="iii.iii.v-p73.3"></span>.)
how shall we hear without ears? and preaching depends on making circuits
wherein the tongue and feet are employed. “For how shall they preach,
except they be sent?” ([Rom. x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="iii.iii.v-p73.4"></span>.)
In the same way writing is performed by means of the hands. Do you not
see that the ministry of the flesh produces for us a thousand benefits?
In his expression, “the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,” he means two
mental states. For these are opposed to each other, namely virtue and
vice, not the soul and the body. Were the two latter so opposed they
would be destructive of one another, as fire of water, and darkness of
light. But if the soul cares for the body, and takes great forethought
on its account, and suffers a thousand things in order not to leave it,
and resists being separated from it, and if the body too ministers to
the soul, and conveys to it much knowledge, and is adapted to its
operations, how can they be contrary, and conflicting with each other?
For my part, I perceive by their acts that they are not only not
contrary but closely accordant and attached one to another. It is not
therefore of these that he speaks as opposed to each other, but he
refers to the contest of bad and good principles. (Compare [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="iii.iii.v-p73.5"></span>.)
To will and not to will belongs to the soul; wherefore he says, “these
are contrary the one to the other,” that you may not suffer the soul to
proceed in its evil desires. For he speaks this like a Master and
Teacher in a threatening way.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p74"></span>[Gal.
5.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p74.1"></span>. “But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are
not under the Law.” <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)

<span id="iii.iii.v-p76"></span>If it be asked in what way are these two
connected, I answer, closely and plainly; for he that hath the Spirit as
he ought, quenches thereby every evil desire, and he that is released
from these needs no help from the Law, but is exalted far above its
precepts. He who is never angry, what need has he to hear the command,
Thou shalt not kill? He who never casts unchaste looks, what need hath
he of the admonition, Thou shalt not commit adultery? Who would
discourse about the fruits of wickedness with him who had plucked up the
root itself? for anger is the root of murder, and of adultery the
inquisitive gazing into faces. Hence he says, “If ye are led by the
Spirit, ye are not under the Law;” wherein he appears to me to have
pronounced a high and striking eulogy of the Law, if, at least, the Law
stood, according to its power, in the place of the Spirit before the
Spirit’s coming upon us. But we are not on that account obliged to
continue apart with our schoolmaster. Then we were justly subject to the
Law, that by fear we might chasten our lusts, the Spirit not being
manifested; but now that grace is given, which not only commands us to
abstain from them, but both quenches them, and leads us to a higher rule
of life, what more need is there of the Law? He who has attained an
exalted excel<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-Page_42"></span>lence from an inner impulse, has no
occasion for a schoolmaster, nor does any one, if he is a philosopher,
require a grammarian. Why then do ye so degrade yourselves, as now to
listen to the Law, having previously given yourselves to the Spirit?

<span id="iii.iii.v-p77"></span>[Gal.
5.19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p77.1"></span>. “Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) which are these;
fornication, <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strife, jealousies, wrath,
factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like: of the which I forewarn you even as I did forewarn you, that
they which practice such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p80"></span>Answer me now, thou that accusest thine
own flesh, and supposest that this is said of it as of an enemy and
adversary. Let it be allowed that adultery and fornication proceed, as
you assert, from the flesh; yet hatred, variance, emulations, strife,
heresies, and witchcraft, these arise merely from a depraved moral
choice. And so it is with the others also, for how can they belong to
the flesh? you observe that he is not here speaking of the flesh, but of
earthly thoughts, which trail upon the ground. Wherefore also he alarms
them by saying, that “they which practice such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of God.” If these things belonged to nature and not to a bad
moral choice, his expression, “they practice,” is inappropriate, it
should be, “they suffer.” And why should they be cast out of the
kingdom, for rewards and punishments relate not to what proceeds from
nature but from choice?

<span id="iii.iii.v-p81"></span>[Gal.
5.22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p81.1"></span>. “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p82"></span>He says not, “the work of the Spirit,”
but, “the fruit of the Spirit.” Is the soul, however, superfluous? the
flesh and the Spirit are mentioned, but where is the soul? is he
discoursing of beings without a soul? for if the things of the flesh be
evil, and those of the Spirit good, the soul must be superfluous. By no
means, for the mastery of the passions belongs to her, and concerns her;
and being placed amid vice and virtue, if she has used the body fitly,
she has wrought it to be spiritual, but if she separate from the Spirit
and give herself up to evil desires, she makes herself more earthly. You
observe throughout that his discourse does not relate to the substance
of the flesh, but to the moral choice, which is or is not vicious. And
why does he say, “the fruit <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) of
the Spirit?” it is because evil works originate in ourselves alone, and
therefore he calls them “works,” but good works require not only our
diligence but God’s loving kindness. He places first the root of these
good things, and then proceeds to recount them, in these words, “Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
temperance; against such there is no law.” For who would lay any command
on him who hath all things within himself, and who hath love for the
finished mistress of philosophy? As horses, who are docile and do every
thing of their own accord, need not the lash, so neither does the soul,
which by the Spirit hath attained to excellence, need the admonitions of
the Law. Here too he completely and strikingly casts out the Law, not as
bad, but as inferior to the philosophy given by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p84"></span>[Gal.
5.24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p84.1"></span>. “And they that are of Christ Jesus <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) have crucified the flesh with the
passions and the lusts thereof.”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p86"></span>That they might not object, “And who is
such a man as this?” he points out by their works those who have
attained to this perfection, here again giving the name of the “flesh”
to evil actions. He does not mean that they had destroyed their flesh,
otherwise how were they going to live? for that which is crucified is
dead and inoperative, but he indicates the perfect rule of life. For the
desires, although they are troublesome, rage in vain. Since then such is
the power of the Spirit, let us live therein and be content therewith,
as he adds himself,

<span id="iii.iii.v-p87"></span>[Gal.
5.25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p87.1"></span>. “If we live <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us
also walk,”

<span id="iii.iii.v-p89"></span>—being governed by His laws. For this is
the force of the words “let us walk,” that is, let us be content with
the power of the Spirit, and seek no help from the Law. Then, signifying
that those who would fain have introduced circumcision were actuated by
ambitious motives, he says,

<span id="iii.iii.v-p90"></span>[Gal.
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p90.1"></span>. “Let us not be vainglorious,” <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) which is the cause of all evils,
“provoking <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) one another” to
contentions and strife, “envying one another,” for from vainglory comes
envy and from envy all these countless evils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[36:119](1130010.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p4"></span> \[The text of this verse is not settled.
The *textus receptus* has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p4.1"></span>τῇ ἐλευθερί& 139· οὖν ἧ χριστὸς ἡμᾶς
ἠλευθέρωσε στήκετε</span>, etc. Chrysostom has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p4.2"></span>τῇ γὰρ ἐλευθερί& 139· ᾗ χριστὸς ὑμᾶς
ἐξηγόρασε, στήκετε</span>, etc. W. & H. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p4.3"></span>τῇ ἐλευθέρί& 139· ἡμᾶς χριστὸς ἠλευθέρωσεν
στήκετε οὖν καὶ</span>, etc., with Aleph, A. <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p4.4"></span>B. C.</span> Rev. Ver.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p5"></span>But W. & H. suspect there is some
primitive error. Lightfoot joins <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p5.1"></span>τῇ ελευθερί& 139·</span>, with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p5.2"></span>τῆς ἐλευθέρας</span> of
the preceding verse and retains the relative <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p5.3"></span>ᾗ</span>, making it read; We are sons of the
free woman with the freedom wherewith Christ freed us. *Com. in loc.*
and *Excursus* p. 371.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[36:120](1130010.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p12"></span> \[The following verse does not
introduce proof that Christ shall profit them nothing, but leads on to
more detailed information and so is introduced by <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p12.1"></span>δέ</span>, *autem*. So
Meyer; though Lightfoot makes <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p12.2"></span>δέ</span> adversative to the idea of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p12.3"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p12.4"></span>φελήσει</span>, and so
Ellicott. Rev. Ver. agrees with Meyer’s view.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_120"></span>[36:121](1130010.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p14"></span> \[“Again refers to ‘I say’ in preceding
sentences.” Schaff, Lightfoot, Ellicott. Meyer says, “It calls to the
remembrance of his readers his last presence,” (second visit.)—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_121"></span>[36:122](1130010.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p16"></span> \[“‘To every man’ stands in a climactic
relation to foregoing <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p16.1"></span>ὐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p16.2"></span>μῖν</span> remorselessly embracing all; that
no one may think himself excluded. Hence Chrysostom’s view is
wrong.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_122"></span>[37:123](1130010.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p17"></span> \[Perhaps Paul’s reason for his
statement that every one who suffers himself to be circumcised is a
debtor to keep the whole Law is this Scripture which he quotes in [Gal.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p17.1"></span>: Cursed is he that continueth not in all
the things that are written etc.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_123"></span>[37:124](1130010.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p22"></span> \[“The Holy Spirit is the divine
‘agent’ and faith is the subjective ‘source’ of our
expectation.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_124"></span>[37:125](1130010.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p25"></span> \[“Circumcision and uncircumcision are
circumstances of no effect or avail in Christianity; and yet they were
in Galatia the points on which the disturbance turned,”—Meyer,—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_125"></span>[37:126](1130010.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p28"></span> \[“How necessary it was for the
Galatians that prominence should be given to the activity of faith ‘in
love’ may be seen from [Gal. 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)<span id="iii.iii.v-p28.1"></span>.
The passive view of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p28.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p28.3"></span>νεργουμένη</span> (wrought through love) as
held by some Fathers and by Catholics is erroneous. In New Test. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p28.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p28.5"></span>νεργεῖσθαι</span> is
always middle: faith ‘which is operative through love.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="iii.iii.v-p29"></span>Lightfoot says: “The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p29.1"></span>δἰ ἀγάπης
ενεργουμένη</span> bridge over the gulf which seems to separate the
language of St. Paul and St. James. Both assert a principle of practical
energy as opposed to a barren theory.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_126"></span>[37:127](1130010.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p31"></span> \[The words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p31.2"></span>ληθεία μὴ πείθεσθάι</span> are wanting in
Chrysostom’s text.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_127"></span>[38:128](1130010.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p43"></span> \[“The false teachers had spread the
malicious report that Paul himself preached circumcision because he
practiced it in the case of Timothy. But this was a measure of
expediency and charity and not a surrender of principle.”—Schaff.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p44"></span>“This calumny was sufficiently absurd to
admit of his dismissing it, as he does here, with all brevity and with
what a striking experimental proof!”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_128"></span>[38:129](1130010.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p49"></span> \[“The vivid realization of the doings
of his opponents, who were not ashamed to resort even to such falsehood,
now wrings from his soul a strong and bitterly sarcastic wish of holy
indignation.”—Meyer.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p50"></span>Paul wishes that the circumcisers would
not stop with circumcision but go beyond it to mutilation (make
themselves eunuchs) like the priests of Cybele. A severe irony and
similar to the one in [Phil. 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.v-p50.1"></span>,
where Paul calls the boasters of circumcision “the Concision.” Self
mutilation was a recognized form of heathen worship especially in
Pessinus in Galatia and therefore quite familiar to the readers. Thus by
their glorying in the flesh the Galatians relapsed into their former
heathenism,—Schaff and Lightfoot. The Revised Version here has, “would
even cut themselves off,” the American Committee has, “would go beyond
circumcision.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_129"></span>[39:130](1130010.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p51"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p51.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p51.2"></span>Αποκοπτειν ἐαυτούς</span>. Chrysostom here,
as often, “goes off at a word” into a digression on a subject which is
only remotely suggested by the passage in hand.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_130"></span>[39:131](1130010.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p54"></span> \[This is not a digression. It is in
strict continuity with the preceeding context and gives a reason for the
indignant expression of the foregoing sentence.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p55"></span>“They are defeating the very purpose of
your calling: ye were called for liberty and not for
bondage.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_131"></span>[39:132](1130010.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p56"></span> \[On the doctrine of the Manichees see
Schaff *Church History* vol. ii. p. 498–508, where a full account of the
literature is given also.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_132"></span>[40:133](1130010.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p58"></span> \[“An ingenious juxtaposition of
‘freedom’ and brotherly ‘service’ in that freedom,”—Meyer.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p59"></span>“Ye were called for ‘freedom,’ but
through love make yourselves willing ‘bond-servants’ to each
other.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_133"></span>[40:134](1130010.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p65"></span> \[See Lightfoot, Introduction, p. 39.
Note 3.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_134"></span>[40:135](1130010.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p68"></span> \[“Paul returns to the warning in [Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p68.1"></span>, not to abuse their freedom for an occasion
to the ‘flesh’”—Schaff.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p69"></span>“In [Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p69.1"></span>he had warned them against using liberty for
an occasion to the flesh; now, [Gal.
5.16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p69.2"></span>, he shows them how they are to accomplish
that end and this introduces the deadly and interminable antagonism
between the spirit and the flesh.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_135"></span>[41:136](1130010.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p71.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p72"></span> \[That is, the “psychical” man, from
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p72.1"></span>ψυχή</span>, the
soul.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_136"></span>[41:137](1130010.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p75"></span> \[“If you adopt the rule of the Spirit,
you thereby renounce your allegiance to the Law. In this passage the
Spirit is doubly contrasted; first with the flesh, and secondly, with
the Law, both of which are closely allied.”—Lightfoot.—G. A \]

<span id="fn_137"></span>[42:138](1130010.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p78"></span> \[“Would you ascertain whether you are
walking by the Spirit or the flesh? Then apply the plain practical
test.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_138"></span>[42:139](1130010.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p79"></span> \[“The sins here mentioned seem to fall
into four classes: (1) Sensual sins; fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness; (2) Unlawful dealings in things spiritual; idolatry,
sorcery; (3) Violations of brotherly love; enmities…envyings; (4)
Excesses, drunkenness and revellings.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_139"></span>[42:140](1130010.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p83"></span> \[“Used apparently with a significant
reference to the organic development, from their root, the
Spirit.”—Ellicott. So substantially Lightfoot and Schaff. But Meyer
demurs and says no marked distinction is intended. He refers it to
Paul’s fondness for variety of expression.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_140"></span>[42:141](1130010.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p85"></span> \[Having now enumerated the distinctive
works of the flesh and fruit of the Spirit he says, Now if you are
Christ’s you have decided between these, the Spirit and the flesh, and
have crucified the flesh, with its passions (passive) and lusts
(active).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_141"></span>[42:142](1130010.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p88"></span> \[Therefore if having crucified the
flesh we are dead to it and live by the Spirit, let us conform our
conduct to our new life, let us also walk by the Spirit.—Lightfoot,
substantially.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_142"></span>[42:143](1130010.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p91"></span> \[“Paul works round again to the
subject of [Gal. 5.15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.v-p91.1"></span> and repeats his warning. It is clear that
something had occurred which alarmed him on this
point.”—Lightfoot.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_143"></span>[42:144](1130010.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p92"></span> \[“‘Provoking’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.v-p92.1"></span>προκαλούμενοι</span>) on
the part of the strong, ‘envying,’ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.v-p92.2"></span>φθονοῦντες</span>) on the part of the weak.
The strong vauntingly challenged their weaker brethren; the weak could
only retaliate with envy,”—Ellicott.—G.A.\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians 6:1](1130011)
