[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130023)  [Next](1130025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Homily XI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.xii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iii.iv.xii-p2.2"></span>[Ephesians iv.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p3"></span>“There is one body, and one Spirit, even
as also ye were called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith,
one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through
all, and in all. But unto each one of us was the grace given according
to the measure of the gift of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>The</span> love Paul requires of us is no
common love, but that which cements us together, and makes us cleave
inseparably to one another, and effects as great and as perfect a union
as though it were between limb and limb. For this is that love which
produces great and glorious fruits. Hence he saith, there is “one body”;
one, both by sympathy, and by not opposing the good of others, and by
sharing their joy, having expressed all at once by this figure. He then
beautifully adds, “and one Spirit,” showing <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md) that from the one body there will be
one Spirit: or, that it is possible that there may be indeed one body,
and yet not one Spirit; as, for instance, if any member of it should be
a friend of heretics: or else he is, by this expression, shaming them
into unanimity, saying, as it were, “Ye who have received one Spirit,
and have been made to drink at one fountain, ought not to be divided in
mind”; or else by spirit here he means their zeal. Then he adds, “Even
as ye were called in one hope of your calling,” that is, God hath called
you all on the same terms. He hath bestowed nothing upon one more than
upon another. To all He hath freely given immortality, to all eternal
life, to all immortal glory, to all brotherhood, to all inheritance. He
is the common Head of all; “He hath raised all” up, “and made them sit
with Him.” ([Eph. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p5.3"></span>.) Ye then who in the spiritual world have
so great equality of privileges, whence is it that ye are high-minded?
Is it that one is wealthy and another strong? How ridiculous must this
be? For tell me, if the emperor some day were to take ten persons, and
to array them all in purple, and seat them on the royal throne, and to
bestow upon all the same honor, would any one of these, think ye,
venture to reproach another, as being more wealthy or more illustrious
than he? Surely never. And I have not yet said all; for the difference
is not so great in heaven as here <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xii-Page_103"></span>below we differ. There is “one
Lord, one faith, one baptism.” <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md)
Behold “the hope of your calling. One God and Father of all, who is over
all, and through all, and in all.” For can it be, that thou art called
by the name of a greater God, another, of a lesser God? That thou art
saved by faith, and another by works? That thou hast received remission
in baptism, whilst another has not? “There is one God and Father of all,
who is over all, and through all, and in all.” “Who is over all,” that
is, the Lord and above all; and “through all,” that is, providing for,
ordering all; and “in you all,” that is, who dwelleth in you all. Now
this they own to be an attribute of the Son; so that were it an argument
of inferiority, it never would have been said of the Father.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p17"></span>“But <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) unto each one of us was the grace
given.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p19"></span>What then? he saith, whence are those
diverse spiritual gifts? For this subject was continually carrying away
both the Ephesians themselves, and the Corinthians, and many others,
some into vain arrogance, and others into despondency or envy. Hence he
everywhere takes along with him this illustration of the body. Hence it
is that now also he has proposed it, inasmuch as he was about to make
mention of diverse gifts. He enters indeed into the subject more fully
in the Epistle to the Corinthians, because it was among them that this
malady most especially reigned: here however he has only alluded to it.
And mark what he says: he does not say, “according to the faith of
each,” lest he should throw those who have no large attainments into
despondency. But what saith he? “According to the measure of the gift of
Christ.” The chief and principal points of all, he saith,—Baptism, the
being saved by faith, the having God for our Father, our all partaking
of the same Spirit,—these are common to all. If then this or that man
possesses any superiority in any spiritual gift, grieve not at it; since
his labor also is greater. He that had received the five talents, had
five required of him; whilst he that had received the two, brought only
two, and yet received no less a reward than the other. And therefore the
Apostle here also encourages the hearer on the same ground, showing that
gifts are bestowed not for the honor of one above another, but for the
work of the church, even as he says further on:

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p20"></span>“For the perfecting of the saints unto
the work of ministering unto the building up of the body of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p21"></span>Hence it is that even he himself saith,
“Woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.” ([1 Cor. ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p21.1"></span>.) For example: he received the grace of
Apostleship, but for this very reason, “woe unto him,” because he
received it: whereas thou art free from the danger.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p22"></span>“According to the measure.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p23"></span>What is meant by, “according to the
measure”? It means, “not according to our merit,” for then would no one
have received what he has received: but of the free gift we have all
received. And why then one more, and another less? There is nothing to
cause this, he would say, but the matter itself is indifferent; for
every one contributes towards “the building.” And by this too he shows,
that it is not of his own intrinsic merit that one has received more and
another less, but that it is for the sake of others, as God Himself hath
measured it; since he saith also elsewhere, “But now hath God set the
members each one of them in the body, even as it pleased Him.” ([1 Cor.
xii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p23.1"></span>.) And he mentions not the reason, lest he
should deject or dispirit the hearers.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p24"></span>[Eph.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p24.1"></span>. “Wherefore he saith, When He ascended on
high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p25"></span>As though he had said, Why art thou
high-minded? The whole is of God. The Prophet saith in the Psalm, “Thou
hast received gifts among men” ([Ps. lxviii.
18.](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p25.1"></span>), whereas the Apostle saith, “He gave
gifts unto men.” The one is the same as the other.  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md)

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p27"></span>[Eph.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p27.1"></span>. “Now this, He ascended, what is it, but
that He also descended into the lower parts of the earth? He that
descended, is the same also that ascended far above all the Heavens,
that He might fill all things.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p28"></span>When thou hearest these words, think
not of a mere removal from one place to another; for what Paul
establishes in the Epistle to the Philippians ([Philip. ii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p28.1"></span>.), that very argument <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) is he also insisting upon here. In the
same way as there, when exhorting them concerning lowliness, he brings
forward Christ as an example, <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xii-Page_104"></span>so does he here also, saying, “He
descended into the lower parts of the earth.” For were not this so, this
expression which he uses, “He became obedient even unto death” ([Phil.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p29.2"></span>.), were superfluous; whereas from His
ascending, he implies His descent, and by “the lower parts of the
earth,” he means “death,” according to the notions of men; as Jacob also
said, “Then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.”
([Gen. xxxii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#048.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p29.3"></span>.) And again as it is in the Psalm, “Lest I
become like them that go down into the pit” ([Ps. cxliii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p29.4"></span>.), that is like the dead. Why does he
descant upon this region here? And of what captivity does he speak? Of
that of the devil; for He took the tyrant captive, the devil, I mean,
and death, and the curse, and sin. Behold His spoils and His trophies.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p30"></span>“Now this, He ascended, what is it but
that He also descended?”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p31"></span>This strikes at Paul of Samosata and
his school. <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md)

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p33"></span>“He that descended, is the same also
that ascended far above all the Heavens, that He might fill all things.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p34"></span>He descended, saith he, into the lower
parts of the earth, beyond which there are none other: and He ascended
up far above all things, to that place, beyond which there is none
other. This is to show His divine energy, and supreme dominion. For
indeed even of old had all things been filled.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p35"></span>[Eph.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p35.1"></span>. “And He gave some to be apostles; and
some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, unto the work of ministering, unto the
building up of the body of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p36"></span>What he said elsewhere, “Wherefore also
God hath highly exalted Him” ([Philip. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p36.1"></span>.), that saith he also here. “He that
descended, is the same also that ascended.” It did Him no injury that He
came down into the lower parts of the earth, nor was it any hindrance to
His becoming far higher than the Heavens. So that the more a man is
humbled, so much the more is he exalted. For as in the case of water,
the more a man presses it downwards, the more he forces it up; and the
further a man retires to hurl a javelin, the surer his aim; so is it
also with humility. However, when we speak of ascents with reference to
God, we must needs conceive a descent first; but when with reference to
man, not at all so. Then he goes on to show further His providential
care, and His wisdom, for He who hath wrought such things as these, who
had such might, and who refused not to go down even to those lower parts
for our sakes, never would He have made these distributions of spiritual
gifts without a purpose. Now elsewhere he tells us that this was the
work of the Spirit, in the words, “In the which the Holy Ghost hath made
you bishops to feed the Church of God.” <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) And here he saith that it is the Son;
and elsewhere that it is God. “And He gave to the Church some apostles,
and some prophets.” But in the Epistle to the Corinthians, he saith, “I
planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.” And again, “Now he
that planteth and he that watereth are one: but each shall receive his
own reward according to his own labor.” ([1 Cor. iii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p37.1"></span>.) So is it also here; for what if thou
bring in but little? Thou hast received so much. First, he says,
“apostles”; <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md) for these had all
gifts; secondarily, “prophets,” for there were some who were not indeed
apostles, but prophets, as Agabus; thirdly, “evangelists,” who did not
go about everywhere, but only preached the Gospel, as Priscilla and
Aquila; “pastors and teachers,” those who were entrusted with the charge
of a whole nation. What then? are the pastors and the teachers inferior?
Yes, surely; those who were settled and employed about one spot, as
Timothy and Titus, were inferior to those who went about the world and
preached the Gospel. However, it is not possible from this passage to
frame the subordination and precedence, but from another Epistle. “He
gave,” saith he; thou must not say a word to gainsay it. Or perhaps by
“evangelists” he means those who wrote the Gospel.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p39"></span>“For the perfecting of the saints unto
the work of ministering, unto the building up of the body of
Christ.” <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md)

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p41"></span>Perceive ye the dignity of the office?
Each one edifies, each one perfects, each one ministers.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p42"></span>[Eph.
4.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p42.1"></span>. “Till we all attain,” he proceeds, “unto
the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
full-grown man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p43"></span>By “stature” here he means perfect
“knowledge”; for as a man will stand firmly, whereas <span
id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xii-Page_105"></span>children are carried about and waver in
mind, so is it also with believers.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p44"></span>“To the unity,” saith he, “of the
faith.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p45"></span>That is, until we shall be shown to
have all one faith: for this is unity of faith, when we all are one,
when we shall all alike acknowledge the common bond. Till then thou must
labor to this end. If for this thou hast received a gift, that thou
mightest edify others, look well that thou overturn not thyself, by
envying another. God hath honored thee, and ordained thee, that thou
shouldest build up another. Yea, for about this was the Apostle also
engaged; and for this was the prophet prophesying and persuading, and
the Evangelist preaching the Gospel, and for this was the pastor and
teacher; all had undertaken one common work. For tell me not of the
difference of the spiritual gifts; but that all had one work. Now when
we shall all believe alike then shall there be unity; for that this is
what he calls “a perfect man,” is plain. And yet he elsewhere calls us
“babes” ([1 Cor. xiii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p45.1"></span>.), even when we are of mature age; but he
is there looking to another comparison, for there it is in comparison
with our future knowledge that he there calls us babes. For having said,
“We know in part” ([1 Cor. 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p45.2"></span>.), he adds also the word “darkly,” and the
like: whereas here he speaks with reference to another thing, with
reference to changeableness, as he saith also elsewhere, “But solid food
is for full-grown men.” ([Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p45.3"></span>.) Do you see then also in what sense he
there calls them full-grown? Observe also in what sense he calls men
“perfect” here, by the words next added, where he says, “that we may be
no longer children.” That we keep, he means to say, that little measure,
which we may have received, with all diligence, with firmness and
steadfastness.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p46"></span>[Eph.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p46.1"></span>. “That we may be no longer.”—The word, “no
longer,” shows that they had of old been in this case, and he reckons
himself moreover as a subject for correction, and corrects himself. For
this cause, he would say, are there so many workmen, that the building
may not be shaken, may not be “carried about,” that the stones may be
firmly fixed. <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) For this is the
character of children, to be tossed to and fro, to be carried about and
shaken. “That we may be no longer,” saith he, “children, tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of
men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error.” “And carried about,”
saith he, “with every wind.” He comes to this figure of speech, to point
out in how great peril doubting souls are. “With every wind,” saith he,
“by the sleight of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error.” The
word “sleight” <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) means the art of
gamesters. Such are the “crafty,” whenever they lay hold on the simpler
sort. For they also change and shift about everything. He here glances
also at human life.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p49"></span>[Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p49.1"></span>. “But speaking truth,” <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md) saith he, “in love, may grow up in all
things into Him, which is the Head, even Christ, from whom,” (that is,
from Christ,) “all the body fitly framed and knit together, through that
which every joint supplieth, according to the working in due measure of
each several part, maketh increase of the body unto the building up of
itself in love.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p51"></span>He expresses himself with great
obscurity, from his desire to utter everything at once. What he means,
however, is this. In the same way as the spirit, or vital principle,
which descends from the brain, communicates the sensitive faculty which
is conveyed through the nerves, not simply to all the members, but
according to the proportion of each member, to that which is capable of
receiving more, more, to that which is capable of less, less, (for the
spirit is the root or source;) so also is Christ. For the souls of men
being dependent upon Him as members, His provident care, and supply of
the spiritual gifts according to a due proportion in the measure of
every single member, effects their increase. But what is the meaning of
this, “by the touch of the supply”? <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) that is to say, by the sensitive
faculty. <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) For that spirit which
is supplied to the members from the head, “touches,” <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) each single member, and thus actuates
it. As though one should say, “the body receiving the supply according
to the proportion of its several members, thus maketh the increase”; or,
in other words, “the members receiving the supply according to the
proportion of their proper measure, thus make increase”; or otherwise
again thus, “the spirit flowing plenteously from above, and
touching <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) all the members, and
supplying them as each is capable of “receiving it, thus maketh
increase.” But wherefore doth he add, “in love”? Because in no other way
is it possible for that Spirit to descend. For as, in case a hand should
happen to be torn from the body, the spirit which pro<span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="iii.iv.xii-Page_106"></span>ceeds
from the brain seeks the limb, and if it finds it not, does not leap
forth from the body, and fly about and go to the hand, but if it finds
it not in its place, does not touch it; so also will it be here, if we
be not bound together in love. All these expressions he uses as tending
to humility. For what, he seems to say, if this or that man receives
more than another? He has received the same Spirit, sent forth from the
same Head, effectually working in all alike, communicating itself to all
alike.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p56"></span>“Fitly framed and knit together.”

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p57"></span>That is, having great care bestowed
upon it; for the body must not be put together anyhow, but with
exceeding art and nicety, since if it gets out of place, it is no
longer. So that each must not only be united to the body, but also
occupy his proper place, since if thou shalt go beyond this, thou art
not united to it, neither dost thou receive the Spirit. Dost thou not
see, that in those dislocations of the bones which take place in any
accident, when a bone gets out of its proper place and occupies that of
another, how it injures the whole body, and oftentimes will produce
death? So that sometimes it will be found to be no longer worth
preserving. For many in many cases will cut it off, and leave a void in
its place; because everywhere what is in excess is an evil. And so again
with the elements, if they lose their proper proportion and be in
excess, they impair the whole system. This is the meaning of the being
“fitly framed and knit together.” Consider then of how vast importance
it is, that each should remain in his own proper place, and not encroach
on another which in nowise appertains to him. Thou puttest the members
together, He supplieth them from above. For as there are in the body
such recipient organs, as we have seen, so is it also with the Spirit,
the whole root or source being from above. For example, the heart is the
recipient of the breath, the liver of the blood, the spleen of the bile,
and the other organs, some of one thing, others of another, but all
these have their source from the brain. So also hath God done, highly
honoring man, and being unwilling to be far from him, He hath made
Himself indeed the source of his dependence, and hath constituted them
fellow-workers with Himself; and some He hath appointed to one office,
and others to another. For example, the Apostle is the most vital vessel
of the whole body, receiving everything from Him; so that He maketh
eternal life to run through them to all, as through veins and arteries,
I mean through their discourse. The Prophet foretells things to come,
whilst He alone ordereth the same; Thou puttest the members
together, <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) but He supplies them
with life, “For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry.” Love builds up, and makes men cleave one to another, and be
fastened and fitted together.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p59"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p59.1"></span>Moral</span>. If therefore we desire to
have the benefit of that Spirit which is from the Head, let us cleave
one to another. For there are two kinds of separation from the body of
the Church; the one, when we wax cold in love, the other, when we dare
commit things unworthy of our belonging to that body; for in either way
we cut ourselves off from the “fullness of Christ.” But if we are
appointed to build up others also, what shall not be done to them who
are first to make division? Nothing will so avail to divide the Church
as love of power. Nothing so provokes God’s anger as the division of the
Church. Yea, though we have achieved ten thousand glorious acts, yet
shall we, if we cut to pieces the fullness of the Church, suffer
punishment no less sore than they who mangled His body. For that indeed
was brought to pass for the benefit of the world, even though it was
done with no such intention; whereas this produces no advantage in any
case, but the injury is excessive. These remarks I am addressing not to
the governors only, but also to the governed. Now a certain holy man
said what might seem to be a bold thing; yet, nevertheless, he spoke it
out. What then is this? He said, that not even the blood of martyrdom
can wash out this sin. <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) For tell
me for what dost thou suffer as a martyr? Is it not for the glory of
Christ? Thou then that yieldest up thy life for Christ’s sake, how dost
thou lay waste the Church, for whose sake Christ yielded up His life?
Hear what Paul saith, “I am not meet to be called an Apostle ([1 Cor.
xv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p60.1"></span>.), because I persecuted the Church of God
and made havoc of it.” ([Gal. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p60.2"></span>.) This injury is not less than that
received at the hands of enemies, nay, it is far greater. For that
indeed renders her even more glorious, whereas this, when she is warred
upon by her own children, disgraces her even before her enemies. Because
it seems to them a great mark of hypocrisy, that those who have been
born in her, and nurtured in her bosom, and have learned perfectly her
secrets, that these should of a sudden change, and do her enemies’ work.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p61"></span>I mean these remarks for those who give
<span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xii-Page_107"></span>themselves up indiscriminately to the
men who are dividing the Church. For if on the one hand those men have
doctrines also contrary to ours, then on that account further it is not
right to mix with them: if, on the other hand, they hold the same
opinions, the reason for not mixing with them is greater still. And why
so? Because then the disease is from lust of authority. Know ye not what
was the fate of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram? ([Num. xvi.
1-35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p61.1"></span>.) Of them only did I say? Was it not also
of them that were with them? What wilt thou say? Shall it be said,
“Their faith is the same, they are orthodox as well as we”? If so, why
then are they not with us? There is “one Lord, one faith, one baptism.”
If their cause is right, then is ours wrong; if ours is right, then is
theirs wrong. “Children,” saith he, “tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind.” Tell me, dost thou think this is enough, to say
that they are orthodox? Is then the ordination <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) of clergy <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md) past and done away? And what is the
advantage of other things, <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) if
this be not strictly observed? For as we must needs contend for the
faith; so must we for this also. For if it is lawful for any one,
according to the phrase of them of old, “to fill his hands,” <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) and to become a priest, let all
approach to minister. In vain has this altar been raised, in vain the
fullness of the Church, in vain the number of the priests. Let us take
them away and destroy them. “God forbid!” ye will say. You are doing
these things, and do ye say, “God forbid”? How say ye, “God forbid,”
when the very things are taking place? I speak and testify, not looking
to my own interest, but to your salvation. But if any one be
indifferent, he must see to it himself: if these things are a care to no
one else, yet are they a care to me. “I planted,” saith he, “Apollos
watered, but God gave the increase.” ([1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.xii-p65.2"></span>..md)
How shall we bear the ridicule of the Greeks? For if they reproach us on
account of our heresies, what will they not say of these things? “If
they have the same doctrines, if the same mysteries, wherefore does a
ruler in one Church invade another? See ye,” say they, “how all things
amongst the Christians are full of vainglory? And there is an ambition
among them, and hypocrisy. Strip them,” say they, “of their numbers, and
they are nothing. Cut out the disease, the corrupt multitude.” Would ye
have me tell what they say of our city, how they accuse us on the score
of our easy compliances? Any one, say they, that chooses may find
followers, and would never be at a loss for them. Oh, what a sneer is
that, what a disgrace are these things! And yet the sneer is one thing,
the disgrace is another. If any amongst us are convicted of deeds the
most disgraceful, and are about to meet with some penalty, great is the
alarm, great is the fear on all sides, lest he should start away, people
say, and join the other side. Yea, let such an one start away ten
thousand times, and let him join them. And I speak not only of those who
have sinned, but if there be any one free from offense, and he has a
mind to depart, let him depart. I am grieved indeed at it, and bewail
and lament it, and am cut to the very heart, as though I were being
deprived of one of my own limbs; and yet I am not so grieved, as to be
compelled to do anything wrong through such fear as this. We have “not
lordship over your faith” ([2 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p65.3"></span>.), beloved, nor command we these things as
your lords and masters. We are appointed for the teaching of the word,
not for power, nor for absolute authority. We hold the place of
counselors to advise you. The counselor speaks his own sentiments, not
forcing the hearer, but leaving him full master of his choice upon what
is said; in this case alone is he blameable, if he fail to utter the
things which present themselves. For this cause do we also say these
things, these things do we assert, that it may not be in your power in
that day to say, “No one told us, no one gave us commandment, we were
ignorant, we thought it was no sin at all.” Therefore I assert and
protest, that to make a schism in the Church is no less an evil than to
fall into heresy. Tell me, suppose a subject of some king, though he did
not join himself to another king, nor give himself to any other, yet
should take and keep hold of his king’s royal purple, and should tear it
all from its clasp, and rend it into many shreds; would he suffer less
punishment than those who join themselves to the service of another? And
what, if withal he were to seize the king himself by the throat and slay
him, and tear his body limb from limb, what punishment could he undergo,
that should be equal to his deserts? Now if in doing this toward a king,
his fellow-servant, he would be committing an act too great for any
punishment to reach; of what hell shall not he be worthy who slays
Christ, and plucks Him limb from limb? of that one which is threatened?
No, I think not, but of another far more dreadful.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p66"></span>Speak, ye women, that are present,—for
this <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xii-Page_108"></span>generally is a failing of women, <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) —relate to them that are absent this
similitude which I have made; startle them. If any think to grieve me
and thus to have their revenge, let them be well aware that they do
these things in vain. For if thou wishest to revenge thyself on me, I
will give thee a method by which thou mayest take vengeance without
injury to thyself; or rather without injury it is not possible to
revenge thyself, but at all events with less injury. Buffet me, woman,
spit upon me, when thou meetest me in the public way, and aim blows at
me. Dost thou shudder at hearing this? When I bid thee buffet me, dost
thou shudder, and dost thou tear thy Lord and Master and not shudder?
Dost thou pluck asunder the limbs of thy Lord and Master, and not
tremble? The Church is our Father’s house. “There is one body, and one
Spirit.” But dost thou wish to revenge thyself on me? Yet stop at me.
Why dost thou revenge thyself on Christ in my stead? nay, rather, why
kick against the nails? In no case indeed is revenge good and right, but
to assault one when another has done the wrong is far worse. Is it I
that wronged you? Why then inflict pain on Him who hath not wronged you?
This is the very extreme of madness. I speak not in irony what I am
about to say, nor without purpose, but as I really think and as I feel.
I would that every one of those who with you are exasperated against me,
and who by this exasperation are injuring themselves, and departing
elsewhere, would direct his blows at me in my very face, would strip me
and scourge me, be his charge against me just or unjust, and let loose
his wrath upon me, rather than that they should dare to commit what they
now dare. If this were done, it were nothing; nothing, that a man who is
a mere nothing and of no account whatever, should be so treated. And
besides, I, the wronged and injured person, might call upon God, and He
might forgive you your sins. Not because I have so great confidence; but
because when he who has been wronged, entreats for him who has done the
wrong, he gains great confidence. “If one man sin against another,” it
is said, “then shall they pray for him” <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) ([1 Sam. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p68.1"></span>.); and if I were unable, I might seek for
other holy men, and entreat them, and they might do it. But now whom
shall we even entreat, when God is outraged by us?

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p69"></span>Mark the consistency; for of those who
belong to this Church, some never approach to communicate at all, or but
once in the year, and then without purpose, and just as it may happen;
others more regularly indeed, yet they too carelessly and without
purpose, and while engaged in conversation, and trifling about nothing:
whilst those who, forsooth, seem to be in earnest, these are the very
persons who work this mischief. Yet surely, if it is for these things ye
are in earnest, it were better that ye also were in the ranks of the
indifferent; or rather it were better still, that neither they should be
indifferent, nor you such as ye are. I speak not of you that are
present, but of those who are deserting from us. The act is adultery.
And if ye bear not to hear these things of them, neither should ye of
us. There must be breach of the law either on the one side or the other.
If then thou hast these suspicions concerning me, I am ready to retire
from my office, and resign it to whomsoever ye may choose. Only let the
Church be one. But if I have been lawfully made and consecrated, entreat
those who have contrary to the law mounted the episcopal throne to
resign it.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p70"></span>These things I have said, not as
dictating to you, but only to secure and protect you. Since every one of
you is come to age, and will have to give account of the things which he
has done, I entreat you not to cast the whole matter on us, and consider
yourselves to be irresponsible, that ye may not go on fruitlessly
deceiving yourselves, and at last bewail it. An account indeed we shall
have to give of your souls; but it will be when we have been wanting on
our part, when we fail to exhort, when we fail to admonish, when we fail
to protest. But after these words, allow even me to say that “I am pure
from the blood of all men” ([Acts xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p70.1"></span>.); and that “God will deliver my soul.”
([Ezek. 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p70.2"></span>.) Say what ye will, give a just cause why
ye depart, and I will answer you. But no, ye will not state it.
Wherefore I entreat you, endeavor henceforward both to resist nobly and
to bring back those who have seceded, that we may with one accord lift
up thanksgiving to God; for to Him belongs the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[102:283](1130024.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p5"></span> \[“The ἕν σῶμα means the totality of
Christians as the *corpus* (*Christi*) *mysticum*; comp. [Eph.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016.md), [Rom.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005.md), [1 Cor.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>. The ἕν πνεῦμα is the Holy Spirit, the
spirit of the *corpus mysticum*; comp. [Eph.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018.md), [1 Cor.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p5.2"></span>. The explanation, ‘one body and one soul,’
is excluded, as at variance with the context by the specifically
Christian character of the other elements, and rendered impossible by
the correct supplying of ἐστί (and not ‘ye ought to be’).”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_283"></span>[103:284](1130024.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p6"></span> \[Note the triad of trinities:—

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p7"></span>- one body.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p8"></span>1. The Church: - one spirit.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p9"></span>- one hope.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p10"></span>- one Lord.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p11"></span>2. Christ: - one faith.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p12"></span>- one baptism.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p13"></span>- over all.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p14"></span>3. God: - through all.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p15"></span>- in all.

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p16"></span>—Meyer, substantially.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_284"></span>[103:285](1130024.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p18"></span> \[“But (δέ) forms the transition from
the summary ‘all,’ ‘all,’ ‘all’ to ‘each individual’ among the
Christians.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_285"></span>[103:286](1130024.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p26"></span> \[“He quotes [Ps. lxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.iv.xii-p26.1"></span>,
with the freedom of a Messianic interpretation of the words, and his
exposition of the Hebrew words yielded essentially the sense expressed
by him. So he took תָּחְקַלָ in the sense: ‘Thou didst take away gifts
to distribute them among men,’ and then translated this in an
explanatory way, ἔδωκε, &c.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_286"></span>[103:287](1130024.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p29"></span> \[This view of Chrysostom is quite at
variance with the context. Ellicott says: To evince still more clearly
the correctness of the Messianic application of the words just cited,
St. Paul urges the antithesis implied by ἀνέβη, namely, κατέβη, a
predication applicable to Christ only, the tacit assumption being that
He who is the subject of the citation is one whose seat was heaven.
Compare [John iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p29.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_287"></span>[104:288](1130024.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p32"></span> Paul was Bishop of Antioch A.D.
260–269, when he was deposed for heresy. Very different accounts are
given of his particular doctrines: St. Athanasius may be securely
followed, however, who says that he denied the doctrine of our Lord’s
preëxistence, asserted that He was a mere man, and that the Word of God
was *in* Him. vid. *Orat*. i. 25, 38; ii. 13; iii. 51. *De decret*. 24,
&c., &c. \[See Schaff’s *History of Christian Ch*., Vol. II., pp. 575,
576.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_288"></span>[104:289](1130024.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p37"></span> \[Both here and in Hom. xliv. on Acts
(xx. 28) Chrysostom reads κυρίου instead of θεοῦ. The latter is,
however, the reading of א B., and is adopted by W. & H. and the Rev.
Ver. (as well as the *textus receptus*).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_289"></span>[104:290](1130024.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p38"></span> \[“The Apostles had an immediate call
from Christ, a destination for all lands and a special power of
miracles. Prophets: not only in the special sense, but also those who
spoke under the *immediate* impulse of the Holy Spirit; Evangelists were
subordinates of the Apostles who traveled about. Pastors and teachers,
constituting one and the same class, were stationary, and probably
included presbyters.—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_290"></span>[104:291](1130024.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p40"></span> \[The proper relation of these
prepositional phrases is brought out in Meyer’s translation: He has,
with a view to the full furnishing of the saints, given those teachers
for the work of ministering, for the edification of the body of Christ.
So Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_291"></span>[105:292](1130024.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p47"></span> \[“It is not the figure of a building
which Paul employs here, but of a ship abandoned to the breakers, on
which figurative expression of restless passive subjection to
influences, compare [Jas. i. 6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p47.1"></span>.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_292"></span>[105:293](1130024.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p48"></span> κυβεία κυβευταί.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[105:294](1130024.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p50"></span> \[“ἀληθεύοντες: The common meaning,
‘To speak truth,’ is clearly unsatisfactory here. It means ‘holding the
truth.’”—Ellicott. “Professing the truth,” Thayer, *Lexicon*. Rev. Ver.
has in margin “dealing truly.” Meyer says it means here, as always,
“speaking the truth,” and correctly.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_294"></span>[105:295](1130024.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p52"></span> ἁφῆς, “joint,” Eng. Tr. Theodoret,
too, *in loc*. interprets *touch*, and considers that it stands for all
the senses. S. Austin translates *tactus in Psalm* x. 7, *de Civ. D*.
xxii. 18, but in the received meaning. \[See Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_295"></span>[105:296](1130024.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p53"></span> \[“Meyer still retains the
interpretation of Chrysostom and Theodoret that ἁφὴ=αἴσθησις, “feeling,”
“perception,” and connects the clause with αὔξησιν ποιεῖται: but the
parallel passage, [Col. ii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.xii-p53.1"></span>, leaves it scarcely doubtful that the
meaning usually assigned is correct, and that the clause is to be
connected with the participles.”—Ellicott. So Thayer, *Lex*., Rev.
Ver.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_296"></span>[105:297](1130024.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p54"></span> ἁπτόμενον.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[105:298](1130024.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p55"></span> ἁπτόμενον.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[106:299](1130024.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p58"></span> \[The text fluctuates here. We have
given that of Field, though neither it nor any of the other readings
yields a satisfactory sense. Field’s text is, συντιθεῖς τὰ μέλη, αὐτὸς
αὐτοῖς ζωὴν χορηγεῖ. Another text, attested by three <span
class="c16"><span id="iii.iv.xii-p58.1"></span>mss</span>., has
συντιθεὶς τὰ μέσα, αὐτὸς αὐτοῖς ζωὴν χορηγεῖ. Savile’s text, supported
by three <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.xii-p58.2"></span>mss</span>., has καὶ ἐκεῖνος μὲν συντιθεῖ
τὰ ὀστᾶ, αὐτὸς δὲ ζωὴν χορηγεῖ. It will be noticed that this same
expression occurs a little above, followed by a clause like that which
follows here.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_299"></span>[106:300](1130024.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p60"></span> “What sacrifice do they believe they
celebrate who are rivals of the Priests?” “If such men were even killed
for confession of the Christian name, not even by their blood is this
stain washed out.…He cannot be a Martyr, who is not in the Church.”—St.
Cyprian, *Treat*. v. 12, p. 141.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[107:301](1130024.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p62"></span> \[See Bingham, Ant. Bk. iv. ch. vi.
sec. 11.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_301"></span>[107:302](1130024.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p63"></span> χειροτονίας. At this time there were
two orthodox successions in Antioch, that of Paulinus and Evagrius, who
were successively representatives of the old line which the Arians had
dispossessed, and which Western Christendom supported; and that of
Meletius and Flavian, to which St. Chrysostom adhered, and the Eastern
Church generally, being the Arian succession conformed to orthodoxy. The
schism was terminated A.D. 392, on the death of Evagrius, though his
party continued for twenty years longer.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[107:303](1130024.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p64"></span> \[τῶν ἄλλων, wanting in the text of
Field, is attested by four good authorities, and yields the only sense
that suits the context.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_303"></span>[107:304](1130024.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p65"></span> [Exodus xxix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.iv.xii-p65.1"></span>.
Our translation has, “Thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons”; the
margin gives the literal rendering, “Thou shalt fill the hands of
Aaron.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[108:305](1130024.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p67"></span> St. Chrysostom was eventually banished
and brought to his end by the Empress Eudoxia. Women had taken a strong
part with the Arians from the first, to which perhaps he alludes. When
Arius began his heresy, he was joined by seven hundred single women.
Epiphan. *Hær*. 69, 3; vid. also Socr. ii. 2, *of the Court*, Greg. Naz.
*Or*. 48, of Constantinople, &c., &c.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[108:306](1130024.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="iii.iv.xii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xii-p68"></span> \[This is the reading of the
Septuagint, as follows: ἂν εἰς ἄνθρωπόν τις ἁμάρτῃ, προσεύξονται περὶ
αὐτοῦ. The Hebrew, however, is different, and reads, “If one man sin
against another, God shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord,
who shall entreat for him?” So the Rev. Ver.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 4:17](1130025.md)
