[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130018)  [Next](1130020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p2"></span>[Eph.
2.17-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p3"></span>“And He came and preached peace to you
that were far off, and peace to them that were nigh, for through Him we
both have our access in one Spirit unto the Father. So then ye are no
more strangers and sojourners, but ye are fellow-citizens with the
saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being the chief
corner-stone. In whom each several building, fitly framed together,
groweth into a holy temple in the Lord. In whom ye also are builded
together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>He</span> sent not, saith the Apostle, by
the hand of another, nor did He announce these tidings to us by means of
any other, but Himself did it in His own person. He sent not Angel nor
Archangel on the mission, because to repair so many and vast mischiefs
and to declare what had been wrought was in the power of none other, but
required His own coming. <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) The
Lord then took upon Himself the rank of a servant, nay, almost of a
minister, “and came, and preached peace to you,” saith he, “that were
far off, and to them that were nigh.” To the Jews, he means, who as
compared with our<span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-Page_75"></span>selves were nigh. “For through Him we
both have our access in one Spirit unto the Father.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6"></span>“Peace,” saith he, that “peace” which is
towards God. He hath reconciled us. For the Lord Himself also saith,
“Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you.” ([John xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>.)
And again, “Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” ([John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>.)
And again, “Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do.” ([John
xiv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p6.3"></span>.) And again, “For the Father loveth you.”
([John xvi. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p6.4"></span>.) These are so many evidences of peace. But
how towards the Gentiles? “Because through Him we both have our access
in one Spirit unto the Father,” not ye less, and they more, but all by
one and the same grace. The wrath He appeased by His death, and hath
made us meet for the Father’s love through the Spirit. Mark again, the
“in” means “by” or “through.” By Himself and the Spirit that is, He hath
brought us unto the Father. “So then ye are no more strangers and
sojourners, but fellow-citizens with the saints.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7"></span>Perceive ye that it is not with the Jews
simply, no, but with those saintly and great men, such as Abraham, and
Moses, and Elias? It is for the self-same city with these we are
enrolled, for that we declare ourselves. “For they that say such
things,” saith he, “make it manifest that they are seeking after a
country of their own.” ([Heb. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>.)
No longer are we strangers from the saints, nor foreigners. For they who
shall not attain to heavenly blessings, are foreigners. “For the Son,”
saith Christ, “abideth for ever.” ([John viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p8"></span>“And of the household,” he continues,
“of God.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p9"></span>The very thing which they at the first
had, by means of so many toils and troubles, hath been for you
accomplished by the grace of God. Behold the hope of your calling.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p10"></span>“Being built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p11"></span>Observe how he blends all together, the
Gentiles, the Jews, <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) the
Apostles, the Prophets, and Christ, and illustrates the union sometimes
from the body, and sometimes from the building: “built,” saith he, “upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets;” that is, the Apostles and
Prophets are a foundation, <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) and
he places the Apostles first, though they are in order of time last,
doubtless to represent and express this, that both the one and the other
are alike a foundation, and that the whole is one building, and that
there is one root. Consider, that the Gentiles have the Patriarchs as a
foundation. He here speaks more strongly of that point than he does when
he speaks of a “grafting in.” There he rather attaches them on. Then he
adds, that He who binds the whole together in Christ. For the chief
corner-stone binds together both the walls, and the foundations.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p14"></span>“In whom each several building.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p15"></span>Mark, how he knits it all together, and
represents Him at one time, as holding down the whole body from above,
and welding it together; at another time, as supporting the building
from below, and being, as it were, a root, or base. And whereas he had
used the expression, “He created in Himself of the twain one new man;”
([Eph. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>.) by this he clearly shows us, that by
Himself Christ knits together the two walls: and again, that in Him it
was created. And “He is the first-born,” <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) saith he, “of all creation,” that is,
He Himself supports all things.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p17"></span>“In whom each several building, fitly
framed together.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p18"></span>Whether you speak of the roof, or of
the walls, or of any other part whatsoever, <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) He it is supports the whole. Thus he
elsewhere calls Him a foundation. “For other foundations,” saith he,
“can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” ([1
Cor. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p19.1"></span>.) “In whom each several building,” he
saith, “fitly framed together.” Here he displays the perfectness of it,
and indicates that one cannot otherwise have place in it, unless by
living with great exactness. “It groweth saith he into a holy temple in
the Lord, in whom ye also,” he adds, “are builded together.” He is
speaking continuously: “Into a holy temple, for a habitation of God in
the Spirit.” What then is the object of this building? It is that God
may dwell in this temple. For each of you severally is a temple, and all
of you together are a temple. And He dwelleth in you as in the body of
Christ, and as in a Spiritual temple. He does not use the word which
means our coming to God, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p19.2"></span>πρόσοδος</span>) but which implies God’s
bringing us to Himself, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p19.3"></span>προσαγωγή</span>) for we came not out of
<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-Page_76"></span>ourselves, but we were brought nigh by
Him. “No one,” saith Christ, “cometh unto the Father but by Me.” And
again, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life.” ([John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p19.4"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p20"></span>He joins them with the Saints and again
returns to his former image, nowhere suffering them to be disunited from
Christ. Doubtless then, this is a building that shall go on until His
coming. Doubtless it was for this reason that Paul said, “As a wise
master builder, I laid a foundation.” ([1 Cor.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p20.1"></span>.) And again that Christ is the foundation.
What then means all this? You observe that the comparisons have all
referred to the subject-matters, and that we must not expound them to
the very letter. The Apostle speaks from analogy as Christ does, where
He calls the Father an husbandman, ([John xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p20.2"></span>.)
and Himself a root. ([Rev. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p20.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p21"></span>[Eph.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p21.1"></span>. “For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of
Christ Jesus in behalf of you Gentiles.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p22"></span>He has mentioned Christ’s great and
affectionate care; he now passes on to his own, insignificant indeed as
it is, and a very nothing in comparison with that, and yet this is
enough to engage them to himself. For this cause, saith he, am I also
bound. <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) For if my Lord was
crucified for your sakes, much more am I bound. He not only was bound
Himself, but allows His servants to be bound also,—“for you Gentiles.”
It is full of emphasis; not only do we no longer loathe you, but we are
even bound, saith he, for your sakes and of this exceeding grace am I
partaker.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p24"></span>[Eph.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p24.1"></span>. “If so be that ye have heard of the
dispensation of that grace of God, which was given me to you-ward.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p25"></span>He alludes to the prediction addressed
to Ananias concerning him at Damascus, when the Lord said, “Go thy way,
for he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear My name before the Gentiles
and Kings.” ([Acts ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p26"></span>By “dispensation of grace,” he means
the revelation made to him. As much as to say, “I learned it not from
man. ([Gal. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p26.1"></span>.) He vouchsafed to reveal it even to me,
though but an individual for your sakes. For Himself said unto me, saith
he, “Depart, for I will send thee forth far hence unto the Gentiles.”
([Acts xxii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p26.2"></span>.) “If so be that ye have heard” for a
dispensation it was, a mighty one; to call one, uninfluenced from any
other quarter, immediately from above, and to say, “Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou Me?” and to strike him blind with that ineffable light!
“if so be that ye have heard,” <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)
saith he, “of the dispensation of that grace of God which was given me
to you-ward.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p28"></span>[Eph.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p28.1"></span>. “How that by revelation was made known
unto me the mystery, as I wrote afore in few words.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p29"></span>Perhaps he had informed them of it by
some persons, or had not long before been writing to them. <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) Here he is pointing out that the whole
is of God, that we have contributed nothing. For what? I ask, was not
Paul himself, the wonderful, he that was so versed in the law, he that
was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel according to the most perfect
manner, was not he saved by grace? With good reason too does he call
this a mystery, for a mystery it is, to raise the Gentiles in a moment
to a higher rank than the Jews. “As I wrote afore,” saith he, “in few
words,” i.e., briefly,

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p31"></span>[Eph.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p31.1"></span>. “Whereby, when ye read, ye can perceive.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p32"></span>Amazing! So then he wrote not the
whole, nor so much as he should have written. But here the nature of the
subject prevented it. Elsewhere, as in the case of the Hebrews ([Heb. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p32.1"></span>.) and the Corinthians, ([1 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p32.2"></span>.)
the incapacity of the hearers. “Whereby, when ye read, ye can perceive,”
saith he, “my understanding in the mystery of Christ,” i.e., how I knew,
how I understood either such things as God hath spoken, or else, that
Christ sitteth at the right hand of God; and then too the dignity, in
that God “hath not dealt so with any nation.” ([Ps. cxlvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p32.3"></span>.) And then to explain what nation this is
with whom God hath thus dealt, he adds,

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p33"></span>[Eph.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p33.1"></span>. “Which in other generations was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it hath now been revealed unto His holy
Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p34"></span>What then, tell me, did not the
Prophets <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) know it? How then doth
Christ say, that Moses and the Prophets wrote “these things concerning
Me?” And again, “If ye believed Moses, ye would believe Me.” ([John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p35.1"></span>.) And again, “Ye search the Scriptures,
because ye think that in them ye have eternal life, and these are they
which bear witness of me.” ([John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p35.2"></span>.) His meaning is this, either that it was
not revealed unto all men, for he adds, “which in other generations was
not made known unto the sons of men, as it hath now been revealed;” or
else, that it was not thus made known by the very facts and realities
<span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-Page_77"></span>themselves, “as it hath now been revealed
unto His holy Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit.” For reflect. Peter,
had he not been instructed by the Spirit, never would have gone to the
Gentiles. For hear what he says, “Then hath God given unto them the Holy
Ghost, as well as unto us.” ([Acts x.
47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p35.3"></span>.) That it was by the Spirit that God chose
that they should receive the grace. The Prophets then spoke, yet they
knew it not thus perfectly; so far from it, that not even did the
Apostles, after they had heard it. So far did it surpass all human
calculation, and the common expectation.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p36"></span>[Eph.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p36.1"></span>. “That the Gentiles are fellow-heirs, and
fellow-members of the body and fellow partakers.” <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p38"></span>What is this; “fellow-heirs, and
fellow-partakers of the promise, and fellow-members of the body?” This
last is the great thing, that they should be one body; this exceeding
closeness of relation to Him. For that they were to be called indeed,
that they knew, but that it was so great, as yet they knew not. This
therefore he calls the mystery. “Of the promise.” The Israelites were
partakers, and the Gentiles also were fellow-partakers of the promise of
God.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p39"></span>“In Christ Jesus through the Gospel.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p40"></span>That is, by His being sent unto them
also, and by their believing; for it is not said they are fellow-heirs
simply, but “through the Gospel.” However, this indeed, is nothing so
great, it is in fact a small thing, and it discloses to us another and
greater thing, that not only men knew not this, but that neither Angels
nor Archangels, nor any other created power, knew it. For it was a
mystery, and was not revealed. “That ye can perceive,” he saith, “my
understanding.” This alludes, perhaps, to what he said to them in the
Acts, that he had some knowledge that the Gentiles also were called.
This, he says, is his own knowledge, “the knowledge of the mystery,”
which he had mentioned, viz., “that Christ will in Himself make of the
twain one new man.” For by revelation he was instructed, both he and
Peter, that they must not spurn the Gentiles; and this he states in his
defence.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p41"></span>[Eph.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p41.1"></span>. “Whereof I was made a minister, according
to the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the
working of His power.”

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p42"></span>He had said, “I am a prisoner;” but now
again he says, that all is of God, as he says, “according to the gift of
His grace;” for according to the power of the gift is the dignity of
this privilege. But the gift would not have been enough, had it not also
implanted in him power.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p43"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.1"></span>Moral</span>. For a work indeed it was of
power, of mighty power, and such as no human diligence was equal to. For
he brought three qualifications to the preaching of the word, a zeal
fervent and venturous, a soul ready to undergo any possible hardship,
and knowledge and wisdom combined. For his love of enterprise, his
blamelessness of life, had availed nothing, had he not also received the
power of the Spirit. And look at it as seen first in himself, or rather
hear his own words. “That our ministration be not blamed.” ([2 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p43.2"></span>.)
And again, “For our exhortation, is not of error, nor of uncleanness,
nor in guile, nor a cloke of covetousness.” ([1 Thess.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.3"></span>.) Thus thou hast seen his blamelessness.
And again, “For we take thought for things honorable, not only in the
sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.” ([2 Cor. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.4"></span>.) Then again, besides these; “I protest by
that glorying in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die
daily.” ([1 Cor. xv. 31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.5"></span>.) And again; “Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution?”
([Rom. viii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.6"></span>.) And again; “In much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in watchings.” ([2 Cor.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.7"></span>.) Then again, his prudence and management;
“To the Jews I became as a Jew, to them that are without law as without
law, to them that are under the law as under the law.” ([1 Cor. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.8"></span>.) He shaves his head also, ([Acts. xxi.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.9"></span>.) and does numberless things of the sort.
But the crown of all is in the power of the Holy Ghost. “For I will not
dare to speak,” saith he, “of any things save those which Christ wrought
through me.” ([Rom. xv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.10"></span>.) And again, “For what is there wherein
you were made inferior to the rest of the Churches?” ([2 Cor. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.11"></span>.) And again, “For in nothing was I behind
the very chiefest Apostles though I am nothing.” ([2 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p43.12"></span>.) Without these things, the work had been
impossible.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p44"></span>It was not then by his miracles that
men were made believers; no, it was not the miracles that did this, nor
was it upon the ground of these that he claimed his high pretension, but
upon those other grounds. For a man must be alike irreproachable in
conduct, prudent and discreet in his dealings with others, regardless of
danger, and apt to teach. It was by these qualifications that the
greater part of his success was achieved. Where there were these, there
was no need of miracles. At least we see he was successful in numberless
such cases, quite antecedently to the use of miracles. But, now-a-days,
we without <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-Page_78"></span>any of these would fain command all
things. Yet if one of them be separated from the other, it henceforth
becomes useless. What is the advantage of a man’s being ever so
regardless of danger, if his life be open to censure. “For if the light
that is in thee be darkness,” saith Christ, “how great is that
darkness?” ([Mat. vi. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p44.1"></span>.) Again, what the advantage of a man’s
being of an irreproachable life, if he is sluggish and indolent? “For,
he that doth not take his cross, and follow after Me,” saith He, “is not
worthy of Me;” ([Mat. x. 38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p44.2"></span>.) and so, “The good shepherd layeth down
his life for the sheep.” ([John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p44.3"></span>.) Again, what is the advantage of being
both these, unless a man is at the same time prudent and discreet in
“knowing how he ought to answer each one?” ([Col. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p44.4"></span>.)
Even if miracles be not in our power, yet both these qualities are in
our power. Still however, notwithstanding Paul contributed so much from
himself, yet did he attribute all to grace. This is the act of a
grateful servant. And we should never so much as have heard of his good
deeds, had he not been brought to a necessity of declaring them.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p45"></span>And are we worthy then so much as even
to mention the name of Paul? He, who had moreover grace to aid him, yet
was not satisfied, but contributed to the work ten thousand perils;
whilst we, who are destitute of that source of confidence, whence, tell
me, do we expect either to preserve those who are committed to our
charge, or to gain those who are not come to the fold;—men, as we are,
who have been making a study of self-indulgence, who are searching the
world over for ease, and who are unable, or rather who are unwilling, to
endure even the very shadow of danger, and are as far distant from his
wisdom as heaven is from earth? Hence it is too that they who are under
us are at so great a distance behind the men of those days; because the
disciples of those days were better than the teachers of these, isolated
as they were in the midst of the populace, and of tyrants, and having
all men on all sides their enemies, and yet not in the slightest degree
dragged down or yielding. Hear at least what he saith to the
Philippians, ([Philip. i. 29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.1"></span>.) “Because to you it hath been granted in
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer in
his behalf.” And again to the Thessalonians, ([1 Thes. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.2"></span>.) “For ye, brethren, became imitators of
the churches of God which are in Judæa.” And again in writing to the
Hebrews ([Heb. x. 34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.3"></span>.) he said, “And ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your possessions.” And to the Colossians ([Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p45.4"></span>.)
he testifies, saying, “For ye died, and your life is hid with Christ in
God.” And indeed to these very Ephesians he bears witness of many perils
and dangers. And again in writing to the Galatians, ([Gal. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p45.5"></span>.)
he says, “Did ye suffer so many things in vain? if it be indeed in
vain.” And you see them too, all employed in doing good. Hence it was
that both grace wrought effectually in those days, hence also that they
lived in good works. Hear, moreover, what he writes to the Corinthians,
against whom he brings charges out of number; yet does he not bear even
them record, where he says, “Yea, what zeal it wrought in you, yea, what
longing!” ([1 Cor. vii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.6"></span>.) And again, in how many points does he
bear them record on this subject? These things one shall not see
now-a-days, even in teachers. They are all gone and perished. And the
cause is, that love hath waxed cold, that sinners go unpunished; (for
hear what he says writing to Timothy, ([1 Tim. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.7"></span>.) “Them that sin, reprove in the sight of
all;”) it is that the rulers are in a sickly state; for if the head be
not sound, how can the rest of the body maintain its vigor? But mark how
great is the present disorder. They, who were living virtuously, and who
under any circumstance might have confidence, have taken possession of
the tops of the mountains, <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) and
have escaped out of the world, separating themselves as from an enemy
and an alien and not from a body to which they belonged.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p47"></span>Plagues too, teeming with untold
mischiefs, have lighted upon the Churches. The chief offices have become
saleable. <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) Hence numberless evils
are springing, and there is no one to redress, no one to reprove them.
Nay, the disorder has assumed a sort of method and consistency. Has a
man done wrong, and been arraigned for it? His effort is not to prove
himself guiltless, but to find if possible accomplices in his crimes.
What is to become of us? since hell is our threatened portion. Believe
me, had not God stored up punishment for us there, ye would see every
day tragedies deeper than the disasters of the Jews. What then? however
let no one take offence, for I mention no names; suppose some one were
to come into this church to present you that are here at this moment,
those that are now with me, and to make inquisition of them; or rather
not now, but suppose on Easter day any one, endued with such a spirit,
as to have a thorough knowledge of the things they had been doing,
should narrowly examine all that came to Communion, and were being
washed \[in Baptism\] after they had attended the mysteries; many things
would be discovered more shocking than the Jewish <span id="page_79">p.
79</span> <span id="iii.iv.vii-Page_79"></span>horrors. He would find
persons who practise augury, who make use of charms, and omens and
incantations, and who have committed fornication, adulterers, drunkards,
and revilers,—covetous, I am unwilling to add, lest I should hurt the
feelings of any of those who are standing here. What more? Suppose any
one should make scrutiny into all the communicants in the world, what
kind of transgression is there which he would not detect? and what if he
examined those in authority? Would he not find them eagerly bent upon
gain? making traffic of high places? envious, malignant, vainglorious,
gluttonous, and slaves to money?

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p49"></span>Where then there is such impiety as
this going on, what dreadful calamity must we not expect? And to be
assured how sore vengeance they incur who are guilty of such sins as
these, consider the examples of old. One single man, a common soldier,
stole the sacred property, and all were smitten. Ye know, doubtless, the
history I mean? I am speaking of Acham the son of Carmi, the man who
stole the consecrated spoil. ([Joshua vii.
1-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p49.1"></span>.) The time too when the Prophet spoke, was
a time when their country was full of soothsayers, like that of the
Philistines. ([Isa. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p49.2"></span>.) Whereas now there are evils out of
number at the full, and not one fears. Oh, henceforth let us take the
alarm. God is accustomed to punish the righteous also with the wicked;
such was the case with Daniel, and with the three holy Children, such
has been the case with ten thousand others, such is the case in the wars
that are taking place even at the present day. For the one indeed,
whatever burden of sins they have upon them, by this means lay aside
even that; but not so the other.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p50"></span>On account of all these things, let us
take heed to ourselves. Do ye not see these wars? Do ye not hear of
these disasters? Do ye learn no lesson from these things? Nations and
whole cities are swallowed up and destroyed, and myriads as many again
are enslaved to the barbarians.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p51"></span>If hell bring us not to our senses, yet
let these things. What, are these too mere threats, are they not facts
that have already taken place? Great is the punishment they have
suffered, yet a greater still shall we suffer, who are not brought to
our senses even by their fate. Is this discourse wearing? <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) I am aware it is myself, but if we
attend to it, it has its advantage; because this it has not, the quality
of an address to please,—nay more, nor ever shall have, but ever those
topics which may avail to humble and to chasten the soul. For these will
be to us the ground-work of those blessings to come hereafter, to which
God grant that we may all attain, in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost be glory and might and honor,
now and henceforth, and forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_234"></span>[74:235](1130019.htm#fr_234) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p5"></span> \[This passage does not refer to His
bodily advent upon earth, as Chrysostom interprets, but following the
account of his crucifixion more naturally refers to a spiritual advent,
namely in the Holy Spirit, (in so far as it is Christ’s spirit) Christ
Himself came. He is our peace; yes, and He came and by His spirit and
the mouths of the Apostles He preached it.—Meyer and Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_235"></span>[75:236](1130019.htm#fr_235) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p12"></span> \[Field’s text has not the words, “the
Jews;” but as there is excellent authority for them and they suit the
context better, we have left them, with the Oxford translator, in our
text.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_236"></span>[75:237](1130019.htm#fr_236) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p13"></span> \[“It is wrong to take this genitive
as the genitive of apposition, as Chrysostom, for the Apostles and
Prophets are not the foundation but have laid it. ([1 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>.) Nor are the Prophets here mentioned O.T.
prophets but N.T. prophets. (cf. [Eph.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005), [Eph.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p13.2"></span>.).—Meyer.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_237"></span>[75:238](1130019.htm#fr_237) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p16"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>.
i.e. “Begotten before every creature;” “begotten of His Father before
all worlds.” It is explained of our Lord’s divine nature by Origen,
*Periarch*. i. 2. Tertullian *in Prax*. 7. *in Marcion*, v. 19. S.
Hilar. *de Trin*. viii. 50. S. Ambros. *de Fid*. i. 14. S. Basil *in
Eunom*. iv. in [Col. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>. Others understand the expression to
denote the Only-Begotten considered as becoming the origin of the new
creation,—as beginning in His flesh, as being the Only-Begotten, the
regenerate world. Thus S. Athanasius *Orat*. iii. 62, 63. S. Greg. Nyss.
*de Perfect*. p. 722. *contra. Eunom*. i. p. 24. iii. pp. 113, 114. S.
Cyril. *de Trin*. iv. p. 518. S. August. *in Rom*. 56. Theodoret
interprets the word in both ways, *in loc*. and in [Ps.
88:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#000), [Ps.
28:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p16.3"></span>. S. Chrysostom too, *Hom. Son. Col*. i.
15. may be understood according to either interpretation. Indeed they
are quite consistent with each other.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[75:239](1130019.htm#fr_238) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p19"></span> \[“Chrysostom is wrong in holding that
by πᾶσα οἰκοδομή is signified every ‘part’ of the building (wall, roof,
etc.,) since οἴκοδομή rather denotes the ‘aggregate’ of the single parts
of the building. Πᾶσα οἰκοδομή means ‘every building’ and is here to be
interpreted, ‘every Christian community, each
congregation.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_239"></span>[76:240](1130019.htm#fr_239) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p23"></span> \[The Syriac Version followed by
commentators from Chrysostom to Meyer makes ὁδέσμιος predicate,
supplying “am.” “I Paul am the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you
Gentiles.” This is open to grave objections. ῾Ο δεσμος is rather in
apposition and the broken construction is resumed at [Eph.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p23.1"></span>.—Riddle, Ellicott, Alford, Braune. R.V.
Comp. [Eph. 4.1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p23.2"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_240"></span>[76:241](1130019.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p27"></span> \[“Gentle appeal, expressed in a
hypothetical form and conveying the hope that his words had not been
forgotten.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_241"></span>[76:242](1130019.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p30"></span> \[“This parenthetical remark of the
Apostle refers not to a lost letter but to the section last treated of
concerning the Gentiles attaining salvation.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_242"></span>[76:243](1130019.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p35"></span> \[Prophets here refers, as before, to
New Testament prophets, and not, as Chrysostom understands it, to O.T.
prophets.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_243"></span>[77:244](1130019.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p37"></span> \[“Fellow-heirs (συγκληρονόμα) denotes
the joint possession with the believing Jews of the eternal Messianic
bliss.”—Meyer. “The following words (σύσσωμα καὶ συμμέτοχα), which seem
to have been coined by the apostle, are well rendered by R.V.,
‘fellow-members of the body, and fellow-partakers,’ and bring out more
fully the relation of the fellow-heirs to each other.”—Riddle.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_244"></span>[78:245](1130019.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p45.8"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p46"></span> This alludes to the Monks who lived in
the mountains about Antioch, where these Homilies seem to have been
written. Compare Homily xiii. p. 2. vid. *Adv. Oppugn*. i. 7, 8.
Elsewhere he blames persons who retired, as hiding their talents, vid.
*I Cor. Hom*. vi. 8.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[78:246](1130019.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p48"></span> The same sin is noticed among other
places by S. Basil *Ep*. 53. S. Ambrose *in Luc*. lib. ix. 17–19. S.
Jerome *in Mat*. xxi. 12, 13.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[79:247](1130019.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iii.iv.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p52"></span> S. Chrysostom complains that his rich
hearers, when the choice lay between theatre or race and Church,
preferred the former; alleging the heat and crowd of the latter, vid. t.
3. *Hom*. iii. xii. and xv. (Ed. Ben.) *I Cor. Hom*. v. fin. We see his
care to consult for the tastes and capacities of his hearers in his
preaching, *in [Ps. 41](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.vii-p52.1"></span>*. init. and t. 3. *Hom*. vii. n. 3. (Ed.
Ben.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 3:8-11](1130020)
