[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130108)  [Next](1130110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.xvii-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy v.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p3"></span>“I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ and the elect angels, that thou observe these things
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. Lay
hands hastily on no man, neither be partaker of other men’s sins: keep
thyself pure. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy
stomach’s sake and thine often infirmities.”

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>Having</span> spoken of Bishops and Deacons,
of men, and women, of widows and elders, and of all others, and having
shown how great was the authority of a Bishop, now he was speaking of
judgment, he has added, “I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without
preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.” Thus
fearfully he charges him. For though Timothy was his beloved son, he did
not therefore stand in awe of him. For as he was not ashamed to say of
himself, “Lest by any means when I have preached to others, I myself
should be a cast-away” ([1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>.); much less would he be afraid or ashamed
in the case of Timothy. He called the Father and the Son to witness. But
wherefore the elect Angels? From great moderation, as Moses said, “I
call heaven and earth to witness” ([Deut. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p4.3"></span>.); and again, “Hear ye, O mountains, and
strong foundations of the earth.” ([Mic. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xvii-p4.4"></span>..md)
He calls the Father and the Son to witness what he has said, making his
appeal to Them against that future Day, that if anything should be done
that ought not to be done, he was clear from the guilt of it.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p5"></span>“That thou observe these things without
preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.” That is,
that thou deal impartially and equally between those who are upon trial
and are to be judged by thee, that no one may pre-occupy thy mind, or
gain thee over to his side beforehand.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p6"></span>But who are the elect Angels? It is
because there are some not elect. As Jacob calls to witness God and the
heap ([Gen. xxxi. 45](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#045.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>.), so we often take at once superior and
inferior persons to witness; so great a thing is testimony. As if he had
said, I call to witness God and His Son and His servants, that I have
charged thee: so before them I charge thee. He impresses Timothy with
fear; after which he adds, what was most vital, <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281.md) and bears most on the maintenance
of the Church, the matter of Ordinations. “Lay hands,” he says,
“suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men’s sins.” What is
“suddenly”? Not upon a first, nor a second, nor a third trial, but after
frequent and strict examination and circumspection. For it is an affair
of no common peril. For thou wilt be responsible for the sins committed
by him, as well his past as his future sins, because thou hast delegated
to him this power. For if thou overlook the past unduly, thou art
answerable for the future also, as being the cause of them, by placing
him in that station, and of the past too, for not leaving him to mourn
over them, and to be in compunction. For as thou art a partaker of his
good actions, so art thou of his sins.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p8"></span>“Keep thyself pure.” This he says with
reference to chastity.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p9"></span>“Drink no longer water, but use a little
wine for thy stomach’s sake and thy often infirmities.” If one who had
practiced fasting to such an extent, and used only water, so long that
he had brought on “infirmities” and “frequent infirmities,” is thus
commanded to be chaste, and does not refuse the admonition, much less
ought we to be offended when we receive an admonition from any one. But
why did not Paul restore strength to his stomach? Not because he could
not—for he whose garment had raised the dead <span id="page_465">p.
465</span> <span id="v.iii.xvii-Page_465"></span>was clearly able to do
this too,—but because he had a design of importance in withholding such
aid. What then was his purpose? <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282.md) That even now, if we see great and
virtuous men afflicted with infirmities, we may not be offended, for
this was a profitable visitation. If indeed to Paul himself a “messenger
of Satan” was sent that he should not be “exalted above measure” ([2
Cor. xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p10.2"></span>.), much more might it be so with Timothy.
For the miracles he wrought were enough to have rendered him arrogant.
For this reason he is left to be subject to the rules of medicine, that
he may be humbled, and others may not be offended, but may learn that
they who performed such excellent actions were men of the same nature as
themselves. In other respects also Timothy seems to have been subject to
disease, which is implied by that expression, “Thy often infirmities,”
as well of other parts as of the stomach. He does not however allow him
to indulge freely in wine, but as much as was for health and not for
luxury. <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283.md)

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p12"></span>[1 Tim.
5.24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p12.1"></span>. “Some men’s sins are open beforehand,
going before to judgment; and some they follow after.”

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p13"></span>In speaking of ordination, he had said,
“Be not partaker of other men’s sins.” But what, he might say, if I be
ignorant of them? Why, “some men’s sins are open beforehand, going
before them to judgment, and some they follow after.” Some men’s, he
means, are manifest, because they, go before, whilst others’ are
unknown, because they follow after.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p14"></span>[1 Tim.
5.25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p14.1"></span>. “Likewise also the good works of some are
manifest beforehand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.”

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p15"></span>[1 Tim.
6.1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p15.1"></span>. “Let as many servants as are under the
yoke count their masters worthy of all honor, that the Name of God and
His doctrine be not blasphemed.”

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p16"></span>Let them count them “worthy of all
honor,” he says; for do not suppose, because thou art a believer, that
thou art therefore a free man: since thy freedom is to serve the more
faithfully. For if the unbeliever sees slaves conducting themselves
insolently on account of their faith, he will blaspheme, as if the
Doctrine produced insubordination. But when he sees them obedient, he
will be more inclined to believe, and will the rather attend to our
words. But God, and the Gospel we preach, will be blasphemed, if they
are disobedient. But what if their own master be an unbeliever? Even in
that case they ought to submit, for God’s Name’s sake.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p17"></span>[1 Tim.
6.2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p17.1"></span>. “And they that have believing masters,
let them not despise them because they are brethren, but rather do them
service, because they are faithful and beloved partakers of the
benefit.”

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p18"></span>As though he had said, If ye are
thought worthy of so great a benefit, as to have your masters for your
brethren, on this account ye ought more especially to submit.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p19"></span>“Going before to judgment.” This he had
said, implying that of evil actions here some are concealed, and some
are not; but there neither the good nor the bad can be concealed. And
what is that going before to judgment? When one commits offenses that
already condemn him, or when he is incorrigible, and when one thinks to
set him right and cannot succeed. What then? What is the use of
mentioning this? Because if here any escape detection, they will not
hereafter. There all things are laid open; and this is the greatest
consolation to those who do well.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p20"></span>Then because he had said, “Do nothing
by partiality,” as if under the necessity of interpreting it, he adds,
“As many servants as are under the yoke.” But you will say, What has a
Bishop to do with this? Much surely, for it is his office to exhort and
to teach these too. And here he makes excellent regulations with respect
to them. For we see him everywhere commanding the servants rather than
their masters, showing them the ways of submission, and treating them
with great regard. <span id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284.md) He exhorts
them therefore to submit with great meekness. But the masters he
recommends to forbear the use of terror. “Forbearing threatening” ([Eph.
vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p21.1"></span>.), he says. And why does he thus command?
In the case of unbelievers, naturally, because it would have been
unreasonable to address those who would pay no heed to him; but where
believers were concerned, what was his reason? Because masters
contribute greater benefits to their servants, than servants to their
masters. For the former furnish the money to purchase for them
sufficient food and clothing; and bestow much care upon them in other
respects, so that the masters pay them the larger service, which is here
intimated, when he says, “they are faithful and beloved, partakers of
the benefit.” <span id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285.md) They suffer
much toil and trouble for your repose, ought they not in return to
receive much honor from their servants?

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p23"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xvii-p23.1"></span>Moral.</span> But if he exhorts servants to
render such implicit obedience, consider what ought to be our
disposition towards our Master, who brought us into existence out of
nothing, and who feeds and clothes us. If in no other way then, let us
render Him service at least as our <span id="page_466">p. 466</span>
<span id="v.iii.xvii-Page_466"></span>servants render it to us. Do not
they order their whole lives to afford rest to their masters, and is it
not their work and their life to take care of their concerns? Are they
not all day long engaged in their masters’ work, and only a small
portion of the evening in their own? But we, on the contrary, are ever
engaged in our own affairs, in our Master’s hardly at all, and that too,
though He needs not our services, as masters need those of their
servants, but those very acts redound to our own benefit. In their case
the master is benefited by the ministry of the servant, but in ours the
ministry of the servant profits not the Master, but is beneficial on the
other hand to the servant. As the Psalmist says, “My goods are nothing
unto Thee.” ([Ps. xvi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p23.2"></span>.) For say, what advantage is it to God,
that I am just, or what injury, that I am unjust? Is not His nature
incorruptible, incapable of injury, superior to all suffering? Servants
having nothing of their own, all is their masters’, however rich they
may be. But we have many things of our own.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p24"></span>And it is not merely so great
honor, <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286.md) that we enjoy from the
King of the universe. What master ever gave his own son for his servant?
No one, but all would rather choose to give their servants for their
sons. Here on the contrary, “He spared not His own Son, but gave Him up
for us all,” for His enemies who hated Him. Servants, though very hard
service is exacted of them, are not impatient; at least, not the
well-disposed. But how many times do we utter discontent? <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287.md) The master promises to his servants
nothing like what God promises to us; but what? Freedom here, which is
often worse than bondage; for it is often embittered by famine beyond
slavery itself. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288.md) Yet this is
their greatest boon. But with God there is nothing temporal, nothing
mortal; but what? wouldest thou learn? Listen then, He says, “Henceforth
I call you not servants. Ye are my friends.” ([John
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p27.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p28"></span>Beloved, let us be ashamed, let us
fear. Let us only serve our Master, as our servants serve us. Rather not
even <span id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289.md) the smallest portion of
service do we render! Necessity makes them philosophers. They have only
food and lodging; but we, possessing much and expecting more, insult our
Benefactor with our luxury. If from nothing else, from them at least let
us learn the rules of philosophy. The Scripture is wont to send men not
even to servants, but to irrational creatures, as when it bids us
imitate the bee and the ant. But I advise you but to imitate servants:
only so much as they do from fear of their masters, let us do from the
fear of God; for I cannot find that you do even this. They receive many
insults from fear of us, and endure them in silence with the patience of
philosophers. Justly or unjustly they are exposed to our violence, and
they do not resist, but entreat us, though often they have done nothing
wrong. They are contented to receive no more and often less than they
need; with straw <span id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290.md) for their
bed, and only bread for their food, they do not complain or murmur at
their hard living, but through fear of us are restrained from
impatience. When they are intrusted with money, they restore it all. For
I am not speaking of the worthless, but of the moderately good. If we
threaten them, they are at once awed.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p31"></span>Is not this philosophy? For say not
they are under necessity, when thou too art under a necessity in the
fear of hell. And yet dost thou not learn wisdom, nor render to God as
much honor, as thou receivest from thy servants. Of thy servants each
has the apartment assigned to him by thy rules, and he does not invade
that of his neighbor, nor do any injury from a desire of more than he
has. This forbearance the fear of their master enforces among domestics,
and seldom will you see a servant robbing or injuring a fellow-servant.
But among free men it is quite the reverse. We bite and devour one
another. We fear not our Master: we rob and plunder our fellow-servants,
we strike them in His very sight. This the servant will not do; if he
strikes, it is not when his master sees him; if he reviles, it is not
when his master hears him. But we dare do anything, though God sees and
hears it all.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p32"></span>The fear of their master is ever before
their eyes, the fear of our Master never before ours. Hence the
subversion of all order, hence all is confusion and destruction. And we
never take into consideration the offenses we have committed, but if our
servants do amiss, we call them to a rigorous account for everything,
even to the least misdemeanor. I say not this to make servants remiss,
but to chide our supineness, to rouse us from our sloth, that we may
serve our God with as much zeal as servants do their master; our Maker,
as faithfully as our fellow-creatures <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291.md) serve us, from whom they have
received no such gift. For they too are free by nature. To them also it
was said, “Let them have dominion over the fishes.” ([Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p33.1"></span>.) For this slavery is not from nature: it
is the result of some particular cause, or circumstances. Yet,
notwithstanding, they pay us great honor; <span id="page_467">p.
467</span> <span id="v.iii.xvii-Page_467"></span>and we with great
strictness exact services from them, whilst to God we hardly render the
smallest portion, though the advantage of it would redound to ourselves.
For the more zealously we serve God, the greater gainers we shall be.
Let us not then deprive ourselves of such important benefits. For God is
self-sufficient, and wants nothing; the recompense and the advantage
reverts altogether to us. Let us therefore, I beseech you, be so
affected, as serving not God but ourselves, and with fear and trembling
let us serve Him, that we may obtain the promised blessings, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[464:1282](1130109.htm#fr_1281.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p7"></span> Or “seasonable.”

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[465:1283](1130109.htm#fr_1282.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p10"></span> A Paris <span class="c16"><span
id="v.iii.xvii-p10.1"></span>ms</span>. adds, “in not curing him,” and
is stated to vary much in this passage, but its readings are not given.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[465:1284](1130109.htm#fr_1283.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p11"></span> This whole passage is treated more at
length in the first Homily on the Statues, where most of these remarks
are expanded and illustrated.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[465:1285](1130109.htm#fr_1284.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p21"></span> Or making a great point of them, i.e.
of the ways of submission.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[465:1286](1130109.htm#fr_1285.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p22"></span> The words οἱ τῆς εὐεργεσίας
ἀντιλαμβανόμενοι may mean, “such as set themselves to confer benefits.”

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[466:1287](1130109.htm#fr_1286.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p25"></span> Or, “and it is not without reason that
we enjoy so great honor”: and so Old Lat. and Ben. that in the text
seems more intelligible. The other might be explained by the sequel. See
[Rom. viii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span
id="v.iii.xvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[466:1288](1130109.htm#fr_1287.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p26"></span> ἀποδυσπετοῦμεν.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[466:1289](1130109.htm#fr_1288.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p27"></span> The slaves, as he had said before,
were wholly provided for by their masters, and so suffer less in a
scarcity than if they had been independent.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[466:1290](1130109.htm#fr_1289.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p29"></span> The negative is added in Colb. and B.
The sense requires it.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[466:1291](1130109.htm#fr_1290.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p30"></span> στιβάδος.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[466:1292](1130109.htm#fr_1291.md) <span
id="v.iii.xvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p33"></span> ὁμοούσιοι.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 6:2-7](1130110.md)
