[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130067)  [Next](1130069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Homily X.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.x-p2.2"></span>[Colossians iii.
18-25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span>*“Wives, be in subjection to your husbands,
as is fitting in the Lord. Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter
against them. Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is
well-pleasing in* <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) *the Lord.
Fathers, provoke not your children, that they be not discouraged.
Servants, obey in all things them that are your masters according to the
flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers, but in singleness of heart,
fearing the Lord: whatsoever ye do, work heartily, as unto the Lord, and
not unto men; knowing that from the Lord ye shall receive the recompense
of the inheritance: ye serve the Lord Christ. For he that doeth wrong
shall receive again for the wrong that he hath done: and there is no
respect of persons with God. (*[Col.
4.1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p4.1"></span>*.)
Masters, render unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing
that ye also have a Master in heaven.”*

<span id="iv.iv.x-p5"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p5.1"></span>Why</span> does he not give these commands
everywhere, and in all the Epistles, but only here, and in that to the
Ephesians, and that to Timothy, and that to Titus? Because probably
there were dissensions in these cities; or probably they were correct in
other respects, so that it was expedient they should hear about these
things. Rather, however, what he saith to these, he saith to all. Now in
these things also this Epistle bears great resemblance to that to the
Ephesians, either <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) because it was
not fitting to write about these things to men now <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) at peace, who needed <span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_304"></span>to be
instructed in high doctrines as yet lacking to them, or because that for
persons who had been comforted under trials, it were superfluous to hear
on these subjects. So that I conjecture, that in this place the Church
was now well-grounded, and that these things are said as in finishing.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p8"></span>[Col.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>.
“Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p9"></span>That is, be subject for God’s sake, because
this adorneth you, he saith, not them. For I mean not that subjection
which is due to a master, nor yet that alone which is of nature, but
that for God’s sake.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p10"></span>[Col.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.x-p10.1"></span>.
“Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p11"></span>See how again he has exhorted to
reciprocity. As in the other case he enjoineth fear and love, so also
doth he here. For it is possible for one who loves even, to be bitter.
What he saith then is this. Fight not; for nothing is more bitter than
this fighting, when it takes place on the part of the husband toward the
wife. For the fightings which happen between beloved persons, these are
bitter; and he shows that it ariseth from great bitterness, when, saith
he, any one is at variance with his own member. To love therefore is the
husband’s part, to yield pertains to the other side. If then each one
contributes his own part, all stands firm. From being loved, the wife
too becomes loving; and from her being submissive, the husband becomes
yielding. And see how in nature also it hath been so ordered, that the
one should love, the other obey. For when the party governing loves the
governed, then everything stands fast. Love from the governed is not so
requisite, as from the governing towards the governed; for from the
other obedience is due. For that the woman hath beauty, and the man
desire, shows nothing else than that for the sake of love it hath been
made so. Do not therefore, because thy wife is subject to thee, act the
despot; nor because thy husband loveth thee, be thou puffed up. Let
neither the husband’s love elate the wife, nor the wife’s subjection
puff up the husband. For this cause hath He subjected her to thee, that
she may be loved the more. For this cause He hath made thee to be loved,
O wife, that thou mayest easily bear thy subjection. Fear not in being a
subject; for subjection to one that loveth thee hath no hardship. Fear
not in loving, for thou hast her yielding. In no other way then could a
bond have been. Thou hast then thine authority of necessity, proceeding
from nature; maintain also the bond that proceedeth from love, for this
alloweth the weaker to be endurable. <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p13"></span>[Col.
3.20](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.x-p13.1"></span>.
“Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in
the Lord.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p14"></span>Again he has put that, “in the Lord,” at
once laying down the laws of obedience, and shaming them, and casting
them down. For this, saith he, is well-pleasing to the Lord. See how he
would have us do all not from nature only, but, prior to this, from what
is pleasing to God, that we may also have reward.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p15"></span>[Col.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.x-p15.1"></span>.
“Fathers, provoke not your children, that they be not discouraged.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p16"></span>Lo! again here also is subjection and
love. And he said not, “Love your children,” for it had been
superfluous, seeing that nature itself constraineth to this; but what
needed correction he corrected; that the love should in this case also
be the more vehement, because that the obedience is greater. For it
nowhere lays down as an exemplification the relation of husband and
wife; but what? hear the prophet saying, “Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitied them that fear Him” ([Ps. ciii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.x-p16.1"></span>,
Sept.) And again Christ saith, “What man is there of you, whom if his
son ask bread, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he
give him a serpent?” ([Matt. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p17"></span>“Fathers, provoke not your children, that
they be not discouraged.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p18"></span>He hath set down what he knew had the
greatest power to seize upon them; and whilst commanding them he has
spoken more like a friend; and nowhere does he mention God, for he would
overcome parents, and bow their tender affections. That is, “Make them
not more contentious, there are occasions when you ought even to give
way.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p19"></span>Next he comes to the third kind of
authority.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p20"></span>There is here also a certain love, but
that no more proceeding from nature, as above, but from habit, and from
the authority itself, and the works done. Seeing then that in this case
the sphere of love is narrowed, whilst that of obedience is amplified,
he dwelleth upon this, wishing to give to these from their obedience,
what the first have from nature. So that what he discourseth with the
servants alone <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) is not for their
masters’ sakes, but for their own also, that they may make themselves
the objects of tender affection to their masters. But he sets not this
forth openly; for so he would doubtless have made them supine.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p22"></span><span id="iv.iv.x-p22.1"></span>Ver. 22.
“Servants,” he saith, “obey in all things your masters according to the
flesh.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p23"></span>And see how always he sets down the names,
“wives, children, servants,” being at once a just <span id="page_305">p.
305</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_305"></span>claim upon their
obedience. But that none might be pained, he added, “to your masters
according to the flesh.” Thy better part, the soul, is free, he saith;
thy service is for a season. It therefore do thou subject, that thy
service be no more of constraint. “Not with eye-service, as
men-pleasers.” Make, he saith, thy service which is by the law, to be
from the fear of Christ. For if when thy master seeth thee not, thou
doest thy duty and what is for his honor, it is manifest that thou doest
it because of the sleepless Eye. “Not with eye-service,” he saith, “as
men-pleasers”; thus implying, “it is you who will have to sustain the
damage.” For hear the prophet saying, “God hath scattered the bones of
the men-pleasers.” ([Ps. 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.1"></span>,
Sept.) See then how he spares them, and brings them to order. “But in
singleness of heart,” he saith, “fearing God.” <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) For that is not singleness, but
hypocrisy, to hold one thing, and act another; to appear one when the
master is present, another when he is absent. Therefore he said not
simply, “in singleness of heart,” but, “fearing God.” For this is to
fear God, when, though none be seeing, we do not aught that is evil; but
if we do, we fear not God, but men. Seest thou how he bringeth them to
order?

<span id="iv.iv.x-p25"></span>[Col.
3.23](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.x-p25.1"></span>.
“Whatsoever ye do, work heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p26"></span>He desires to have them freed not only
from hypocrisy, but also from slothfulness. He hath made them instead of
slaves free, when they need not the superintendence of their master; for
the expression “heartily” means this, “with good will,” not with a
slavish necessity, but with freedom, and of choice. And what is the
reward?

<span id="iv.iv.x-p27"></span>[Col.
3.24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv.x-p27.1"></span>.
“Knowing,” he saith, “that from the Lord ye shall receive the recompense
of your <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) inheritance: for ye
serve the Lord Christ.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p29"></span>For from Him also it is evident that ye
shall receive the reward. And that ye serve the Lord is plain from this.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p30"></span>[Col.
3.25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv.x-p30.1"></span>.
“For he that doeth wrong,” he saith, “shall receive again for the wrong
that he hath done.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p31"></span>Here he confirmeth his former statements.
For that his words may not appear to be those of flattery, “he shall
receive,” he saith, “the wrong he hath done,” that is, he shall suffer
punishment also, “for there is no respect of persons.” <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) For what if thou art a servant? it is
no shame to thee. And truly he might have said this to the masters, as
he did in the Epistle to the Ephesians. ([Eph. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.1"></span>.)
But here he seems to me to be alluding to the Grecian masters. For, what
if he is a Greek and thou a Christian? Not the persons but the actions
are examined, so that even in this case thou oughtest to serve with good
will, and heartily.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p33"></span>[Col.
4.1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p33.1"></span>.
“Masters, render unto your servants that which is just and equal.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p34"></span>What is “just”? What is “equal”? To place
them in plenty of everything, and not allow them to stand in need of
others, but to recompense them for their labors. For, because I have
said that they have their reward from God, do not thou therefore deprive
them of it. And in another place he saith, “forbearing threatening”
([Eph. vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.1"></span>.), wishing to make them more gentle; for
those were perfect men; that is, “with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured unto you.” ([Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.2"></span>.)
And the words, “there is no respect of persons,” are spoken with a view
to these, <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) but they are assigned
to the others, in order that these may receive them. For when we have
said to one person what is applicable to another, we have not corrected
him so much, as the one who is in fault. “Ye also,” along with them, he
saith. He has here made the service common, for he saith, “knowing that
ye also have a Master in heaven.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p36"></span>[Col.
4.2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.x-p36.1"></span>.
“Continue in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving.”

<span id="iv.iv.x-p37"></span>For, since continuing in prayers
frequently makes persons listless, therefore he saith, “watching,” that
is, sober, not wandering. For the devil knoweth, he knoweth, how great a
good prayer is; therefore he presseth heavily. And Paul also knoweth how
careless <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) many are when they
pray, wherefore he saith, “continue” <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) in prayer, as of somewhat laborious,
“watching therein with thanksgiving.” For let this, he saith, be your
work, to give thanks in your prayers both for the seen and the unseen,
and for His benefits to the willing and unwilling, and for the kingdom,
and for hell, and for tribulation, and for refreshment. For thus is the
custom of the Saints to pray, and to give thanks for the common benefits
of all.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p40"></span>I know a certain holy man who prayeth
thus. He used to say nothing before these words, but thus, “We give Thee
thanks for all Thy benefits bestowed upon us the unworthy, from the
first day until the present, for what we know, and what we know not, for
the seen, for the unseen, for those in deed, those in word, those with
our wills, those against our wills, for all that have been bestowed upon
the unworthy, even us; for <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iv.iv.x-Page_306"></span>tribulations, for refreshments, for hell,
for punishment, for the kingdom of heaven. We beseech Thee to keep our
soul holy, having a pure conscience; an end worthy of thy
lovingkindness. Thou that lovedst us so as to give Thy Only-Begotten for
us, grant us to become worthy of Thy love; give us wisdom in Thy word,
and in Thy fear. Only-Begotten Christ, inspire the strength that is from
Thee. Thou that gavest The Only-Begotten for us, and hast sent Thy Holy
Spirit for the remission of our sins, if in aught we have wilfully or
unwillingly transgressed, pardon, and impute it not. Remember all that
call upon Thy Name in truth; remember all that wish us well, or the
contrary, for we are all men.” Then having added the Prayer <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) of the Faithful, he there ended;
having made that prayer, as a certain crowning part, and a binding
together for all. For many benefits doth God bestow upon us even against
our wills; many also, yea more, without our knowledge even. For when we
pray for one thing, and He doeth to us the reverse, it is plain that He
doeth us good even when we know it not.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p42"></span>[Col.
4.3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p42.1"></span>.
“Withal praying for us also.” See his lowlymindedness; he sets himself
after them.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p43"></span>“That God may open to us a door for the
word, to speak the mystery of Christ.” He means an entrance, and
boldness in speaking. Wonderful! The great athlete said not “that I may
be freed from my bonds,” but being in bonds he exhorted others; and
exhorted them for a great object, that himself might get boldness in
speaking. Both the two are great, both the quality of the person, and of
the thing. Wonderful! how great is the dignity! “The mystery,” he saith,
“of Christ.” He shows that nothing was more dearly desired by him than
this, to speak. “For which I am also in bonds; that I may make it
manifest, as I ought to speak.” ([Col.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p43.1"></span>.)
He means with much boldness of speech, and withholding nothing. His
bonds display, not obscure him. With much boldness he means. Tell me,
art thou in bonds, and dost thou exhort others? Yea, my bonds give me
the greater boldness; but I pray for God’s furtherance, for I have heard
the voice of Christ saying, “When they deliver you up, be not anxious
how or what ye shall speak.” ([Matt. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.x-p43.2"></span>.)
And see, how he has expressed himself in metaphor, “that God may open to
us a door for the word”; (see, how unassuming he is; even in his bonds,
how he expresses himself;) that is, that He would soften their hearts.
Still he said not so; but, “that He would give us boldness”; out of
lowlymindedness he thus spoke, and that which he had, he asks to
receive.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p44"></span>He shows in this Epistle, why Christ came
not in those times, in that he calleth the former things “shadow, but
the body,” saith he, “is of Christ.” So that it was necessary they
should be formed to habits under the shadow. At the same time also he
exhibits the greatest proof of the love he bears to them; “in order that
ye,” he saith, “may hear, for that reason, ‘I am in bonds.’” Again he
sets before us those bonds of his; which I so greatly love, which rouse
up my heart, and always draw me into longing to see Paul bound, and in
his bonds writing, and preaching, and baptizing, and catechizing. In his
bonds he was referred to on behalf of the Churches everywhere; in his
bonds he builded up incalculably. Then was he rather at large. For hear
him saying, “So that most of the brethren being confident through my
bonds are more abundantly bold to speak the word without fear.”
([Philip. i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p44.1"></span>.) And again he makes the same avowal of
himself, saying, “For when I am weak, then am I strong.” ([2 Cor. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.x-p44.2"></span>.)
Wherefore he said also, “But the word of God is not bound.” ([2 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p44.3"></span>.) He
was bound with malefactors, with prisoners, with murderers; he, the
teacher of the world, he that had ascended into the third heaven, that
had heard the unspeakable words, was bound. ([2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p44.4"></span>.)
But then was his course the swifter. He that was bound, was now loosed;
he that was unbound, was bound. For he indeed was doing what he would;
whilst the other prevented him not, nor accomplished his own purpose.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p45"></span>What art thou about, O senseless one?
Thinkest thou he is a fleshly runner? Doth he strive in our race-course?
His course of life is in heaven; him that runneth in heaven, things on
earth cannot bind nor hold. Seest thou not this sun? Enclose his beams
with fetters! stay him from his course! Thou canst not. Then neither
canst thou Paul! Yea, much less this one than that, for this enjoyeth
more of Providence than that, seeing he beareth to us light, not such as
that is, but the true.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p46"></span>Where now are they who are unwilling to
suffer aught for Christ? But why do I say “suffer,” seeing that they are
unwilling even to give up their wealth? In time past Paul also used to
bind, and cast into prison; but since he is become Christ’s servant, he
glorieth no more of doing, but of suffering. And this, moreover, is
marvelous in the Preaching, when it is thus raised up and increased by
the sufferers themselves, and not by the persecutors. Where hath any
seen such contests as this? He that suffereth ill, conquers; he that
doeth ill, is worsted. Brighter is this man than the other. Through
bonds the Preaching entered. “I am not ashamed” ([Rom. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.x-p46.1"></span>.),
yea, I glory even, he saith, in preaching The Crucified. For consider, I
pray: the whole world left those who were at large, and went over to
those that are bound; turning away <span id="page_307">p. 307</span>
<span id="iv.iv.x-Page_307"></span>from the imprisoners, it honoreth
those laden with chains; hating the crucifiers, it worships the
Crucified.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p47"></span>Not the only marvel is it that the
preachers were fishermen, that they were ignorant; but that there were
also other hindrances, hindrances too by nature; still the increase was
all the more abundant. Not only was their ignorance no hindrance; but
even it itself caused the Preaching to be manifested. For hear Luke
saying, “And perceiving that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they
marveled.” ([Acts iv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p47.1"></span>.) Not only were bonds no hindrance, but even
of itself this made them more confident. Not so bold were the disciples
when Paul was at large, as when he was bound. For he saith, they “are
more abundantly bold to speak the word” of God “without fear.” ([Philip.
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p47.2"></span>.) Where are they that will gainsay the
divinity of the Preaching? Was not their ignorance enough to procure
them to be condemned? Would it not then in this case too, affright them?
For ye know that by these two passions the many are possessed, vainglory
and cowardice. Suppose their ignorance suffered them not to feel
ashamed, still the dangers must have put them in fear.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p48"></span>But, saith one, they wrought miracles. Ye
do believe then that they wrought miracles. But did they not work
miracles? This is a greater miracle than to work them, if men were drawn
to them without miracles. Socrates too amongst the Greeks was put in
bonds. What then? Did not his disciples straightway flee to Megara?
Assuredly, why not? They admitted <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) his arguments about immortality. But
see here. Paul was put in bonds, and his disciples waxed the more
confident, with reason, for they saw that the Preaching was not
hindered. For, canst thou put the tongue in bonds? hereby chiefly it
runneth. For as, except thou have bound the feet of a runner, thou hast
not prevented him from running; so, except thou have bound the tongue of
an evangelist, thou hast not hindered him from running. And as the
former, if thou have bound his loins, runneth on the rather, and is
supported, so too the latter preacheth the rather, and with greater
boldness.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p50"></span>A prisoner is in fear, when there is
nothing beyond bonds: but one that despiseth death, how should he be
bound? They did the same as if they had put in bonds the shadow of Paul,
and had gagged its mouth. For it was a fighting with shadows; for he was
both more tenderly regretted by his friends, and more reverenced by his
enemies, as bearing the prize for courage in his bonds. And a crown
binds the head; but it disgraces it not, yea rather, it makes it
brilliant. Against their wills they crowned him with his chain. For,
tell me, was it possible he could fear iron, who braved the adamantine
gates of death? Come we, beloved, to emulate these bonds. As many of you
women as deck yourselves with trinkets of gold, long ye for the bonds of
Paul. Not so glitters the collar round your necks, as the grace of these
iron bonds gleamed about his soul! If any longs for those, let him hate
these. For what communion hath softness with courage; tricking out of
the body with philosophy? Those bonds Angels reverence, these they even
make a mock of; those bonds are wont to draw up from earth to heaven;
these bonds draw down to earth from heaven. For in truth these are
bonds, not those; those are ornament, these are bonds; these, along with
the body, afflict the soul also; those, along with the body, adorn as
well the soul.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p51"></span>Wouldest thou be convinced that those are
ornament? Tell me which would more have won the notice of the
spectators? thou or Paul? And why do I say, “thou”? the queen <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) herself who is all bedecked with gold
would not have attracted the spectators so much; but if it had chanced
that both Paul in his bonds and the queen had entered the Church at the
same time, all would have removed their eyes from her to him; and with
good reason. For to see a man of a nature greater than human, and having
nought of man, but an angel upon earth, is more admirable than to see a
woman decked with finery. For such indeed one may see both in theaters,
and in pageants, and at baths, and many places; but whoso seeth a man
with bonds upon him, and deeming himself to have the greatest of
ornaments, and not giving way under his bonds, doth not behold a
spectacle of earth, but one worthy of the heavens. The soul that is in
that way attired looks about,—who hath seen? who not seen?—is filled
with pride, is possessed with anxious thoughts, is bound with countless
other passions: but he that hath these bonds on him, is without pride:
his soul exulteth, is freed from every anxious care, is joyous, hath its
gaze on heaven, is clad with wings. If any one were to give me the
choice of seeing Paul either stooping out of heaven, and uttering his
voice, or out of the prison, I would choose the prison. For they of
heaven visit him when he is in the prison. The bonds of Paul were the
bond of the Preaching, that chain of his was its foundation. Long we for
those bonds!

<span id="iv.iv.x-p53"></span>And how, some one says, may this be? If we
break up and dash in pieces these. No good results to us from these
bonds, but even harm. These will show us as prisoners There; but the
bonds of Paul will loose those bonds; she that is bound with these here,
with those <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.iv.x-Page_308"></span>deathless bonds shall she also be bound
There, both hands and feet; she that has been bound with Paul’s, shall
have them in that day as it were an ornament about her. Free both
thyself from thy bonds, and the poor man from his hunger. Why rivetest
thou fast the chains of thy sins? Some one saith, How? When thou wearest
gold whilst another is perishing, when thou, to get thee vainglory,
takest so much gold, whilst another hast not even what to eat, hast thou
not wedged fast thy sins? Put Christ about thee, and not gold; where
Mammon is, there Christ is not, where Christ is, there Mammon is not.
Wouldest not thou put on the King of all Himself? If one had offered
thee the purple, and the diadem, wouldest thou not have taken them
before all the gold in the world? I give thee not the regal ornaments,
but I offer thee to put on the King Himself. And how can one put Christ
on, doth any say? Hear Paul saying, “As many of you as were baptized
into Christ, did put on Christ.” ([Gal. iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.x-p53.1"></span>.)
Hear the Apostolical precept, “Make not provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof.” ([Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.x-p53.2"></span>.)
Thus doth one put on Christ, if one provide not for the flesh unto its
lusts. If thou have put on Christ, even the demons will fear thee; but
if gold, even men will laugh thee to scorn: if thou have put on Christ,
men also will reverence thee.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p54"></span>Wouldest thou appear fair and comely? Be
content with the Creator’s fashioning. Why dost thou overlay these bits
of gold, as if about to put to rights God’s creation? Wouldest thou
appear comely? Clothe thee in alms; clothe thee in benevolence; clothe
thee in modesty, humbleness. These are all more precious than gold;
these make even the beautiful yet more comely; these make even the ill
formed to be well formed. For when any one looks upon a countenance with
good will, he gives his judgment from love; but an evil woman, even
though she be beautiful, none can call beautiful; for the mind being
confounded pronounceth not its sentence aright.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p55"></span>That Egyptian woman of old was adorned;
Joseph too was adorned; which of them was the more beautiful? I say not
when she was in the palace, and he in the prison. <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) He was naked, but clothed in the
garments of chastity; she was clothed, but more unseemly than if she had
been naked; for she had not modesty. When thou hast excessively adorned
thee, O woman, then thou art become more unseemly than a naked one; for
thou hast stripped thee of thy fair adorning. Eve also was naked; but
when she had clothed herself, then was she more unseemly, for when she
was naked indeed, she was adorned with the glory of God; but when she
had clothed herself with the garment of sin, then was she unseemly. And
thou, when arraying thyself in the garment of studied finery, dost then
appear more unseemly. For that costliness availeth not to make any
appear beautiful, but that it is possible even for one dressed out to be
even more unseemly than if naked, tell me now; if thou hadst ever put on
the dresses of a piper or a flute-player, would it not have been
unseemliness? And yet those dresses are of gold; but for this very
reason it were unseemliness, because they are of gold. For the
costliness suits well with people on the stage, tragedians, players,
mimes, dancers, fighters with wild beasts; but to a woman that is a
believer, there are given other robes from God, the Only-Begotten Son of
God Himself. “For,” he saith, “as many as were baptized into Christ, did
put on Christ.” ([Gal. iii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p56.1"></span>.) Tell me, if one had given thee kingly
apparel, and thou hadst taken a beggar’s <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) dress, and put this on above it,
wouldest thou not, besides the unseemliness, have also been punished for
it? Thou hast put on the Lord of Heaven, and of the Angels, and art thou
still busied about earth?

<span id="iv.iv.x-p58"></span>I have spoken thus, because love of
ornament is of itself a great evil, even were no other gendered by it,
and it were possible to hold it without peril, (for it inciteth to
vainglory and to pride,) but now many other evils are gendered by
finery, evil suspicions, unseasonable expenses, evil speakings,
occasions of rapacity. For why dost thou adorn thyself? Tell me. Is it
that thou mayest please thy husband? Then do it at home. But here the
reverse is the case. For if thou wouldest please thine own husband,
please not others; but if thou please others, thou wilt not be able to
please thine own. So that thou shouldest put away all thine ornaments,
when thou goest to the forum or proceedest to the church. Besides,
please not thy husband by those means which harlots use, but by those
rather which wives that are free employ. For wherein, tell me, doth a
wife differ from a harlot? In that the one regardeth one thing only,
namely, that by the beauty of her person she may attract to herself him
whom she loves; whilst the other both ruleth the house, and shareth in
the children, and in all other things.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p59"></span>Hast thou a little daughter? look to it
lest she inherit the mischief, for they are wont to form their manners
according to their nurture, and to imitate their mothers’ behavior. Be a
pattern to thy daughter of modesty, deck thy<span id="page_309">p.
309</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_309"></span>self with that adorning,
and see that thou despise the other; for that is in truth an ornament,
the other a disfigurement. Enough has been said. Now God that made the
world, and hath given to us the ornament <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) of the soul, adorn us, and clothe us
with His own glory, that all shining brightly in good works, and living
unto His glory, we may send up glory to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Spirit, now and always, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_870"></span>[303:871](1130068.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p4"></span> R. t. and E.V. “unto.”

<span id="fn_871"></span>[303:872](1130068.htm#fr_871) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p6"></span> \[In these apparently hasty notes, perhaps
composed by dictation, or more probably taken down in shorthand, we are
not surprised to find a frequent lack of clear connection. Here, as
often elsewhere, the altered text followed in most editions has inserted
clauses to bring out the supposed meaning.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_872"></span>[303:873](1130068.htm#fr_872) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p7"></span> He seems to class the Romans, Hebrews,
Corinthians, and Galatians together, as needing doctrinal instruction
before these particulars, and to consider the Thessalonians and
Philippians as needing them less from their state of suffering.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[304:874](1130068.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p12"></span> ἀνεκτὴν. He seems to mean, “to be in an
endurable position.” \[Downes suggested, and Field inclines to approve,
that the reading should be ἄνετον, “unrestrained,” which in another
passage is confused in a <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p12.1"></span>ms</span>. with ἀνεκτόν.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_874"></span>[304:875](1130068.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p21"></span> μόνοις. One would expect μόνον, as he
speaks to the masters afterwards. But he may either mean that they were
chiefly addressed, or that this is the object even of what is addressed
to them separately.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[305:876](1130068.htm#fr_875) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p24"></span> \[The correct text, as in Rev. Ver., is
“fearing the Lord.” Chrys. very often has an erroneous type of N.T.
text, which spread from Constantinople, and became the so-called Textus
Receptus.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_876"></span>[305:877](1130068.htm#fr_876) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p28"></span> \[Some documents for N.T. also give
“your,” but the correct N.T. text has simply “the,” and omits
“for.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_877"></span>[305:878](1130068.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p32"></span> \[Some documents for Chrys., and some for
N.T., add “with God.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_878"></span>[305:879](1130068.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p35"></span> The masters.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[305:880](1130068.htm#fr_879) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p38"></span> ἀκηδιῶσι, generally used of giving up
caring for anything in despair. But the name “acedia” amongst the seven
deadly sins is of this origin.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[305:881](1130068.htm#fr_880) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p39"></span> προσκαρτερεῖτε, “persevere.”

<span id="fn_881"></span>[306:882](1130068.htm#fr_881) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p41"></span> The Lord’s Prayer.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[307:883](1130068.htm#fr_882) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p49"></span> \[Ironical.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_883"></span>[307:884](1130068.htm#fr_883) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p52"></span> \[Meaning the Empress, as king meant the
Emperor.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_884"></span>[308:885](1130068.htm#fr_884) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p56"></span> Downes would remove the negative; but the
meaning is “not only when,” &c., but “even when he was exposed by the
loss of his garment.”

<span id="fn_885"></span>[308:886](1130068.htm#fr_885) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p57"></span> \[The Greek has a word, λωτός, not
elsewhere found in this sense, but explained (Field’s Annotations) by a
similar word, λωτάξ, employed and interpreted in another passage by
Chrys. The correctors changed λωτοῦ into the familiar εἵλωτος, a
Helot.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_886"></span>[309:887](1130068.htm#fr_886) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p60"></span> \[The word κόσμος denotes order and
ornament, and so the world, as being orderly and beautiful.—J.A.B.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 4:5,6](1130069)
