[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130035)  [Next](1130037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2.2"></span>[Ephesians vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>“Stand therefore, having girded your
loins with truth.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Having</span> drawn up this army, and
roused their zeal,—for both these things were requisite, both that they
should be drawn up in array and subject to each other, and that their
spirit should be aroused,—and having inspired them with courage, for
this was requisite also, he next proceeds also to arm them. For arms had
been of no use, had they not been first posted each in his own place,
and had not the spirit of the soldier’s soul been roused; for we must
first arm him within, and then without.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span>Now if this is the case with soldiers,
much more is it with spiritual soldiers. Or rather in their case, there
is no such thing as arming them without, but everything is within. He
hath roused their ardor, and set it on fire, he hath added confidence.
He hath set them in due array. Observe how he also puts on the armor.
“Stand therefore,” <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) saith he. The
very first feature in tactics is, to know how to stand well, and many
things will depend upon that. Hence he discourses much concerning
standing, saying also elsewhere, “Watch ye, stand fast.” ([1 Cor. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.2"></span>.) And again, “So stand fast in the Lord.”
([Philip. iv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.3"></span>.) And again, “Let him that thinketh he
standeth, take heed lest he fall.” ([1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.4"></span>.) And again, “That ye may be able, having
done all, to stand.” ([Eph. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.5"></span>.) Doubtless then he does not mean merely
any way of standing, but a correct way, and as many as have had
experience in wars know how great a point it is to know how to stand.
For if in the case of boxers and wrestlers, the trainer recommends this
before anything else, namely, to stand firm, much more will it be the
first thing in warfare, and military matters.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>The man who, in a true sense, stands,
is upright; he stands not in a lazy attitude, not leaning upon anything.
Exact uprightness discovers itself by the way of standing, so that they
who are perfectly upright, they stand. But they who do not stand, cannot
be upright, but are unstrung and disjointed. The luxurious man does not
stand upright, but is bent; so is the lewd man, and the lover of money.
He who knows how to stand will from his very standing, as from a sort of
foundation, find every part of the conflict easy to him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>“Stand therefore,” saith he, “having
girded your loins with truth.” <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10"></span>He is not speaking of a literal,
physical gir<span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_164"></span>dle, for all the language in this
passage he employs in a spiritual sense. <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) And observe how methodically he
proceeds. First he girds up his soldier. <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) What then is the meaning of this? The
man that is loose in his life, and is dissolved in his lusts, and that
has his thoughts trailing on the ground, him he braces up by means of
this girdle, not suffering him to be impeded by the garments entangling
his legs, but leaving him to run with his feet well at liberty. “Stand
therefore, having girded your loins,” saith he. By the “loins” here he
means this; just what the keel is in ships, the same are the loins with
us, the basis or groundwork of the whole body: for they are, as it were,
a foundation, and upon them as the schools of the physicians tell you,
the whole frame is built. So then in “girding up the loins” he compacts
the foundation of our soul; for he is not of course speaking of these
loins of our body, but is discoursing spiritually: and as the loins are
the foundation alike of the parts both above and below, so is it also in
the case of these spiritual loins. Oftentimes, we know, when persons are
fatigued, they put their hands there as if upon a sort of foundation,
and in that manner support themselves; and for this reason it is that
the girdle is used in war, that it may bind and hold together this
foundation, as it were, in our frame; for this reason too it is that
when we run we gird ourselves. It is this which guards our strength. Let
this then, saith he, be done also with respect to the soul, and then in
doing anything whatsoever we shall be strong; and it is a thing most
especially becoming to soldiers.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p13"></span>True, you may say, but these our
natural loins we gird with a leathern band; but we, spiritual soldiers,
with what? I answer, with that which is the head and crown of all our
thoughts, I mean, “with truth.” “Having girded your loins,” saith he,
“with truth.” <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) What then is the
meaning of “with truth”? Let us love nothing like falsehood, all our
duties let us pursue “with truth,” let us not lie one to another.
Whether it be an opinion, let us seek the truth, or whether it be a line
of life, let us seek the true one. If we fortify ourselves with this, if
we “gird ourselves with truth,” then shall no one overcome us. He who
seeks the doctrine of truth, shall never fall down to the earth; for
that the things which are not true are of the earth, is evident from
this, that all they that are without are enslaved to the passions,
following their own reasonings; and therefore if we are sober, we shall
need no instruction in the tales of the Greeks. Seest thou how weak and
frivolous they are? incapable of entertaining about God one severe
thought or anything above human reasoning? Why? Because they are not
“girded about with truth”; because their loins, the receptacle of the
seed of life, and the main strength of their reasonings, are ungirt;
nothing then can be weaker than these. And the Manicheans <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) again, seest thou, how all the things
they have the boldness to utter, are from their own reasonings? “It was
impossible,” say they, “for God to create the world without matter.”
Whence is this so evident? These things they say, groveling, and from
the earth, and from what happens amongst ourselves; because man, they
say, cannot create otherwise. Marcion again, look what he says. “God, if
He took upon Him flesh, could not remain pure.” Whence is this evident?
“Because,” says he, “neither can men.” But men are able to do this.
Valentinus again, with his reasonings all trailing along the ground,
speaks the things of the earth; and in like manner Paul of Samosata. And
Arius, what does he say? “It was impossible for God when He begat, to
beget without passion.” <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) Whence,
Arius, hast thou the boldness to allege this; merely from the things
which take place amongst ourselves? Seest thou how the reasonings of all
these trail along on the ground? All are, as it were, let loose and
unconfined, and savoring of the earth? And so much then for doctrines.
With regard to life and conduct, again, whoremongers, lovers of money,
and of glory, and of everything else, trail on the ground. They have not
their loins themselves standing firm, so that when they are weary they
may rest upon them; but when they are weary, they do not put their hands
upon them and stand upright, but flag. He, however, who “is girt about
with the truth,” first, never is weary; and secondly, if he should be
weary, he will rest himself upon the truth itself. What? Will poverty,
tell me, render him weary? No, in nowise; for he will repose on the true
riches, and by this poverty will understand what is true poverty. Or
again, will slavery make him weary? No, in nowise, for he will know what
is the true slavery. Or shall disease? No, nor even that. “Let your
loins,” saith Christ, “be girded about, and your lamps burning” ([Luke
xii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p16.1"></span>.), with that light which shall never be
put out. This is what the Israelites also, when they were departing out
of Egypt ([Ex. xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p16.2"></span>.), were <span id="page_165">p. 165</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_165"></span>charged to do. For why did they
eat the passover with their loins girded? Art thou desirous to hear the
ground of it? According to the historical fact, or according to its
mystical sense, <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) shall I state
it? But I will state them both, and do ye retain it in mind, for I am
not doing it without an object, merely that I may tell you the solution,
but also that my words may become in you reality. They had, we read,
their loins girded, and their staff in their hands, and their shoes on
their feet, and thus they ate the Passover. Awful and terrible
mysteries, and of vast depth; and if so terrible in the type, how much
more in the reality? They come forth out of Egypt, they eat the
Passover. Attend. “Our Passover hath been sacrificed, even Christ,” it
is said. Wherefore did they have their loins girded? Their guise is that
of wayfarers; for their having shoes, and staves in their hands, and
their eating standing, declares nothing else than this. Will ye hear the
history first, or the mystery? <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483)
Better the history first. What then is the design of the history? The
Jews were continually forgetting God’s benefits to them. Accordingly
then, God tied the sense of these, His benefits, not only to the time,
but also to the very habit of them that were to eat. For this is why
they were to eat girded and sandalled, that when they were asked the
reason, they might say, “we were ready for our journey, we were just
about to go forth out of Egypt to the land of promise and we were ready
for our exodus.” This then is the historical type. But the reality is
this; we too eat a Passover, even Christ; “for,” saith he, “our Passover
hath been sacrificed, even Christ.” ([1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p18.1"></span>.) What then? We too ought to eat it, both
sandalled and girded. And why? That we too may be ready for our Exodus,
for our departure hence.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let not any one of them that
eat this Passover look towards Egypt, but towards Heaven, towards
“Jerusalem that is above.” ([Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.2"></span>.) On this account thou eatest with thy
loins girded, on this account thou eatest with shoes on thy feet, that
thou mayest know, that from the moment thou first beginnest to eat the
Passover, thou oughtest to set out, and to be upon thy journey. And this
implies two things, both that we must depart out of Egypt, and that,
whilst we stay, we must stay henceforth as in a strange country; “for
our citizenship,” saith he, “is in Heaven” ([Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.3"></span>.); and that all our life long we should
ever be prepared, so that when we are called we may not put it off, but
say, “My heart is fixed.” ([Ps. cviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.4"></span>.) “Yes, but this Paul indeed could say,
who knew nothing against himself; but I, who require a long time for
repentance, I cannot say it.” Yet that to be girded is the part of a
waking soul, hearken to what God says to that righteous man, “Gird up
now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto Me.” ([Job xxxviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.5"></span>.) This He says also to all the prophets,
and this He says again to Moses, to be girded. And He Himself also
appears to Ezekiel ([Ezek. ix. 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.6"></span>, Sept.) girded. Nay more, and the Angels,
too, appear to us girded ([Rev. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19.7"></span>.), as being soldiers. From our being
girded about, it comes that we also stand bravely as from our standing
our being girded comes.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20"></span>For we also are going to depart, and
many are the difficulties that intervene. When we have crossed this
plain, straightway the devil is upon us, doing everything, contriving
every artifice, to the end that those who have been saved out of Egypt,
those who have passed the Red Sea, those who are delivered at once from
the evil demons, and from unnumbered plagues, may be taken and destroyed
by him. But, if we be vigilant, we too have a pillar of fire, the grace
of the Spirit. The same both enlightens and overshadows us. We have
manna; yea rather not manna, but far more than manna. Spiritual drink we
have, not water, that springs forth from the Rock. So have we too our
encampment ([Rev. xx. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20.1"></span>.), and we dwell in the desert even now;
for a desert indeed without virtue, is the earth even now, even more
desolate than that wilderness. Why was that desert so terrible? Was it
not because it had scorpions in it, and adders? ([Deut. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20.2"></span>.) “A land,” it is said, “which none
passed through.” ([Jer. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20.3"></span>.). Yet is not that wilderness, no, it is
not so barren of fruits, as is this human nature. At this instant, how
many scorpions, how many asps are in this wilderness, how many serpents,
how many “offsprings of vipers” ([Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20.4"></span>.) are these through whom we at this
instant pass! Yet let us not be afraid; for the leader of this our
Exodus is not Moses, but Jesus.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21"></span>How then is it that we shall not
suffer the same things? Let us not commit the same acts, and then shall
we not suffer the same punishment. They murmured, they were ungrateful;
let us therefore not cherish these passions. How was it that they fell
all of them? <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_166"></span>“They despised the pleasant land.”
([Ps. cvi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.1"></span>.) “How ‘despised’ it? Surely they prized
it highly.” By becoming indolent and cowardly, and not choosing to
undergo any labors to obtain it. Let not us then “despise” Heaven! This
is what is meant by “despising.” Again, among us also has fruit been
brought, fruit from Heaven, not the cluster of grapes borne upon the
staff ([Num. xiii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.2"></span>.), but the “earnest of the Spirit” ([2
Cor. i. 22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.3"></span>.), “the citizenship which is in Heaven”
([Philip. iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.4"></span>.), which Paul and the whole company of
the Apostles, those marvelous husbandmen, have taught us. It is not
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, nor Jesus the son of Nun, that hath brought
these fruits; but Jesus the Son of “the Father of mercies” ([2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.5"></span>.), the Son of the Very God, hath brought
every virtue, hath brought down from Heaven all the fruits that are from
thence, the songs of heaven hath He brought. For the words which the
Cherubim above say, these hath He charged us to say also, “Holy, Holy,
Holy.” <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) He hath brought to us the
virtue of the Angels. “The Angels marry not, neither are given in
marriage” ([Matt. xxii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p22.1"></span>.); this fair plant hath He planted here
also. They love not money, nor anything like it; and this too hath He
sown amongst us. They never die; and this hath He freely given us also,
for death is no longer death, but sleep. For hearken to what He saith,
“Our friend Lazarus is fallen asleep.” ([John xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23"></span>Seest thou then the fruits of
“Jerusalem that is above”? ([Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.1"></span>.) And what is indeed more stupendous than
all is this, that our warfare is not decided, but all these things are
given us before the attainment of the promise! For they indeed toiled
even after they had entered into the land of promise;—rather, they
toiled not, for had they chosen to obey God, they might have taken all
the cities, without either arms or array. Jericho, we know, they
overturned, more after the fashion of dancers than of warriors. We
however have no warfare after we have entered into the land of promise,
that is, into Heaven, but only so long as we are in the wilderness, that
is, in the present life. “For he that is entered into his rest hath
himself also rested from his works as God did from His.” ([Heb. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.2"></span>.) “Let us not then be weary in
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.” ([Gal.
vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.3"></span>.) Seest thou how that just as He led
them, so also He leads us? In their case, touching the manna and the
wilderness, it is said, “He that gathered much had nothing over, and he
that gathered little had no lack.” ([Ex. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.4"></span>.) And we have this charge given us, “not
to lay up treasure upon the earth.” ([Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.5"></span>.) But if we do lay up treasure, it is no
longer the earthly worm that corrupts it, as was the case with the
manna, but that which dwelleth eternally with fire. <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) Let us then “subdue all things,” that
we furnish not food to this worm. For “he,” it is said, “who gathered
much had nothing over.” For this too happens with ourselves also every
day. We all of us have but the same capacity of hunger to satisfy. And
that which is more than this, is but an addition of cares. For what He
intended in after-times to deliver, saying, “Sufficient unto the day is
the evil thereof” ([Matt. vi. 34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24.4"></span>), this had He thus been teaching even
from the very beginning, <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) and not
even thus did they receive it. But as to us, let us not be insatiable,
let us not be discontented, let us not be seeking out for splendid
houses; for we are on our pilgrimage, not at home; so that if there be
any that knows that the present life is a sort of journey, and
expedition, and, as one might say, it is what they call an entrenched
camp, <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) he will not be seeking for
splendid buildings. For who, tell me, be he ever so rich, would choose
to build a splendid house in an encampment? No one; he would be a
laughing stock, he would be building for his enemies, and would the more
effectually invite them on; and so then, if we be in our senses, neither
shall we. The present life is nothing else than a march and an
encampment.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p27"></span>Wherefore, I beseech you, let us do
all we can, so as to lay up no treasure here; for if the thief should
come, we must in a moment arise and depart. “Watch,” saith He, “for ye
know not at what hour the thief cometh” ([Matt.
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p27.1"></span>.), thus naming death. O then, before he
cometh, let us send away everything before us to our native country; but
here let us be “well girded,” that we may be enabled to overcome our
enemies, whom God grant that we may overcome, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom together with the
Holy Ghost, be unto the Father glory, strength, honor forever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_475"></span>[163:476](1130036.htm#fr_475) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span> \[“‘Stand,’ here, is not, like the
preceding στῆναι (in [Eph. 6.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>), the standing of the victor, but the
‘standing forth of the man ready for the combat.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_476"></span>[163:477](1130036.htm#fr_476) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span> Compare [Isa. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[164:478](1130036.htm#fr_477) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p11"></span> νοητῶς.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[164:479](1130036.htm#fr_478) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p12"></span> \[“As for the actual warrior, the
whole *aptus habitus* (prepared state) for the combat would be wanting
in the absence of the girdle; so also for the spiritual warrior, if he
is not furnished with truth.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_479"></span>[164:480](1130036.htm#fr_479) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p14"></span> \[“It is clear that truth does not
mean ‘objectively the gospel,’ for that is designated later, [Eph.
6.17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p14.1"></span>, by ῥῆμα θεοῦ (‘the word of God’), but
‘subjectively,’ truth as an inward property, i.e. the ‘harmony of
knowledge with the objective truth given in the gospel.’”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_480"></span>[164:481](1130036.htm#fr_480) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p15"></span> The Manichees considered matter to be
uncreate; vid. Note on St. Augustine’s *Confessions*, i. b. The
Marcionites considered matter intrinsically evil; vid. Theod. *Hær*. i.
24. Valentinus denied that our Lord was born of the substance of Mary;
vid. St. Cyril, *Lect*. iv. 9. Paul of Samosata and Arius both denied
His Godhead.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[164:482](1130036.htm#fr_481) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p16"></span> ἀπαθῶς.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[165:483](1130036.htm#fr_482) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p17"></span> The word ἀναγωγὴ, when used of
Scripture exposition, has various senses, but always implies an
interpretation not literal, grammatical, or historical. Sometimes it
stands for a “moral” interpretation, i.e. one conveying a moral lesson;
e.g. Chrys. *in Psalm* cxix. (120) init.; Basil. *in Esai*. v. § 152.
Sometimes for an interpretation with reference simply to heavenly
persons and things; vid. Mosheim, *de Reb. ante Const*. p. 644; Dionys.
*Hierarch Cæl*. i. 2. Origen enumerates three senses of Scripture,
literal, moral, and mystical, the last being either allegorical or
anagogical; Clement four, literal, moral, mystical, and prophetical; but
the more common division has been into literal, tropological,
allegorical, and anagogical. \[Cassian, a pupil of Chrysostom, defines
ἀναγωγή: *Anagoge vero de spiritalibus mysteriis ad sublimiora quaedam
et sacratiora coelorum secreta conscendens*, “leading up from spiritual
mysteries to higher and more sacred secrets of heaven.” See also
Sophocles’ *Greek Lex. sub* “*voce*.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_483"></span>[165:484](1130036.htm#fr_483) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p18"></span> ἀναγωγήν.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[166:485](1130036.htm#fr_484) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p22"></span> \[For the use of these words in the
church service, see Bingham, *Antiquities*, xv. 3, 10, and Hom. III. on
Ephesians.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_485"></span>[166:486](1130036.htm#fr_485) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24"></span> \[The text in this passage is very
corrupt. Three <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. have οὐκέτι σκώληξ ὁ αἰσθητὸς
λυμαίνεται…ἀλλὰ ὁ τῆς δικαιοσύνης. But as Field says, ὁσκώληξ τῆς
δικαιοσύνης (“the worm of righteousness”) seems “*absurdissimum*.” Three
other <span class="c16"><span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24.2"></span>mss</span>.
give the reading which we have adopted: “No longer the earthly worm,”
&c., “but that which dwelleth eternally with fire,” ἀλλ᾽ ὁ τῷ πυρὶ
συνδιαιωνίζων ἡμᾶς λυμαίνεται. Field, in his text, follows a single
<span class="c16"><span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24.3"></span>ms</span>., and
emends even that.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_486"></span>[166:487](1130036.htm#fr_486) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p25"></span> ἄνωθεν.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[166:488](1130036.htm#fr_487) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p26"></span> φωσσάτον, *fossatum*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 6:14-17](1130037)
