[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130043)  [Next](1130045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>[Philippians i.
8-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>“For God is my witness, how I long after
you all in the tender mercies of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that
your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment;
that ye may approve the things that are excellent; that ye may be
sincere and void of offense unto the day of Christ; being filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, unto the
glory and praise of God.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>He</span> calls not God to witness as though
he should be doubted, but does this from his great affection, and his
exceeding persuasion and confidence; for after saying that they had
fellowship with him, he adds this also, “in the tender mercies of
Christ,” lest they should think that his longing for them was for this
cause, and not simply for their own sake. And what mean these words, “in
the tender mercies of Christ”? They stand for “according to Christ.”
Because ye are believers, because ye love Christ, because of the love
that is according to Christ. He does not say “love,” but uses a still
warmer expression, “the tender mercies of Christ,” as though he had
said, “having become as a father to you through the relationship which
is in Christ.” For this imparts to us bowels <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) warm and glowing. For He gives such
bowels to His true servants. “In these bowels,” saith He, as though one
should say, “I love you with no natural bowels, but with warmer ones,
namely, those of Christ.” “How I long after you all.” I long after all,
since ye are all of this nature; I am unable in words to represent to
you my longing; it is therefore impossible to tell. For this cause I
leave it to God, whose range is in the heart, to know this. Now had he
been flattering them, he would not have called God to witness, for this
cannot be done without peril.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>[Philip.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>.
“And this,” saith he, “I pray, that your love may abound yet more and
more.” For this is a good of which there is no satiety; <span
id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_189"></span>for
see, being so loved he wished to be loved still more, for he who loves
the object of his love, is willing to stay at no point of love, for it
is impossible there should be a measure of so noble a thing. Paul
desires that the debt of love should always be owing; “Owe no man any
thing, save to love one another.” ([Rom. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>..md)
The measure of love is, to stop nowhere; “that your love,” says he, “may
abound yet more and more.” Consider the character of the expression,
“that it may abound yet more and more,” he says, “in knowledge and all
discernment.” He does not extol friendship merely, nor love merely, but
such as comes of knowledge; that is, Ye should not apply the same love
to all: for this comes not of love, but from want of feeling. What means
he by “in knowledge”? He means, with judgment, with reason, with
discrimination. There are who love without reason, simply and any how,
whence it comes that such friendships are weak. He says, “in knowledge
and all discernment, that ye may approve the things that are excellent,”
that is, the things that are profitable. This I say not for my own sake,
says he, but for yours, for there is danger lest any one be spoiled by
the love of the heretics; for all this he hints at, and see how he
brings it in. Not for my own sake, says he, do I say this, but that ye
may be sincere, that is, that ye receive no spurious doctrine under the
pretence of love. How then, says he, “If it be possible, live peaceably
with all men”? “Live peaceably” ([Rom. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p6.3"></span>.), he says, not, Love so as to be harmed by
that friendship; for he says, “if thy right eye causeth thee to stumble,
pluck it out, and cast it from thee; that ye may be sincere” ([Matt. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p6.4"></span>.), that is, before God, “and without
offence,” that is, before men, for many men’s friendships are often a
hurt to them. Even though it hurts thee not, says he, still another may
stumble thereat. “Unto the day of Christ”; i.e. that ye may then be
found pure, having caused no one to stumble.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>[Philip.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>. “Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness which are through Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise
of God;” i.e. holding, together with true doctrine, an upright life.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>And not merely upright, but “filled with
the fruits of righteousness.” For there is indeed a righteousness not
according to Christ, as, for example, a moral life. “Which are through
Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God.” Seest thou <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) that I speak not of mine own glory,
but the righteousness of God; and oftentimes he calls mercy itself too
righteousness; let not your love, he says, indirectly injure you, by
hindering your perception of things profitable, and take heed lest you
fall through your love to any one. For I would indeed that your love
should be increased, but not so that ye should be injured by it. And I
would not that it should be simply of prejudice, but upon proof whether
I speak well or no. He says not, that ye may take up my opinion, but
that ye may “prove” it. He does not say outright, join not yourself to
this or that man, but, I would that your love should have respect to
what is profitable, not that ye should be void of understanding. For it
is a foolish thing if ye work not righteousness for Christ’s sake and
through Him. Mark the words, “through Him.” Does he then use God as a
mere assistant? Away with the thought. Not that I may receive praise,
says he, but that God may be glorified.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>[Phil.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>. “Now I would have you know, brethren,
that the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the
progress of the Gospel, so that my bonds became manifest in Christ
throughout the whole prætorian guard, and to all the rest.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>It was likely they would grieve when
they heard he was in bonds, and imagine that the preaching was at a
stand. What then? He straightway destroys this suspicion. And this also
shows his affection, that he declares the things which had happened to
him, because they were anxious. What say you? you are in bonds! you are
hindered! how then does the Gospel advance? He answers, “so that my
bonds in Christ became manifest in all the prætorium.” This thing not
only did not silence the rest, nor affright them, but contrariwise
rather encouraged them. If then they who were near the dangers were not
only nothing hurt, but even received greater confidence, much more
should you. Had he when in bonds taken it hardly, and held his peace, it
were probable that they would be affected in like sort. But as he spoke
more boldly when in bonds, he gave them more confidence than if he had
not been bound. And how have his bonds “turned to the progress of the
Gospel”? So God in His dispensation ordered, he means, that my bonds
were not hid, my bonds which were “in” Christ, which were “for” Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span>“In the whole prætorium.” For up to
that time they so called the palace. <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) And in the whole city, <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) says he.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>[Philip.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>. “And that most of the brethren in the
Lord, being confident through my bonds, <span id="page_190">p.
190</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_190"></span>are more abundantly
bold to speak the word without fear.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>This shows that they were of good
courage even before, and spoke with boldness, but much more now. If
others then, says he, are of good courage through my bonds, much more am
I; if I am the cause of confidence to others, much more to myself. “And
most of the brethren in the Lord.” As it was a great thing to say, My
bonds gave confidence to them, he therefore adds beforehand, “in the
Lord.” Do you see how, even when he sees himself constrained to speak
great things, he departs not from moderation? “Are more abundantly
bold,” he says, “to speak the word without fear”; the words “more
abundantly” show that they had already begun.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>[Philip.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>. “Some indeed preach Christ even of envy
and strife, and some also of good will.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>And what this means is worth enquiry.
Since Paul was under restraint, many of the unbelievers, willing to stir
up more vehemently the persecution from the Emperor, themselves also
preached Christ, in order that the Emperor’s wrath might be increased at
the spread of the Gospel, and all his anger might fall on the head of
Paul. From my bonds then two lines of action have sprung. One party took
great courage thereat; the other, from hope to work my destruction, set
themselves to preach Christ; “some of them through envy,” that is,
envying my reputation and constancy, and from desire of my destruction,
and the spirit of strife, work with me; or that they themselves may be
esteemed, and from the expectation that they will draw to themselves
somewhat of my glory. “And some also of good will,” that is, without
hypocrisy, with all earnestness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>[Philip.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>. “The one proclaim Christ of faction not
sincerely.” <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>That is, not with pure motives, nor
from regard to the matter itself; but why? “thinking to add affliction
to my bonds.” <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) As they think that
I shall thus fall into greater peril, they add affliction to affliction.
O cruelty! O devilish instigation! They saw him in bonds, and cast into
prison, and still they envied him. They would increase his calamities,
and render him subject to greater anger: well said he, “thinking,” for
it did not so turn out. They thought indeed to grieve me by this; but I
rejoiced that the Gospel was furthered.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>[Philip.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>. “But the other of love, knowing that I am
set for the defense of the Gospel.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>What means, “that I am set for the
defense of the Gospel”? <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md) It is,
They are preparing for <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md) the
account which I must give to God, and assisting me.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>What is meant by “for the defense”? I
have been appointed to preach, I must give account, and answer for the
work to which I have been appointed; they assist me, that my defense may
be easy; for if there be found many who have been instructed and have
believed, my defense will be easy. So it is possible to do a good work,
from a motive which is not good. And not only is there no reward in
store for such an action, but punishment. For as they preached Christ
from a desire to involve the preacher of Christ in greater perils, not
only shall they receive no reward, but shall be subject to vengeance and
punishment. <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) “And some of love.”
That is, they know that I must give account for the Gospel.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span>[Philip.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>. “What then? only that every way, whether
in pretense, or in truth, Christ is proclaimed.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span>But see the wisdom of the Man. He did
not vehemently accuse them, but mentioned the result; what difference
does it make to me, says he, whether it be done in this or that way?
only that every way, “whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is
proclaimed.” He did not say, “Let him be proclaimed,” as some suppose,
stating that he opens the way for the heresies, but, “He is
proclaimed.” <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md) For in the first
place he did not lay down the law and say, as if laying down the law,
“Let Him be proclaimed,” but he reported what was taking place;
secondly, if he even spoke as laying down the law, not even thus would
he be opening the way for the heresies.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span>For let us examine the matter. For even
if he gave permission to preach as they preached, not even thus was he
opening the way for the heresies. How so? In that they preached
healthfully; though the aim and purpose on which they acted was
corrupted, still the preaching itself was not changed, and they were
forced so to preach. And why? Because, had they preached otherwise than
as Paul preached, had they taught otherwise than as he taught, they
would not have increased the wrath of the Emperor. But now by furthering
his preaching, by teaching in the same way, and making disciples as he
did, they had power to exasperate the Emperor, when he saw the multitude
of the disciples <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_191"></span>numerous. But then some wicked and
senseless man, taking hold of this passage, says, Verily they would have
done the contrary, they would have driven off those who had already
believed, instead of making believers to abound, had they wished to
annoy him. What shall we answer? That they looked to this thing only,
how they might involve him in present danger, and leave him no escape;
and thus they thought to grieve him, and to quench the Gospel, rather
than in the other way.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span>By that other course they would have
extinguished the wrath of the Emperor, they would have let him go at
large and preach again; but by this course they thought that because of
him all would be ruined, could they but destroy him. The many however
could not have this intention, but certain bitter men alone.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span>Then “and therein,” says he, “I
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.” What means, “yea, I will rejoice”? Even
if this be done still more, he means. For they coöperate with me even
against their will; and will receive punishment for their toil, whilst
I, who contributed nothing thereto, shall receive reward. Is there
anything beyond this villainy of the Devil, to contrive the punishment
of the preaching, and vengeance for the toils? Seest thou with how many
evils he pierces through his own! How else would a hater and an enemy of
their salvation have arranged all this? Seest thou how he who wages war
against the truth has no power, but rather wounds himself, as one who
kicks against the goads?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span>[Philip.
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>. “For I know,” says he, “that this shall
turn to my salvation through your supplication, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span>Nothing is more villainous than the
Devil. So does he everywhere involve his own in unprofitable toils, and
rends them. Not only does he not suffer them to obtain the prizes, but
he even subjects them to punishment.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span>For not only does he command them the
preaching of the Gospel, but likewise fasting and virginity, in such
sort as will not only deprive them of their reward, but will bring down
heavy evil on those who pursue that course. Concerning whom he says
elsewhere, also, “Branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron.”
([1 Tim. iv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38"></span>Wherefore, I beseech you, let us give
thanks to God for all things, since he hath both lightened our toil, and
increased our reward. For such as among them live in virginity enjoy not
the rewards, which they do who among us live chastely in wedlock; but
they who live as virgins among the heretics are subject to the
condemnation of the fornicators. All this springs from their not acting
with a right aim, but as accusing God’s creatures, <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) and His unspeakable Wisdom.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40"></span>Let us not then be sluggish. God hath
placed before us contests within measure, having no toil. Yet let us not
despise them for this. For if the heretics put themselves to the stretch
in unprofitable toils, what excuse shall we have if we will not endure
those which are less, and which have a greater reward? For which of
Christ’s ordinances is burdensome? which is grievous? Art thou unable to
live a virgin life? Thou art permitted to marry. Art thou unable to
strip thyself of all thou hast? Thou art permitted to supply the needs
of others from what thou hast. Let “your abundance be a supply for their
want.” ([2 Cor. viii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>.) These things indeed appear burdensome.
What things? I mean to despise money, and to overcome the desires of the
body. But His other commands require no cost, no violence. For tell me,
what violence is there in speaking no ill, in simply abstaining from
slander? <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md) What violence is there
in envying not another man’s goods? What violence in not being led away
by vain-glory? To be tortured, and endure it, is the part of strength.
The exercise of philosophy is the part of strength. To bear poverty
through life is the part of strength. It is the part of strength to
wrestle with hunger and thirst. Where none of these things are, but
where you may enjoy your own, as becomes a Christian, without envying
others, what violence is there?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p42"></span>From this source springs envy; nay,
rather all evils spring from no other source than this, that we cleave
to things present. For did you hold money and the glory of this world to
be nought, you would not cast an evil eye on its possessors. But since
you gape at these things, and idolize them, and are flattered by them,
for this reason envy troubles you, and vain-glory; it all springs from
idolizing the things of the present life. Art thou envious because
another man is rich? Nay, such an one is an object for pity and for
tears. But you laugh and answer straight, I am the object for tears, not
he! Thou also art an object for tears, not because thou art poor, but
because thou thinkest thyself wretched. For we weep for those who have
nothing the matter, and are discontented, not because they have anything
the matter, but because, without having, they think they have. For
example: if any one, cured of a fever, still is restless and rolls
about, lying in health on his bed, is he not more to be wept for than
those in fever, not that he has a fever, for he has none, but because
having no sickness he still thinks he has? And thou art an object for
tears just <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_192"></span>because thou thinkest thyself wretched,
not for thy poverty. For thy poverty thou art to be thought happy.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p43"></span>Why enviest thou the rich man? Is it
because he has subjected himself to many cares? to a harder slavery?
because he is bound like a dog, with ten thousand chains—namely, his
riches? Evening overtakes him, night overtakes him, but the season of
rest is to him a time of trouble of anguish, of pain, of anxiety. There
is a noise: he straightway jumps up. Has his neighbor been plundered? He
who has lost nothing cares more for it than the loser. For that man has
lost once, but having endured the pain he lays aside his care; but the
other has it always with him. Night comes on, the haven of our ills, the
solace of our woes, the medicine of our wounds. For they who are weighed
down by excess of grief, often give no ear to their friends, to their
relations, to their intimates,—ofttimes not even to a father when he
would give comfort, but take their very words amiss; but when sleep bids
them rest, none has the power to look him in the face. For worse than
any burning does the bitterness of grief afflict our souls. And as the
body, when parched and worn down by struggling against the violence of
the sunbeams, is brought to a caravansary with many fountains, and the
soothing of a gentle breeze, so does night hand over our soul to sleep.
Yea, rather, I should say, not night nor sleep does this, but God, who
knoweth our toil-worn race, has wrought this, while we have no
compassion on ourselves, but, as though at enmity with ourselves, have
devised a tyranny more powerful than natural want of rest—the
sleeplessness which comes of wealth. For it is said, “The anxieties of
wealth drive away sleep.” ([Ecclesiasticus
31.1](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>.) See how great is the care of God. But He
hath not committed rest to our will, nor our need of sleep to choice,
but hath bound it up in the necessities of nature, that good may be done
to us even against our wills. For to sleep is of nature. But we, as
mighty haters of ourselves, like enemies and persecutors of others, have
devised a tyranny greater than this necessity of nature that, namely,
which comes of money. Has day dawned? Then such an one is in dread of
the informers. Hath night overtaken him? He trembles at robbers. Is
death at hand? The thought that he must leave his goods to others preys
upon him worse than death. Hath he a son? His desires are increased; and
then he fancies himself poor. Has he none? His pains are greater.
Deemest thou him blessed who is unable to receive pleasure from any
quarter? Can you envy him thus tempest-tossed, while you yourself are
placed in the quiet haven of poverty? Of a truth this is the
imperfection of human nature; that it bears not its good nobly, but
casts insults on its very prosperity.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p44"></span>And all this on earth; but when we
depart thither, listen what the rich man, who was lord of innumerable
goods, as you say (since for my part I call not these things good, but
indifferent), listen to what this lord of innumerable goods says, and of
what he stands in need: “Father Abraham,” he exclaims, “send Lazarus,
that with the tip of his finger he may drop water on my tongue, for I am
scorched in this flame.” For even if that rich man had endured none of
the things I have mentioned, if he had passed his whole life without
dread and care—why say I his whole life? rather that one moment (for it
is a moment, our whole life is but one moment, compared with that
eternity which has no end)—if all things had turned out according to his
desire; must he not be pitied for these words, yea, rather, for this
state of things? Was not your table once deluged with wine? Now you are
not master even of a drop of water, and that, too, in your greatest
need. Did not you neglect that poor man full of sores? But now you ask a
sight of him, and no one gives leave. He lay at your gate; but now in
Abraham’s bosom. You then lay under your lofty ceiling; but now in the
fire of hell.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p45"></span>These things let the rich men hear.
Yea, rather not the rich, but the pitiless. For not in that he was rich
was he punished, but because he showed no pity; for it is possible that
a man who is at the same time rich and pitiful, should meet with every
good. And for this cause the rich man’s eyes were fixed on no one else,
but on him alone, who then begged his alms; that he might learn from
memory of his former actions, that his punishment was just. Were there
not ten thousand poor men who were righteous? But he, who then lay at
his gate, alone is seen by him, to instruct him and us, how great a good
it is to put no trust in riches. His poverty hindered not the one in
obtaining the kingdom; his riches helped not the other to avoid hell.
Where is the point at which a man is poor? where is the point at which
he is reduced to beggary? <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md) He is
not, he is not poor, who has nought, but he who desires many things! He
is not rich who has large possessions, but he who stands in need of
nothing. For what profit is there to possess the whole world, and yet
live in greater despondency than he who has nothing? Their dispositions
make men rich and poor, not the abundance or the want of money. Would
you, who are a poor man, become rich? You may have your will, and no one
can hinder you. Despise the world’s <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
<span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_193"></span>wealth, think it nought, as it is
nought. Cast out the desire of wealth, and you are straightway rich. He
is rich who does not desire to become rich; he who is unwilling to be
poor, is the poor man. As he is the diseased man, <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) who even in health bemoans his case,
and not the man who bears his disease more lightly than perfect health,
so also he is poor who cannot endure poverty, but in the midst of wealth
thinks himself poorer than the poor; not he who bears his poverty more
lightly than they their riches, for he is a richer man.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p48"></span>For tell me, wherefore fearest thou
poverty? wherefore tremblest thou? is it not by reason of hunger? is it
not for thirst? is it not for cold? Is it not indeed for these things?
There is not, there is not any one who is ever destitute in these
things! “For look at the generations of old, and see, did ever any one
trust in the Lord, and was forsaken? or did any one hope in Him, and was
made ashamed?” ([Ecclesiasticus
2.11](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49"></span>And again, “Behold the birds of the
heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns;
and your heavenly Father feedeth them.” ([Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>.) No one can readily point us out any one
who has perished by hunger and cold. Wherefore then dost thou tremble at
poverty? Thou canst not say. For if thou hast necessaries enough,
wherefore dost thou tremble at it? Because thou hast not a multitude of
servants? This truly is to be quit of masters; this is continual
happiness, this is freedom from care. Is it because your vessels, your
couches, your furniture are not formed of silver? And what greater
enjoyment than thine has he who possesses these things? None at all. The
use is the same, whether they are of this or that material. Is it
because thou art not an object of fear to the many? May you never become
so! For what pleasure is it that any should stand in dread and fear of
thee? Is it because thou art afraid of others? But thou canst not be
alarmed. For “wouldest thou have no fear of the power? do that which is
good, and thou shalt have praise from the same.” ([Rom. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49.2"></span>..md)
Does any say, It is because we are subject to contempt, and apt to
suffer ill? It is not poverty but wickedness which causes this; for many
poor men have quietly passed through life, whilst rulers, and the rich,
and powerful, have ended their days more wretchedly than all evil doers,
than bandits, than grave-robbers. For what poverty brings in thy case,
that doth wealth in theirs. For that which they who would ill-treat thee
do through thy contemptible estate, they do to him from envy and the
evil eye they cast upon him, and the latter still more than the former,
for this is the stronger craving to ill-treat another. He who envies
does everything with all his might and main, while the despiser ofttimes
has even pity on the despised; and his very poverty, and utter want of
power, has often been the cause of his deliverance.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p50"></span>And sometimes by saying to him, <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) “A great deed it will be if you make
away with such an one! If you slay one poor man, what vast advantage
will you reap?” we may thus soften down his anger. But envy sets itself
against the rich, and ceases not until it has wrought its will, and has
poured forth its venom. See you, neither poverty nor wealth is good in
itself, but our own disposition. Let us bring it to a good tone, let us
discipline it in true wisdom. If this be well affected, riches cannot
cast us out of the kingdom, poverty will not make us come short. But we
shall meekly bear our poverty, and receive no loss in respect to the
enjoyment of future goods, nor even here on earth. But we shall both
enjoy what is good on earth, and obtain the good things in heaven, which
may we all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_540"></span>[188:541](1130044.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span> \[Above translated “tender
mercies.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_541"></span>[189:542](1130044.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span> This is still in the person of St.
Paul. Of this use of the word Righteousness, see on [Rom. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[189:543](1130044.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span> βασίλεια. This is the eastern and
despotic name; the other was a remnant of the republic. \[The Rev. Ver.
understands the word prætorium here to mean the prætorian guard. See
Lightfoot on Philip. Others, the prætorian barracks, or the great
prætorian camp; but without distinct warrant of usage.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_543"></span>[189:544](1130044.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span> \[This seems to be Chrys.’s
interpretation, or recollection, of the Apostle’s phrase, “and to all
the rest.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_544"></span>[190:545](1130044.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span> \[The order of [Phil.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>
is transposed in Rev. Ver., upon the authority of nearly all the uncial
<span class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.iii-p20.2"></span>mss</span>., nearly
all the ancient versions, and other documents. It is best here to leave
Chrys.’s order, which is that of the Common Ver., but the translation of
Rev. Ver. is given as elsewhere.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_545"></span>[190:546](1130044.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span> \[So Chrys.’s text. The true text is
(as Rev. Ver.) “thinking to raise up affliction for me in my
bonds.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_546"></span>[190:547](1130044.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span> He takes “the Gospel” here in the
sense of St. Paul’s preaching of the Gospel. Theodoret takes it of his
being a champion of the Gospel among men.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[190:548](1130044.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span> \[The altered text has “cutting down,”
“lessening.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_548"></span>[190:549](1130044.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span> \[The altered text puts these three
last sentences under ver. 16.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_549"></span>[190:550](1130044.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span> \[This sentence, wanting in all known
<span class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>mss</span>. of
Chrys. is supplied by Field from a Catena. It evidently fell out, as
often happened in copying, through similarity to the following sentence.
The amplifying repetition is quite in Chrys.’s manner.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_550"></span>[191:551](1130044.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39"></span> See on [1 Tim.
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>
Hom. xii. and article Manichees in indices.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[191:552](1130044.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p41"></span> Or “in keeping from needless evil
speaking.”

<span id="fn_552"></span>[192:553](1130044.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p46"></span> Or “Till when (lasts) poverty? Till
when beggary?”

<span id="fn_553"></span>[193:554](1130044.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p47"></span> νοσῶν. Perhaps alluding to the sense
“insane.”

<span id="fn_554"></span>[193:555](1130044.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p51"></span> The reading is doubtful, but the sense
clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 1:18-20](1130045.md)
