[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130059)  [Next](1130061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii-Page_264"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Homily II.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>[Col.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>“For this cause we also, since the day we
heard it, do not cease to pray and make request for you, that ye may be
filled with the knowledge of His will in all spiritual wisdom and
understanding; to walk worthily of the Lord unto all pleasing, bearing
fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>“<span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>For</span> this cause.” What cause? Because we
heard of your faith and love, because we have good hopes, we are hopeful
to ask for future blessings also. For as in the games we cheer on those
most who are near upon gaining the victory, just so doth Paul also most
exhort those who have achieved the greater part.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>“Since the day we heard it,” saith he, “we
do not cease to pray for you.” Not for one day do we pray for you, nor
yet for two, nor three. Herein he both shows his love, and gives them a
gentle hint that they had not yet arrived at the end. For the words,
“that ye may be filled,” are of this significancy. And observe, I pray,
the prudence of this blessed one. He nowhere says that they are
destitute of everything, but that they are deficient; everywhere the
words, “that ye may be filled,” show this. And again, “unto all
pleasing, in every good work” ([Col.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>.), and again, “strengthened with all power,”
and again, “unto all patience and long-suffering”; for the constant
addition of “all” bears witness to their doing well in part, though, it
might be, not in all. And, “that ye may be filled,” he saith; not, “that
ye may receive,” for they had received; but “that ye may be filled” with
what as yet was lacking. Thus both the rebuke was given without offense,
and the praise did not suffer them to sink down, and become supine, as
if it had been complete. But what is, “that ye may be filled with the
knowledge of His will”? That through the Son we should be brought unto
Him, and no more through Angels. Now that ye must be brought unto Him,
ye have learnt, but it remains for you to learn this, and why He sent
the Son. For had it been that we were to have been saved by
Angels, <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md) He would not have sent
Him, would not have given Him up. “In all spiritual wisdom,” he saith,
“and understanding.” For since the philosophers deceived them; I wish
you, he saith, to be in spiritual wisdom, not after the wisdom of men.
But if in order to know the will of God, there needs spiritual wisdom;
to know His Essence what it is, there is need of continual prayers.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>And Paul shows here, that since that time
he has been praying, and has not yet prevailed, and yet has not
desisted; for the words, “from the day we heard it,” show this. But it
implies condemnation to them, if, from that time, even assisted by
prayers, they had not amended themselves. “And making request,” he says,
with much earnestness, for this the expression “ye knew” <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md) shows. But it is necessary still to
know somewhat besides. “To walk worthily,” he says, “of the Lord.” Here
he speaks of life and its works, for so he doth also everywhere: with
faith he always couples conduct. “Unto all pleasing.” And how, “all
pleasing”? “Bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God.” Seeing, saith he, He hath fully revealed Himself unto
you, and seeing ye have received knowledge so great; do ye then show
forth a conduct worthy of the faith; for this needeth elevated conduct,
greater far than the old dispensation. For, he that hath known God, and
been counted worthy to be God’s servant, yea, rather, even His Son, see
how great virtue he needeth. “Strengthened with all power.” He is here
speaking of trials and persecutions. We pray that ye might be filled
with strength, that ye faint not for sorrow, nor despair. “According to
the might of His glory.” But that ye may take up again such forwardness
as it becometh the power of His glory to give. “Unto all patience and
long-suffering.” What he saith is of this sort. Summarily, he saith, we
pray that ye may lead a life of virtue, and worthy of your citizenship,
and may stand firmly, being strengthened as it is reasonable to be
strengthened by God. For this cause he doth not as yet touch upon
doctrines, but dwells upon life, wherein he had nothing to charge them
with, and having praised them where praise was due, he then comes down
to accusation. And this he does everywhere: when he is about writing to
any with somewhat to blame them for, and somewhat to praise, he first
praises them, and then comes down to his charges. For he first
conciliates the hearer, and frees his accusation from all suspicion, and
<span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii-Page_265"></span>shows that for his own part he could have
been glad to praise them throughout; but by the necessity of the case is
forced into saying what he does. And so he doth in the first <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md) Epistle to the Corinthians. For after
having exceedingly praised them as loving him, even from the case of the
fornicator, he comes down to accuse them. But in that to the Galatians
not so, but the reverse. Yea, rather, if one should look close into it,
even there the accusation follows upon praise. For seeing he had no good
deeds of theirs then to speak of, and the charge was an exceeding grave
one, and they were every one of them corrupted; and were able to bear it
because they were strong, he begins with accusation, saying, “I
marvel.” <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md) ([Gal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>..md)
So that this also is praise. But afterwards he praises them, not for
what they were, but what they had been, saying, “If possible, ye would
have plucked out your eyes, and given them to me.” ([Gal. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10.2"></span>..md).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>“Bearing fruit,” he saith: this hath
reference to works. “Strengthened”: this to trials. “Unto all patience
and longsuffering”: long-suffering towards one another, patience towards
those without. For longsuffering is toward those whom we can requite,
but patience toward those whom we cannot. For this reason the term
patient is never applied to God, but longsuffering frequently; as this
same blessed one saith otherwhere in his writings, “Or despisest thou
the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering?” “Unto
all pleasing.” Not, one while, and afterwards not so. “In all spiritual
wisdom,” he saith, “and understanding.” For otherwise it is not possible
to know His will. Although indeed they thought they had His will; but
that wisdom was not spiritual. “To walk,” saith he, “worthily of the
Lord.” For this is the way of the best life. For he that hath understood
God’s love to man, (and he doth understand it if he have seen the Son
delivered up,) will have greater forwardness. And besides, we pray not
for this alone that ye may know, but that ye may show forth your
knowledge in works; for he that knows without doing, is even in the way
to punishment. “To walk,” he saith, that is, always, not once, but
continually. As to walk is necessary for us, so also is to live rightly.
And when on this subject he constantly uses the term “walk,” and with
reason, showing that such is the life set before us. But not of this
sort is that of the world. And great too is the praise. “To walk,” he
saith, “worthily of the Lord,” and “in every good work,” so as to be
always advancing, and nowhere standing still, and, with a metaphor,
“bearing fruit and increasing in the knowledge of God,” that ye might be
in such measure “strengthened,” according to the might of God, as is
possible for man to be. “Through His power,” great is the
consolation.—He said not strength, but “power,” which is greater:
“through the power,” he saith, “of His glory,” because that everywhere
His glory hath the power. He thus comforts him that is under reproach:
and again, “To walk worthily of the Lord.” He saith of the Son, that He
hath the power everywhere both in heaven and in earth, because His glory
reigneth everywhere. He saith not “strengthened” simply, but so, as they
might be expected to be who are in the service of so strong a Master.
“In the knowledge of God.” And at the same time he touches in passing
upon the methods of knowledge; for this is to be in error, not to know
God as one ought; or he means, so as to increase in the knowledge of
God. For if he that hath not known the Son, knoweth not the Father
either; justly is there need of increased <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md) knowledge: for there is no use in life
without this. “Unto all patience and longsuffering,” he saith, “with
joy, giving thanks” ([Col. 1.12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>.) unto God. Then being about to exhort them,
he makes no mention of what by and by shall be laid up for them; he did
hint at this however in the beginning of the Epistle, saying, “Because
of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens” ([Col.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>.): but in this place he mentions the things
which were already theirs, for these are the causes of the other. And he
doth the same in many places. For that which hath already come to pass
gains belief, and more carries the hearer along with it. “With joy,” he
saith, “giving thanks” to God. The connection is this. We cease not
praying for you, and giving thanks for the benefits already received.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>Seest thou how he bears himself along
into speaking of the Son? For if “we give thanks with much joy,” it is a
great thing that is spoken of. For it is possible to give thanks only
from fear, it is possible to give thanks even when in sorrow. For
instance; Job gave thanks indeed, but in anguish; and he said, “The Lord
gave, the Lord hath taken away.” ([Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>..md)
For, let not any say that what had come to pass pained him not, nor
clothed him with dejection of soul; nor let his great praise be taken
away from that righteous one. But when it is thus, it is not for fear,
nor because of His being Lord alone, but for the very nature of the
things themselves, that we give thanks. “To Him who made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.” He hath said a
great thing. What <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii-Page_266"></span>has been given, he saith, is of this
nature; He hath not only given, but also made us strong to receive. Now
by saying, “Who made us meet,” he showed that the thing was one of great
weight. For example, were some low person to have become a king, he hath
it in his power to give a governorship to whom he will; and this is the
extent of his power, to give the dignity: he cannot also make the person
fit for the office, and oftentimes the honor makes one so preferred even
ridiculous. If however he have both conferred on one the dignity, and
also made him fit for the honor, and equal to the administration, then
indeed the thing is an honor. This then is what he also saith here; that
He hath not only given us the honor, but hath also made us strong enough
to receive it.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span>For the honor here is twofold, the
giving, and the making fit for the gift. He said not, gave, simply; but,
“made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light,” that is, who hath appointed us a place with the saints. But he
did not say simply placed us, but hath given us to enjoy even the very
same things, for “the portion” <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715.md)
is that which each one receives. For it is possible to be in the same
city, and yet not enjoy the same things; but to have the same “portion,”
and yet not enjoy the same, is impossible. It is possible to be in the
same inheritance, and yet not to have the same portion; for instance,
all we (clergy) are in the inheritance, <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md) but we have not all the same
portion. <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md) But here he doth not
say this, but with the inheritance adds the portion also. But why doth
he call it inheritance (or lot)? To show that by his own achievements no
one obtains the kingdom, but as a lot <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md) is rather the result of good
luck, <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md) so in truth is it here
also. For a life so good as to be counted worthy of the kingdom doth no
one show forth, but the whole is of His free gift. Therefore He saith,
“When ye have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants, for we have
done that which was our duty to do.” ([Luke xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>..md)
“To be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light,”—he means,
both the future and the present light, <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md) —that is, in knowledge. He seems to me
to be speaking at once of both the present and the future. Then he shows
of what things we have been counted worthy. For this is not the only
marvel, that we are counted worthy of the kingdom; but it should also be
added who we are that are so counted; for it is not unimportant. And he
doth this in the Epistle to the Romans, saying, “For scarcely for a
righteous <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md) man will one die, but
peradventure for the good man some one would even dare to die.” ([Rom.
v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22"></span>[Col.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>.
“Who delivered us,” he saith, “from the power of darkness.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23"></span>The whole is of Him, the giving both of
these things and those; for nowhere is any achievement of ours. “From
the power of darkness,” he saith, that is, of error, the dominion of the
devil. He said not “darkness,” but “power”; for it had great power over
us, and held us fast. For it is grievous indeed even to be under the
devil at all, but to be so “with power,” this is far more grievous. “And
translated us,” he saith, “into the kingdom of the Son of His love.” Not
then so as to deliver man from darkness only, did He show His love
toward him. A great thing indeed is it to have delivered from darkness
even; but to have brought into a kingdom too, is a far greater. See then
how manifold the gift, that he hath delivered us who lay in the pit; in
the second place, that He hath not only delivered us, but also hath
translated us into a kingdom. “Who delivered us.” He said not, hath sent
us forth, but “delivered”: showing our great misery, and their <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) capture of us. Then to show also the
ease with which the power of God works, he saith, “And translated us,”
just as if one were to lead over a soldier from one position to another.
And he said not, “hath led over”; nor yet “hath transposed,” for so the
whole would be of him who transposed, nothing of him who went over; but
he said, “translated”; <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md) so that
it is both of us and of Him. “Into the kingdom of the Son of His love.”
He said not simply, “the kingdom of heaven,” but gave a grandeur to his
discourse by saying, “The kingdom of the Son,” for no praise can be
greater than this, as he saith elsewhere also: “If we endure, we shall
also reign with Him.” ([2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>..md)
He hath counted us worthy of the same things with the Son; and not only
so, but what gives it greater force, with His Beloved Son. <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md) Those that were enemies, those that
were in darkness, as it were on a sudden he had translated to where the
Son is, to the same honor with Him. Nor was he content with only this,
in order to show the greatness of the gift; he was not content with
saying, “kingdom,” but he also added, “of the Son”; nor yet with this,
but he added also “beloved”; <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii-Page_267"></span>nor yet with this, but he added yet, the
dignity of His nature. For what saith he? “Who is the Image of the
invisible God.” But he proceeded not to say this immediately, but
meanwhile inserted the benefit which He bestowed upon us. For lest, when
thou hearest that the whole is of the Father, thou shouldest suppose the
Son excluded, he ascribes the whole to the Son, and the whole to the
Father. For He indeed translated us, but the Son furnished the cause.
For what saith he? “Who delivered us out of the power of darkness.” But
the same is, “In whom we have the full redemption, even the forgiveness
of sins.” For had we not been forgiven our sins, we should not have been
“translated.” So here again the words, “In whom.” And he said not
“redemption,” but “full redemption,” so that we shall not fall any more,
nor become liable to death.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27"></span>[Col.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>.
“Who is the image of the invisible God, the First-born of all creation.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p28"></span>We light here upon a question of heresy.
So it were well we should put it off to-day and proceed with it
to-morrow, addressing it to your ears when they are fresh.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29"></span>But if one ought to say anything more:
the work of the Son is the greater. How? Because it were a thing
impossible to give the kingdom to men whilst continuing in their sins;
but thus it is an easier thing, so that He prepared the way for the
gift. What sayest thou? He Himself loosed thee from thy sins: surely
then He Himself also hath brought thee nigh; already he has laid by
anticipation the foundation of his doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30"></span>But we must put a close to this
discourse, when first we have made one remark. And what is this? Seeing
we have come to enjoy so great a benefit, we ought to be ever mindful of
it, and continually to turn in our minds the free gift of God, and to
reflect upon what we have been delivered from, what we have obtained;
and so we shall be thankful; so we shall heighten our love toward Him.
What sayest thou, O man? Thou art called to a kingdom, to the kingdom of
the Son of God—and art thou full of yawning, and scratching, and dozing?
If need were that thou shouldest leap into ten thousand deaths every
day, oughtest thou not to endure all? For the sake of office thou doest
all manner of things; when then thou art going to share the kingdom of
the Only-Begotten, wilt thou not spring down upon ten thousand swords?
wouldest thou not leap into fire? And this is not all that is strange,
but that when about to depart even, thou bewailest, and wouldest gladly
dwell amongst the things which are here, being a lover of the body. What
fancy is this? Dost thou regard even death as a thing of terror? The
cause of this is luxury, ease: for he at least that should live an
embittered life would wish even for wings, and to be loosed from hence.
But now it is the same with us as with the spoiled nestlings, which
would willingly remain for ever in the nest. But the longer they remain,
the feebler they become. For the present life is a nest cemented
together with sticks and mire. Yea, shouldest thou show me even the
great mansions, yea the royal palace itself glittering with all its gold
and precious stones; I shall think them no better than the nests of
swallows, for when the winter is come they will all fall of themselves.
By winter I mean That Day, not that it will be a winter to all. For God
also calleth it both night and day; the first in regard of sinners, the
latter of the just. So do I also now call it winter. If in the summer we
have not been well brought up, so as to be able to fly when winter is
come, our mothers will not take us, but will leave us to die of hunger,
or to perish when the nest falls; for easily as it were a nest, or
rather more easily, will God in that day remove all things, undoing and
new molding all. But they which are unfledged, and not able to meet Him
in the air, but have been so grossly brought up that they have no
lightness of wing, will suffer those things which reason is such
characters should suffer. Now the brood of swallows, when they are
fallen, perish quickly; but we shall not perish, but be punished for
ever. That season will be winter; or rather, more severe than winter.
For, not winter torrents of water roll down, but rivers of fire; not
darkness that riseth from clouds is there, but darkness that cannot be
dispelled, and without a ray of light, so that they cannot see either
the heaven, or the air, but are more straitened than those who have been
buried in the earth.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31"></span>Oftentimes do we say these things, but
there are whom we cannot bring to believe. But it is nothing wonderful
if we, men of small account, are thus treated, when we discourse of such
things, since the same happened to the Prophets also; when they spoke
not of such matters only, but also of war and captivity. ([Jer.
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011.md), [Jer.
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>, &c) And Zedekiah was rebuked by Jeremiah,
and was not ashamed. Therefore the Prophets said, “Woe unto them that
say, Let God hasten with speed His work, that we may see it, and let the
counsel of the Holy One of Israel come, that we may know it.” ([Isa.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31.2"></span>..md)
Let us not wonder at this. For neither did those believe who were in the
days of the ark; they believed, however, when their belief was of no
gain to them; neither did they of Sodom expect \[their fate\], howbeit
they too believed, when they gained nothing by believing. And why do I
speak of the future? Who would have expected these things which are now
hap<span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii-Page_268"></span>pening in divers places; these
earthquakes, these overthrows of cities? And yet were these things
easier to believe than those; those, I mean, which happened in the days
of the ark.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32"></span>Whence is this evident? Because that the
men of those times had no other example to look at, neither had they
heard the Scriptures, but with us, on the other hand, are countless
instances that have happened both in our own, and in former years. But
whence arose the unbelief of these persons? From a softened soul; they
drank and ate, and therefore they believed not. For, what a man wishes,
he thinks, and expects; and they that gainsay him are a jest.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33"></span>But let it not be so with us; for
hereafter it will not be a flood; nor the punishment till death only;
but death will be the beginning of punishment for persons who believe
not that there is a Judgment. And doth any ask, who has come from
thence, and said so? If now thou speakest thus in jest, not even so is
it well; for one ought not to jest in such matters; and we jest, not
where jesting is in place, but with peril; but if what thou really
feelest, and thou art of opinion that there is nothing hereafter, how is
it that thou callest thyself a Christian? For I take not into account
those who are without. Why receivest thou the Laver? Why dost thou set
foot within the Church? Is it that we promise thee magistracies? All our
hope is in the things to come. Why then comest thou, if thou believest
not the Scriptures? If thou dost not believe Christ, I cannot call such
an one a Christian; God forbid! but worse than even Greeks. In what
respect? In this; that when thou thinkest Christ is God, thou believest
Him not as God. For in that other impiety there is at least consistency;
for he who thinks not that Christ is God, necessarily will also not
believe Him; but this impiety has not even consistency; to confess Him
to be God, and yet not to think Him worthy of belief in what He has
said; these are the words of drunkenness, of luxury, of riot. “Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.” ([1 Cor. xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>..md)
Not to-morrow; but now ye are dead, when ye thus speak. Shall we then be
in nothing different from swine and asses? tell me. For if there be
neither a judgment, nor a retribution, nor a tribunal, wherefore have we
been honored with such a gift as reason, and have all things put under
us? Why do we rule, and are they ruled? See how the devil is on every
side urgent to persuade us to be ignorant of the Gift of God. He mixes
together the slaves with their masters, like some man-stealer <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) and ungrateful servant; he strives to
degrade the free to the level of the criminal. And he seems indeed to be
overthrowing the Judgment, but he is overthrowing the being of God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p35"></span>For such is ever the devil’s way; he puts
forward everything in a wily, and not in a straightforward manner, to
put us on our guard. If there is no Judgment, God is not just (I speak
as a man): if God is not just, then there is no God at all: if there is
no God, all things go on at haphazard, virtue is nought, vice nought.
But he says nothing of this openly. Seest thou the drift of this
satanical argument? how, instead of men, he wishes to make us brutes, or
rather, wild beasts, or rather, demons? Let us then not be persuaded by
him. For there is a Judgment, O wretched and miserable man! I know
whence thou comest to use such words. Thou hast committed many sins,
thou hast offended, thou hast no confidence, thou thinkest that the
nature of things will even follow thy arguments. Meanwhile, saith he, I
will not torment my soul with the expectation of hell, and, if there be
a hell, I will persuade it that there is none; meanwhile I will live
here in luxury! Why dost thou add sin to sin? If when thou hast sinned
thou believest that there is a hell, thou wilt depart with the penalty
of thy sins only to pay; but if thou add this further impiety, thou wilt
also for thine impiety, and for this thy thought, suffer the uttermost
punishment; and what was a cold and shortlived comfort to thee, will be
a ground for thy being punished for ever. Thou hast sinned: be it so:
why dost thou encourage others also to sin, by saying that there is no
hell? Why didst thou mislead the simpler sort? Why unnerve the hands of
the people? So far as thou art concerned, everything is turned upside
down; neither will the good become better, but listless; nor the wicked
desist from their wickedness. For, if we corrupt others, do we get
allowance for our sins? Seest thou not the devil, how he attempted to
bring down Adam? And has there then been allowance for him? Nay, surely
it will be the occasion of a greater punishment, that he may be punished
not for his own sins only, but also for those of others. Let us not then
suppose that to bring down others into the same destruction with
ourselves will make the Judgment-seat more lenient to us. Surely this
will make it more severe. Why thrust we ourselves on destruction? The
whole of this cometh of Satan.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36"></span>O man, hast thou sinned? Thou hast for
thy Master One that loveth man. Entreat, implore, weep, groan; and
terrify others, and pray them that they fall not into the same. If in a
house some servant, of those that had offended their master, says to his
son, “My child, I have offended the master, do thou be careful to please
him, that thou be not as I”: tell me, will he <span id="page_269">p.
269</span> <span id="iv.iv.ii-Page_269"></span>not have some
forgiveness? will he not bend and soften his master? But if, leaving so
to speak, he shall say such words as these, that he <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md) will not requite every one according
to his deserts; that all things are jumbled together indiscriminately,
both good and bad; that there is no thanks in this house; what thinkest
thou will be the master’s mind concerning him? will he not suffer a
severer punishment for his own misdoings? Justly so; for in the former
case his feeling will plead for him, though it be but weakly; but in
this, nobody. If no other then, yet imitate at least that rich man in
hell, <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727.md) who said, “Father Abraham,
send to my kinsmen, lest they come into this place,” since he could not
go himself, so that they might not fall into the same condemnation. Let
us have done with such Satanical words.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39"></span>What then, saith he, when the Greeks put
questions to us; wouldest thou not that we should try to cure <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) them? But by casting the Christian
into perplexity, under pretense of curing the Greek, thou aimest at
establishing thy Satanical doctrine. For since, when communing with thy
soul alone of these things, thou persuadest her not; thou desirest to
bring forward others as witnesses. But if one must reason with a Greek,
the discussion should not begin with this; but whether Christ be God,
and the Son of God; whether those gods of theirs be demons. If these
points be established, all the others follow; but, before making good
the beginning, it is vain to dispute about the end; before learning the
first elements, it is superfluous and unprofitable to come to the
conclusion. The Greek disbelieves the Judgment, and he is in the same
case with thyself, seeing that he too hath many who have treated these
things in their philosophy; and albeit when they so spoke they held the
soul as separated from the body, still they set up a seat of judgment.
And the thing is so very clear, that no one scarcely is ignorant of it,
but both poets and all are agreed among themselves that there is both a
Tribunal and a Judgment. So that the Greek also disbelieves <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) his own authorities; and the Jew doth
not doubt about these things nor in a word doth any man.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p42"></span>Why then deceive we ourselves? See, thou
sayest these things to me. What wilt thou say to God, “that fashioned
our hearts one by one” <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md) ([Ps.
xxxiii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p43.1"></span>.); that knoweth everything that is in the
mind; “that is living and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword”?
([Heb. iv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p43.2"></span>.) For tell me with truth; Dost thou not
condemn thyself? And how should wisdom so great, as that one who sins
should condemn himself, come by chance, for this is a work of mighty
wisdom. Thou condemnest thyself. And will he who giveth thee such
thoughts leave everything to go on at hazard? The following rule then
will hold universally and strictly. Not one of those who live in virtue
wholly disbelieves the doctrine of the Judgment, even though he be Greek
or heretic. None, save a few, of those who live in great wickedness,
receives the doctrine of the Resurrection. And this is what the Psalmist
says, “Thy judgments are taken away from before his face.” ([Ps. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p43.3"></span>..md)
Wherefore? Because “his ways are always profane”; for he saith, “Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44"></span>Seest thou that thus to speak is the mark
of the grovelling? Of eating and drinking come these sayings which are
subversive of the Resurrection. For the soul endures not, I say, it
endures not the tribunal which the conscience supplieth, and so it is
with it, as with a murderer, who firsts suggests to himself that he
shall not be detected, and so goes on to slay; for had his conscience
been his judge, he would not hastily have come to that daring
wickedness. And still he knows, and pretends not to know, lest he should
be tortured by conscience and fear, for, certainly, in that case, he
would have been less resolute for the daring deed. So too, assuredly,
they who sin, and day by day wallow in the same wickedness, are
unwilling to know it, although their consciences pluck at them.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p45"></span>But let us give no heed to such persons,
for there will be, there will assuredly be, a Judgment and a
Resurrection, and God will not leave so great works without direction.
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us leave off wickedness, and lay fast hold
on virtue, that we may receive the true doctrine in Christ Jesus our
Lord. And yet, which is easier to receive? the doctrine of the
Resurrection, or that of Fate? The latter is full of injustice, of
absurdity, of cruelty, of inhumanity; the other of righteousness,
awarding according to desert; and still men do not receive it. But the
fault is, indolence, for no one that hath understanding receives the
other. For amongst the Greeks even, they who did receive that doctrine,
were those who in their definition of pleasure affirmed it to be the
“end,” but they who loved virtue, would not receive it, but they cast it
out as absurd. But if among the Greeks this were so, much more will it
hold good with the doctrine of the Resurrection. And observe, I pray
you, how the devil hath established two contrary things: for in order
that we may neglect virtue; and pay honor to demons, <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="iv.iv.ii-Page_270"></span>he
brought in this Necessity, and by means of each he procured the belief
of both. What reason then will he be able to give, who obstinately
disbelieves a thing so admirable, and is persuaded by those who talk so
idly? Do not then support thyself with the consolation, that thou wilt
meet with forgiveness; but let us, collecting all our strength, stir
ourselves up to virtue, and let us live truly to God, in Christ Jesus
our Lord, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_710"></span>[264:711](1130060.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span> It may be asked how St. Chrysostom could
use this argument, and yet speak as he does of the intercession of
Saints (see the end of Hom. vi. on the Statues, and note). The reason
is, that he viewed the Saints as in the Kingdom of Christ, and
subordinate; but the error here referred to seems to have made the
Angels independent of Him, and the means of an approach to God without
reference to His Atonement. St. Augustine refers to such systems, *De.
Civ. Dei*, lib. ix. 15, 21; x. 1, &c.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[264:712](1130060.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span> ἔγνωτε. This is implied in his wishing
them “more” knowledge.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[265:713](1130060.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span> Perhaps it should be “second.” \[All
documents read “first,” and there is really no occasion for the
conjectural alteration, for the statement applies to the first, as well
as the second, Epistle.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_713"></span>[265:714](1130060.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span> Vid. St. Chrys. in loc.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[265:715](1130060.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span> \[The apostle’s word rendered
“knowledge” is ἐπίγνωσις, which etymologically signified additional or
full knowledge, and often has distinctively that sense.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_715"></span>[266:716](1130060.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span> \[“To be partakers” is, literally, “for
the portion.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_716"></span>[266:717](1130060.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span> κλήρῳ.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[266:718](1130060.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span> μερίδα.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[266:719](1130060.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span> \[κλῆρος signifies “lot,” “inheritance,”
&c. From the notion that Christian ministers were the Lord’s heritage
(like the tribe of Levi) came the application to them of the terms
*clerus*, *clerici*, whence clergy, clerk, &c.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_719"></span>[266:720](1130060.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span> The whole passage shows that he uses
this word *merely* to imply man’s insufficiency, and not at all to
introduce the notion of chance as opposed to Divine agency. He
constantly uses the word at the end of his Homilies, as well as
ἀξιωθῆναι, “to be thought worthy,” to show at once the necessity of good
works, and our unworthiness after all.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[266:721](1130060.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span> \[This clause Field restores from
several <span class="c16"><span id="iv.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>mss</span>.
and the Catena. The substantial repetition of it just after is
characteristic.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_721"></span>[266:722](1130060.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span> ἀδίκου, 2 \[4\] <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>mss</span>. and Sav. marg. St. Chrys. does
not, however, read so on the passage. Hom. ix. on Ep. to Romans.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[266:723](1130060.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24"></span> i.e. the devils’, αἰχμαλωσίαν.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[266:724](1130060.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25"></span> μετέστησε. The word in [Heb. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>, is
μετετέθη, which agrees with this criticism.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[266:725](1130060.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26"></span> \[“The Son of His love” really means
greatly more than “His Beloved Son.” See Lightfoot on Col.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_725"></span>[268:726](1130060.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p34"></span> ἀνδραποδιστὴς, one who steals freemen
for slaves. \[Literally, “enslaver” ([1 Tim. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>.).—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_726"></span>[269:727](1130060.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p37"></span> The master.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[269:728](1130060.htm#fr_727.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38"></span> γεέννῃ.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[269:729](1130060.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40"></span> θεραπεύειν. As we say, familiarly,
“doctor them.” The term was commonly used. Theodoret has a treatise
called, “The Remedy of Greekish affections.” Here it is “humor them” by
palatable doctrine.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[269:730](1130060.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41"></span> \[Various documents have “does not
disbelieve,” through failing to observe that it means the Greek above
mentioned, and that the expression changes with the next clause as to
the Jew.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_730"></span>[269:731](1130060.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p43"></span> καταμόνας, Sept. E.V. “alike.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians 1:15-18](1130061.md)
