[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130098)  [Next](1130100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p3"></span>“I exhort therefore that, first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.” \[R.V.:
who willeth that all men should be saved, &c.\]

<span id="v.iii.vii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>The</span> Priest is the common father, as it
were, of all the world; it is proper therefore that he should care for
all, even as God, Whom he serves. <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) For this reason he says, “I exhort
therefore that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men.” From this, two advantages result.
First, hatred towards those who are without is done away; for no one can
feel hatred towards those for whom he prays: and they again are made
better by the prayers that are offered for them, and by losing their
ferocious disposition towards us. For nothing is so apt to draw men
under teaching, as to love, and be loved. Think what it was for those
who persecuted, scourged, banished, and slaughtered the Christians, to
hear that those whom they treated so barbarously offered fervent prayers
to God for them. <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) Observe how
he wishes a Christian to be superior to all ill-treatment. As a father
who was struck on the face by a little child which he was carrying,
would not lose anything of his affection for it; so we ought not to
abate in our good will towards those who are without, even when we are
stricken by them. What is “first of all”? It means in the daily Service;
and the initiated know how this is done every day both in the evening
and the morning, how we offer prayers for the whole world, for kings and
all that are in authority. But some one perhaps will say, he meant not
for all men, but for all the faithful. How then does he speak of kings?
for kings were not then worshipers of God, for there was a long
succession of ungodly princes. And that he might not seem to flatter
them, he says first, “for all men,” then “for kings”; for if he had only
mentioned kings, that might have been suspected. And then since the soul
of some Christians might be slow <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) at hearing this, and reject the
exhortation, if at the celebration of the holy Mysteries it was
necessary to offer prayers for a heathen king, he shows them the
advantage of it, thus at least to reconcile them to the advice, “that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life”; as much as to say, Their safety is
a security to us; <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) as also in
his Epistle to the Romans, he exhorts them to obey their rulers, “not
for wrath but for conscience’ sake.” ([Rom. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.vii-p8.2"></span>.)
For God has appointed government for the public good. When therefore
they make war for this end, and stand on guard for our security, were it
not unreasonable that we should not offer prayers for their safety in
wars and dangers? It is not therefore flattery, but agreeable to the
rules of justice. For if they were not preserved, and prospered in their
wars, our affairs must necessarily be involved in confusion and trouble;
and if they were cut off, we must either serve ourselves, or be
scattered up and down as fugitives. For they are a sort of bul<span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span id="v.iii.vii-Page_427"></span>warks
thrown up before us, within which those who are inclosed are in peace
and safety.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p9"></span>He says, “supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks.” For we must give thanks to God for
the good that befalls others, as that He maketh the sun to shine upon
the evil and the good, and sendeth His rain both upon the just and the
unjust. Observe how he would unite and bind us together, not only by
prayer but by thanksgiving. For he who is urged to thank God for his
neighbor’s good, is also bound to love him, and be kindly disposed
towards him. And if we must give thanks for our neighbor’s good, much
more for what happens to ourselves, and for what is unknown, and even
for things against our will, and such as appear grievous to us, since
God dispenses all things for our good.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p10"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let every prayer of ours,
then, be accompanied with thanksgiving. And if we are commanded to pray
for our neighbors, not only for the faithful, but for the unbelieving
also, consider how wrong it is to pray against your brethren. What? Has
He commanded you to pray for your enemies, and do you pray against your
brother? But your prayer is not against him, but against yourself. For
you provoke God by uttering those impious words, “Show him the same!”
“So do to him!” “Smite him!” “Recompense him!” Far be such words from
the disciple of Christ, who should be meek and mild. From the mouth that
has been vouchsafed such holy Mysteries, let nothing bitter
proceed. <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) Let not the tongue
that has touched the Lord’s Body utter anything offensive, let it be
kept pure, let not curses be borne upon it. For if “revilers shall not
inherit the kingdom of God” ([1 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p11.2"></span>.), much less those who curse. For he that
curses must be injurious; and injuriousness and prayer are at variance
with each other, cursing and praying are far apart, accusation and
prayer are wide asunder. Do you propitiate God with prayer, and then
utter imprecations? If you forgive not, you will not be forgiven.
([Matt. vi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p11.3"></span>.) But instead of forgiving, you beseech God
not to forgive; what excessive wickedness in this! If the unforgiving is
not forgiven, he that prays his Lord not to forgive, how shall he be
forgiven? The harm is to yourself, not him. For though your prayers were
on the point of being heard for yourself, they would never be accepted
in such a case, as offered with a polluted mouth. For surely the mouth
that curses is polluted with all that is offensive and unclean.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p12"></span>When you ought to tremble for your own
sins, to wrestle earnestly for the pardon of them, you come to move God
against your brother—do you not fear, nor think of what concerns
yourself? do you not see what you are doing? Imitate even the conduct of
children at school. If they see their own class within giving account of
their lessons, and all beaten for their idleness, and one by one
severely examined and chastised with blows, they are frightened to
death, and if one of their companions strikes them, and that severely,
they cannot have while to be angry, nor complain to their master; so is
their soul possessed with fear. They only look to one thing, that they
may go in and come out without stripes, and their thoughts are on that
time. And when they come out, whether beaten or not, the blows they have
received from their play-fellows never enter their minds for the
delight. And you, when you stand anxiously concerned for your own sins,
how can you but shudder at making mention of others’ faults? <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) How can you implore pardon of God?
For your own case is made worse on the terms of your imprecations
against another, and you forbid Him to make allowance for your own
faults. Might He not say, “If thou wouldest have Me so severe in
exacting offenses against thee, how canst thou expect Me to pardon thy
offenses against Me?” Let us learn at last to be Christians! If we know
not how to pray, which is a very simple and easy thing, what else shall
we know? Let us learn to pray like Christians. Those are the prayers of
Gentiles, the supplications of Jews. The Christian’s are the reverse,
for the forgiveness and forgetting of offenses against us. “Being
reviled,” it is said, “we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being
defamed, we entreat.” ([1 Cor. 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p13.1"></span>.) Hear Stephen saying, “Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge.” ([Acts vi.
60](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#060)<span id="v.iii.vii-p13.2"></span>.)
Instead of praying against them, he prayed for them. You, instead of
praying for them, utter imprecations against them. You then are wicked
in the degree that he was excellent. Whom do we admire, tell me; those
for whom he prayed, or him who prayed for them? Him certainly! and if
we, much more then God. Would you have your enemy stricken? pray for
him: yet not with such intention, not to strike him. That will indeed be
the effect, but let it not be your object. That blessed martyr suffered
all unjustly, yet he prayed for them: we suffer many things justly from
our enemies. And if he who suffered unjustly durst not forbear to pray
for his enemies, what punishment do we deserve, who suffer justly, and
yet do not pray for them, nay, pray against them? Thou thinkest indeed
that thou art inflicting a blow upon another, but in truth thou art
thrust<span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="v.iii.vii-Page_428"></span>ing the sword against thyself. Thou
sufferest not the Judge to be lenient to thy own offenses, by this way
of urging Him to anger against others. For, “with what measure ye mete,”
He saith, “it shall be measured to you again; and with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged.” ([Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.vii-p13.3"></span>.)
Let us therefore be disposed to pardon, that God may be so disposed
towards us.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p14"></span>These things I wish you not only to
hear, but to observe. For now the memory retains only the words, and
perhaps hardly those. And after we are separated, if any one who was not
present were to ask you, what had been our discourse, some could not
tell: others would know merely the subject we had spoken of, and answer
that there had been a Homily upon the subject of forgiving injuries, and
praying for our enemies, but would omit all that had been said, as they
could not remember: others remember a little, but still somewhat. If
therefore you gain nothing by what you hear, I entreat you not even to
attend at the discourse. For of what use is it? The condemnation is
greater, the punishment more severe, if after so many exhortations, we
continue in the same course. For this reason God has given us a definite
form of prayer, that we might ask for nothing human, nothing worldly.
And you that are faithful know what you ought to pray for, how the whole
Prayer is common. But one says, “It is not commanded there to pray for
unbelievers.” This you would not say, if you understood the force, the
depth, the hidden treasure of that <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) Prayer. Only unfold it, and you
find this also comprised within it. For it is implied, when one says in
prayer, “Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven.” Now, because in
heaven there is no unbeliever nor offender; if therefore it was for the
faithful alone, there would be no reason in that expression. If the
faithful were to do the will of God and the unbelievers not to do it,
His will were not done in earth as it is in heaven. But it means; As
there is none wicked in heaven, so let there be none on earth; but draw
all men to the fear of Thee, make all men angels, even those who hate
us, and are our enemies. Dost thou not see how God is daily blasphemed
and mocked by believers and unbelievers, both in word and in deed? What
then? Has He for this extinguished the sun? or stayed the course of the
moon? Has He crushed the heavens and uprooted the earth? Has He dried up
the sea? Has He shut up the fountains of waters? or confounded the air?
Nay, on the contrary, He makes His sun to rise, His rain to descend,
gives the fruits of the earth in their seasons, and thus supplies yearly
nourishment to the blasphemers, to the insensible, to the polluted, to
persecutors; not for one day or two, but for their whole life. Imitate
Him then, emulate Him as far as human powers admit. Canst thou not make
the sun arise? Abstain from evil speaking. Canst thou not send rain?
Forbear reviling. Canst thou not give food? Refrain from insolence. Such
gifts from thee are sufficient. The goodness of God to His enemies is
shown by His works. Do thou so at least by words: pray for thine
enemies, so wilt thou be like thy Father who is in heaven. How many
times have we discoursed upon this subject! nor shall we cease to
discourse; only let something come of it. It is not that we are drowsy,
and weary of speaking; only do not you that hear be annoyed. Now a
person seems to be annoyed, when he will not do what one says. For he
who practices, loves often to hear the same thing, and is not annoyed by
it; for it is his own commendation. But annoyance arises simply from not
doing what is prescribed. Hence the speaker is troublesome. If a man
practices almsgiving, and hears another speak of almsgiving, he is not
wearied, <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) but pleased, for he
hears his own good actions recommended and proclaimed. So that when we
are displeased at hearing a discourse upon the forgiveness of injuries,
it is because we have no interest in forbearance, it is not practiced by
us; for if we had the reality, we should not be pained at its being
named. If therefore you would not have us wearisome or annoying,
practice as we preach, exhibit in your actions the subject of our
discourses. For we shall never cease discoursing upon these things till
your conduct is agreeable to them. And this we do more especially from
our concern and affection for you. For the trumpeter must sound his
trumpet, though no one should go out to war; he must fulfill his part.
We do it, not as wishing to bring heavier condemnation upon you, but to
avert it from ourselves. And besides this, love for you constrains us,
for it would tear and torture our hearts if that should befall you,
which God avert! It is not any costly process that we recommend to you:
it does not require the spoiling of goods, nor a long and toilsome
journey. It is only to will. It is a word, it is a purpose of the mind.
Let us only set a guard on our tongues, a door and a bar upon our lips,
that we may utter nothing offensive to God. It is for our own advantage,
not for theirs for whom we pray, to act thus. For let us ever consider,
that he who blesses his enemy, blesses himself, he who curses his enemy,
curses himself, and he who prays for his enemy, prays not for him, but
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="v.iii.vii-Page_429"></span>for himself. If we thus act, we shall be
able to reduce to practice this excellent virtue, <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) and so to obtain the promised
blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[426:1158](1130099.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p5"></span> ᾦἱερᾷται.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[426:1159](1130099.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p6"></span> This is urged by Tertullian, Apol. i. §
30, and Address to Scapula, § 2. See also St. Justin, M. Apol. i. § 23.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[426:1160](1130099.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p7"></span> ναρκᾷν.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[426:1161](1130099.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p8"></span> See on [Rom. xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>,
Hom. xxiii.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[427:1162](1130099.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p11"></span> See [Jas. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#011)<span id="v.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[427:1163](1130099.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p13"></span> In the Apostolical Constitutions, b.
viii. c. 12, the Deacon says, just before the Offertory Prayer, “No man
against another! no man in hypocrisy! Upright before the Lord with fear
and trembling let us stand to offer!” The first sentence shows that the
like abuse was apprehended.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[428:1164](1130099.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p15"></span> Gr. “the.”

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[428:1165](1130099.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p16"></span> ἀποκναίει. Dounæus conjectures ἀποκνεῖ.
The other is usually transitive.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[429:1166](1130099.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p17"></span> He evidently hints at a higher degree
of Christian feeling, in which a man would simply wish well to his
enemies, and *therefore* pray for them. See on [Philip. i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030)<span id="v.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>,
Hom. iv., and on [Rom. xii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p17.2"></span>, Hom. xxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy 2:2-4](1130100)
