[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130034)  [Next](1130036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2.2"></span>[Ephesians vi.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>“Servants, be obedient unto them that,
according to the flesh, are your masters, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; not in the way of eye-service,
as men-pleasers: but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart; with good-will doing service, as unto the Lord, and not unto
men: knowing that whatsoever good thing each one doeth, the same shall
he receive again from the Lord, whether he be bond or free.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Thus</span> then it is not husband only,
nor wife, nor children, but virtuous servants also that contribute to
the organization and protection of a house. Therefore the blessed Paul
has not overlooked this department even. He comes to it, however, in the
last place, because it is last in dignity and rank. Still he addresses
much discourse also to them, no longer in the same tone as to children,
but in a far more advanced way, inasmuch as he does not hold out to
these the promise in this world, but in that which is to come.
“Knowing,” saith he, “that whatsoever good or evil <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) thing each one doeth, the same shall
he receive of the Lord,” and thus at once instructs them to love wisdom.
For though they be inferior to the children in dignity, still in mind
they are superior to them.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p6"></span>“Servants,” saith he, “be obedient to
them that, according to the flesh, are your masters.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7"></span>Thus at once he raises up, at once
soothes the wounded soul. Be not grieved, he seems to say, that you are
inferior to the wife and the children. Slavery is nothing but a name.
The mastership is “according to the flesh,” brief and temporary; <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) for whatever is of the flesh, is
transitory.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p9"></span>“With fear,” he adds, “and
trembling.” <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p11"></span>Thou seest that he does not require
the same fear from slaves as from wives: for in that case he simply
said, “and let the wife see that she fear her husband”; whereas in this
case he heightens the expression, “with fear,” he saith, “and trembling,
in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ.” This is what he constantly
says. What meanest thou, blessed Paul? He is a brother, or rather he has
become a brother, he enjoys the same privileges, he belongs to the same
body. Yea, more, he is the brother, not of his own master only, but also
of the Son of God, he is partaker of all the same privileges; yet sayest
thou, “obey your masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling”? Yes, for this very reason, he would say, I say it. For if I
charge free men to submit themselves one to another in the fear of
God,—as he said above, “submitting yourselves one to another in the fear
of Christ”;—if I charge moreover the wife to fear and reverence her
husband, although she is his equal; much more must I so speak to the
<span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_158"></span>servant. It is no sign of low birth,
rather it is the truest nobility, to understand how to lower ourselves,
to be modest and unassuming, and to give way to our neighbor. And the
free have served the free with much fear and trembling.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p12"></span>“In singleness of heart,” he says.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p13"></span>And it is well said, since it is
possible to serve with fear and trembling, and yet not of good will, but
in just any way that may be possible. Many servants in many instances
secretly cheat their masters. And this cheating accordingly he does
away, by saying, “in singleness of your heart as unto Christ, not in the
way of eye-service as men-pleasers, but as servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart; with good-will doing service, as unto the
Lord, and not unto men.” Seest thou how many words he requires, in order
to implant this good principle, “with goodwill,” I mean, and “from the
heart”? That other service, “with fear and trembling” I mean, we see
many rendering to their masters, and the master’s threat goes far to
secure that. But show, saith he, that thou servest as “the servant of
Christ,” not of man. Make the right action your own, not one of
compulsion. Just as in the words which follow, he persuades and
instructs the man who is ill-treated by another to make the right action
his own, and the work of his own free choice. Because inasmuch as the
man that smites the cheek, is not supposed to come to that act in
consequence of any intention in the person struck, but only of his own
individual malice, what saith He? “Turn to him the other also” ([Matt.
v. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p13.1"></span>.); to show him that in submitting to the
first thou wert not unwilling. For he that is lavish in suffering wrong,
makes that his own which is not his own act, by suffering himself to be
smitten on the other cheek also, and not merely by enduring the first
blow. For this latter will have perhaps the appearance even of
cowardice; but that of a high philosophy.—Thus thou wilt show that it
was for the sake of wisdom that thou didst bear the first blow also. And
so in the present case, show here too, that thou bearest this slavery
also willingly. The man-pleaser then is no servant of Christ. The
servant of Christ is not a man-pleaser. ([Gal. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p13.2"></span>.) For who that is the servant of God,
makes it his object to please men? And who that pleases men, can be a
servant of God?

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p14"></span>“From the heart,” <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) saith he, “with good-will doing
service.” For since it is possible to do service even with singleness of
heart and not wrongfully, and yet not with all one’s might, but only so
far as fulfilling one’s bounden duty, therefore he says, do it with
alacrity, not of necessity, upon principle, not upon constraint. If thus
thou do service, thou art no slave; if thou do it upon principle, if
with good-will, if from the heart, and if for Christ’s sake. For this is
the servitude that even Paul, the free man, serves, and exclaims, “For
we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus, as Lord, and ourselves as
your servants for Jesus’ sake.” ([2 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p15.1"></span>.) Look how he divests thy slavery of its
meanness. For just in the same way as the man who has been robbed, if he
gives still more to him who has taken, is not ranked among those robbed,
but rather amongst liberal givers; not amongst those who suffer evil,
but amongst those who do good; and rather clothes the other with
disgrace by his liberality, than is clothed with disgrace by being
robbed,—so, I say, in this case, by his generosity he will appear at
once more high-minded, and by showing that he does not feel the
wrong, <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) will put the other to
shame.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p17"></span>Let us then do service to our masters
for Christ’s sake, “knowing,” he continues, “that whatsoever good thing
each one doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be
bond or free.” For inasmuch as it was probable that many masters, as
being unbelievers, would have no sense of shame, and would make no
return to their slaves for their obedience, observe how he has given
them encouragement, so that they may have no misgiving about the
remuneration, but may have full confidence respecting the recompense.
For as they who receive a benefit, when they make no return, make God a
debtor to their benefactors; so, I say, do masters also, if, when
well-treated by thee, they fail to requite thee, requite thee the more,
by rendering God thy debtor.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p18"></span>[Eph.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p18.1"></span>. “And ye masters,” he continues, “do the
same things unto them.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p19"></span>The same things. What are these?
“With good-will do service.” However he does not actually say, “do
service,” though by saying, “the same things,” he plainly shows this to
be his meaning. For the master himself is a servant. “Not as
men-pleasers,” he means, “and with fear and trembling”: that is, toward
God, fearing lest He one day accuse you for your negligence toward your
slaves.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p20"></span>“And forbear threatening;” be not
irritating, he means, nor oppressive.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p21"></span>“Knowing that both their Master
and <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) yours is in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p27"></span>Ah! How mighty a Master does he hint
at <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_159"></span>here! How startling the suggestion! It
is this. “With what measure thou metest, it shall be measured unto thee
again” ([Matt. vii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p27.1"></span>.); lest thou hear the sentence, “Thou
wicked servant. I forgave thee all that debt.” ([Matt. xviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p28"></span>“And there is no respect of persons,”
he saith, “with Him.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p29"></span>Think not, he would say, that what is
done towards a servant, He will therefore forgive, because done to a
servant. Heathen laws indeed as being the laws of men, recognize a
difference between these kinds of offenses. But the law of the common
Lord and Master of all, as doing good to all alike, and dispensing the
same rights to all, knows no such difference.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p30"></span>But should any one ask, whence is
slavery, and why it has found entrance into human life, (and many I know
are both glad to ask such questions, and desirous to be informed of
them,) I will tell you. Slavery is the fruit of covetousness, of
degradation, of savagery; since Noah, we know, had no servant, nor had
Abel, nor Seth, no, nor they who came after them. The thing was the
fruit of sin, of rebellion against parents. Let children hearken to
this, that whenever they are undutiful to their parents, they deserve to
be servants. Such a child strips himself of his nobility of birth; for
he who rebels against his father is no longer a son; and if he who
rebels against his father is not a son, how shall he be a son who rebels
against our true Father? He has departed from his nobility of birth, he
has done outrage to nature. Then come also wars, and battles, and take
their prisoners. <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) Well, but
Abraham, you will say, had servants. Yes, but he used them not as
servants.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p32"></span>Observe how everything depends upon
the head; the wife, by telling him “to love her”; the children, by
telling him “to bring them up in the chastening and admonition of the
Lord”; the servants, by the words, “knowing that both their Master and
yours is in Heaven.” So, saith he, ye also in like manner, as being
yourselves servants, shall be kind and indulgent. “Finally, be strong in
the Lord and in the strength of His might.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p33"></span>But if, before considering this next,
ye have a mind to hearken, I shall make the same remarks concerning
servants, as I have also made before concerning children. Teach them to
be religious, and everything else will follow of necessity. But now,
when any one is going to the theater, or going off to the bath, he drags
all his servants after him; but when he goes to church, not for a
moment; nor does he compel them to attend and hear. Now how shall thy
servant listen, when thou his master art attending to other things? Hast
thou purchased, hast thou bought thy slave? Before all things enjoin him
what God would have him do, to be gentle towards his fellow-servants,
and to make much account of virtue.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p34"></span>Every one’s house is a city; and
every man is a prince in his own house. That the house of the rich is of
this character, is plain enough, where there are both lands, and
stewards, and rulers over rulers. But I say that the house of the poor
also is a city. Because here too there are offices of authority; for
instance, the husband has authority over the wife, the wife over the
servants, the servants again over their own wives; again the wives and
the husbands over the children. Does he not seem to you to be, as it
were, a sort of king, having so many authorities under his own
authority? and that it were meet that he should be more skilled both in
domestic and general government than all the rest? For he who knows how
to manage these in their several relations, will know how to select the
fittest men for offices, yes, and will choose excellent ones. And thus
the wife will be a second king in the house, lacking only the diadem;
and he who knows how to choose this king, will excellently regulate all
the rest.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p35"></span>[Eph.
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p35.1"></span>. “Finally,” saith he, “be strong in the
Lord.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p36"></span>Whenever the discourse is about to
conclude, he always employs this turn. Said I not well from the first,
that every man’s house is a camp in itself? For look, having disposed of
the several offices, he proceeds to arm them, and to lead them out to
war. <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) If no one usurps the
other’s office, but every one remains at his post, all will be well
ordered.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p38"></span>“Be strong,” saith he, “in the Lord,
and in the strength of His might.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p39"></span>That is, in the hope which we have in
Him, by means of His aid. For as he had enjoined many duties, which were
necessary to be done, fear not, he seems to say, cast your hope upon the
Lord, and He will make all easy.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p40"></span>[Eph.
6.11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p40.1"></span>. “Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p41"></span>He saith not, against the fightings,
nor against the hostilities, but against the “wiles.” For this enemy is
at war with us, not simply, nor openly, but by “wiles.” What is meant by
wiles? To use “wiles,” is to deceive and to take by artifice or
contrivance; a thing which takes place both in the case of the arts, and
by words, and actions, and stratagems, in the case of those who seduce
us. <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_160"></span>I mean something like this. The Devil
never proposes to us sins in their proper colors; he does not speak of
idolatry, but he sets it off in another dress, using “wiles,” <span
id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) that is, making his discourse
plausible, employing disguises. Now therefore the Apostle is by this
means both rousing the soldiers, and making them vigilant, by persuading
and instructing them, that our conflict is with one skilled in the arts
of war, and with one who wars not simply, nor directly, but with much
wiliness. And first then he arouses the disciples from the consideration
of the Devil’s skill; but in the second place, from his nature, and the
number of his forces. It is not from any desire to dispirit the soldiers
that stand under him, but to arouse, and to awaken them, that he
mentions these stratagems, and prepares them to be vigilant; for had he
merely detailed their power, and there stopped his discourse, he must
have dispirited them. But now, whereas both before and after this, he
shows that it is possible to overcome such an enemy, he rather raises
their courage; for the more clearly the strength of our adversaries is
stated on our part to our own people, so much the more earnest will it
render our soldiers.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p43"></span>[Eph.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p43.1"></span>. “For our wrestling is not,” saith he,
“against flesh and blood, <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) but
against the principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers
of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness, in the
heavenly places.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p45"></span>Having stimulated them by the
character of the conflict, he next goes on to arouse them also by the
prizes set before them. For what is his argument? Having said that the
enemies are fierce, he adds further, that they despoil us of vast
blessings. What are these? The conflict lies “in the heavenlies”; <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) the struggle is not about riches, not
about glory, but about our being enslaved. And thus is the enmity
irreconcilable. The strife and the conflict are fiercer when for vast
interests at stake; for the expression “in the heavenlies” <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) is equivalent to, “for the heavenly
things.” It is not that they may gain anything by the conquest, but that
they may despoil us. As if one were to say, “In what does the contract
lie?” In gold. The word “in,” means, “in behalf of”; the word “in,” also
means, “on account <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) of.” <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) Observe how the power of the enemy
startles us; how it makes us all circumspection, to know that the hazard
is on behalf of vast interests, and the victory for the sake of great
rewards. For he is doing his best to cast us out of Heaven.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p50"></span>He speaks of certain “principalities,
and powers, and world-rulers of this darkness.” What darkness? Is it
that of night? No, but of wickedness. “For ye were,” saith he, “once
darkness” ([Eph. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p50.1"></span>.); so naming that wickedness which is in
this present life; for beyond it, it will have no place, not in Heaven,
nor in the world to come.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p51"></span>“World-rulers” <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) he calls them, not as having the
mastery over the world, but the Scripture is wont to call wicked
practices “the world,” as, for example, where Christ saith, “They are
not of this world, even as I am not of the world.” ([John xvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p52.1"></span>.) What then, were they not of the world?
Were they not clothed with flesh? Were they not of those who are in the
world? And again; “The world hateth Me, but you it cannot hate.” ([John
vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p52.2"></span>.) Where again He calls wicked practices
by this name. Thus the Apostle here by the world means wicked men, and
the evil spirits have more especial power over them. “Against the
spiritual hosts of wickedness,” saith he, “in the heavenly places.”
“Principalities, and powers,” he speaks of; just as in the heavenly
places there are “thrones and dominions, principalities and powers.”
([Col. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p52.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p53"></span>[Eph.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p53.1"></span>. “Wherefore,” saith he, “take up the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day,
and, having done all, to stand.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p54"></span>By “evil day” he means the present
life, <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) and calls it too “this
present evil world” ([Gal. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p55.2"></span>.), from the evils which are done in it.
It is as much as to say, Always be armed. And again, “having done all,”
saith he; that is, both passions, and vile lusts, and all things else
that trouble us. He speaks not merely of doing the deed, but of
completing it, <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) so as not only to
slay, but to stand also after we have slain. For many who have gained
this victory, have fallen again. “Having done,” saith he, “all”; not
having done one, but not the other. For even after the victory, we must
stand. An enemy may be struck, but things that are struck revive again
if we do not stand. But if after having fallen they rise up again, so
long as we stand, they are fallen. So long as we waver not, the
adversary rises not again.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p57"></span>“Let us put on the whole armor of
God.” Seest thou how he banishes all fear? For if it be possible “to do
all, and to stand,” his de<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_161"></span>scribing in detail the power of the
enemy does not create cowardice and fear, but it shakes off indolence.
“That ye may be able,” he saith, “to withstand in the evil day.” And he
further gives them encouragement too from the time; the time, he seems
to say, is short; <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) so that ye
must needs stand; faint not when the slaughter is achieved.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p59"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p59.1"></span>Moral</span>. If then it is a warfare, if
such are the forces arrayed against us, if “the principalities” are
incorporeal, if they are “rulers of the world,” if they are “the
spiritual hosts of wickedness,” how, tell me, canst thou live in
self-indulgence? How canst thou be dissolute? How if we are unarmed,
shall we be able to overcome? These words let every one repeat to
himself every day, whenever he is under the influence of anger, or of
lust, whenever he is aiming, and all to no profit, after this languid
life. Let him hearken to the blessed Paul, saying to him, “Our wrestling
is not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against
the powers.” A harder warfare this than that which is matter of sense, a
fiercer conflict. Think how long time this enemy is wrestling, for what
it is that he is fighting, and be more guarded than ever. “Nay,” a man
will say, “but as he is the devil, he ought to have been removed out of
the way, and then all had been saved.” <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) These are the pretenses to which some
of your indolent ones in self-defense give utterance. When thou oughtest
to be thankful, O man, that, if thou hast a mind, thou hast the victory
over such a foe, thou art on the contrary even discontented, and givest
utterance to the words of some sluggish and sleepy soldier. Thou knowest
the points of attack, <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) if thou
choosest. Reconnoiter on all sides, fortify thyself. Not against the
devil alone is the conflict, but also against his powers. How then, you
may say, are we to wrestle with the darkness? By becoming light. How
with the “spiritual hosts of wickedness”? By becoming good. For
wickedness is contrary to good, and light drives away darkness. But if
we ourselves too be darkness, we shall inevitably be taken captive. How
then shall we overcome them? If, what they are by nature, that we become
by choice, free from flesh and blood, thus shall we vanquish them. For
once it was probable that the disciples would have many persecutors,
“imagine not,” he would say, “that it is they who war with you. They
that really war with you, are the spirits that work in them. Against
them is our conflict.” Two things he provides for by these
considerations; he renders them in themselves more courageous and he
lets loose their wrath against those who war against them. And wherefore
is our conflict against these? Since we have also an invincible ally,
the grace of the Spirit. We have been taught an art, such as shall
enable us to wrestle not against men, but against spirits. Nay, if we
have a mind, neither shall we wrestle at all; for it is because we
choose it, that there is a struggle, since so great is the power of Him
that dwelleth in us, as that He said, “Behold, I have given you
authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power
of the enemy.” ([Luke x. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.1"></span>.) All power hath He given us, both of
wrestling and of not wrestling. It is because we are slothful, that we
have to wrestle with them; for that Paul wrestled not, hear what he
saith himself, “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?” ([Rom. viii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.2"></span>.) And again hear his words, “God shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly.” ([Rom. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.3"></span>.) For he had him under his subjection;
whence also he said, “I charge thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come
out of her.” ([Acts xvi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.4"></span>.) And this is not the language of one
wrestling; for he that wrestles has not yet conquered, and he that has
conquered no longer wrestles; he has subdued, has taken his captive. And
so Peter again wrestled not with the devil, but he did that which was
better than wrestling. In the case of the faithful, the obedient, the
catechumens, they prevailed over him to vast advantage and over his
powers. Hence too was it that the blessed Paul said, “For we are not
ignorant of his devices” ([2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.5"></span>.), which was the way moreover in which
he especially overcame him; and again hear his words, “And no marvel—if
his ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of righteousness.”
([2 Cor. 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.6"></span>.) So well knew he every part of the
conflict, and nothing escaped him. Again, “For the mystery of
lawlessness,” saith he, “doth already work.” ([2 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61.7"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p62"></span>But against us is the struggle; for
hearken again to him, saying, “I am persuaded, that neither angels, nor
principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
Christ.” ([Rom. viii. 38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p62.1"></span>.) He saith not simply, “from Christ,”
but, “from the love of Christ.” <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472)
For many there are who are united forsooth to Christ, and who yet love
Him not. Not only, saith he, shalt thou not persuade me to deny Him,
but, not even to love Him less. And if the powers above had not strength
to do this, who else should move him? Not, <span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_162"></span>however, that he
saith this, as though they were actually attempting it, but upon the
supposition; wherefore also he said, “I am persuaded.” So then he did
not wrestle, yet nevertheless he fears his artifices; for hear what he
saith, “I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve in his
craftiness, your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is
toward Christ.” ([2 Cor. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p63.1"></span>.) True, you will say, but he uses this
word touching himself also, where he saith, “For I fear <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) lest, by any means, after that I have
preached to others, I myself should be rejected.” How then art thou
“persuaded that no one shall separate thee”? Perceivest thou that the
expression is that of lowliness and of humility? For he already dwelt in
Heaven. And hence also it was that he said, “For I know nothing against
myself” ([1 Cor. iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64.2"></span>.); and again, “I have finished the
course.” ([2 Tim. iv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64.3"></span>.) So that it was not with regard to
these matters that the devil placed obstacles in his way, but with
reference to the interests of the disciples. And why forsooth? Because
in these points he was not himself sole master, but also their own will.
There the devil prevailed in some cases; nay, neither there was it over
him that he prevailed, but over the indolence of persons who took no
heed. If indeed, whether from slothfulness, or anything else of the
sort, he had failed to fulfill his own duty, then had the devil
prevailed over him; but if he himself on his part did all he could, and
they obeyed not it was not over him he prevailed, but over their
disobedience; and the disease prevailed not over the physician, but over
the unruliness of the patient; for, when the physician takes every
precaution, and the patient undoes all, the patient is defeated, not the
physician. Thus then in no instance did he prevail over Paul. But in our
own case, it is matter for contentment that we should be so much as able
to wrestle. For the Romans indeed this is not what he asks, but what?
“He shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.” ([Rom. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64.4"></span>.) And for these Ephesians he invokes,
“Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think.” ([Eph. iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64.5"></span>.) He that wrestles is still held fast,
but it is enough for him that he has not fallen. When we depart hence,
then, and not till then, will the glorious victory be achieved. For
instance, take the case of some evil lust. The extraordinary thing would
be, not even to entertain it, but to stifle it. If, however, this be not
possible, then though we may have to wrestle with it, and retain it to
the last, yet if we depart still wrestling, we are conquerors. For the
case is not the same here as it is with wrestlers; for there if thou
throw not thy antagonist, thou hast not conquered; but here if thou be
not thrown, thou hast conquered; if thou art not thrown, thou hast
thrown him; and with reason, because there both strive for the victory,
and when the one is thrown, the other is crowned; here, however, it is
not thus, but the devil is striving for our defeat; when then I strip
him of that upon which he is bent, I am conqueror. For it is not to
overthrow us, but to make us share his overthrow that he is eager.
Already then am I conqueror, for he is already cast down, and in a state
of ruin; and his victory consists not in being himself crowned, but in
effecting my ruin; so that though I overthrow him not, yet if I be not
overthrown, I have conquered. What then is a glorious victory? It is,
over and above, to trample him underfoot, as Paul did, by regarding the
things of this present world as nothing. Let us too imitate him, and
strive to become above them, and nowhere to give him a hold upon us.
Wealth, possessions, vain-glory, give him a hold. And oftentimes indeed
this has roused him, and oftentimes exasperated him. But what need is
there of wrestling? What need of engaging with him? He who is engaged in
the act of wrestling has the issue in uncertainty, whether he may not be
himself defeated and captured. Whereas he that tramples him under foot,
has the victory certain.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p65"></span>Oh then, let us trample under foot
the power of the devil; let us trample under foot our sins, I mean
everything that pertains to this life, wrath, lust, vain-glory, every
passion; that when we depart to that world, we may not be convicted of
betraying that power which God hath given us; for thus shall we attain
also the blessings that are to come. But if in this we are unfaithful,
who will entrust us with those things which are greater? If we were not
able to trample down one who had fallen, who had been disgraced, who had
been despised, who was lying beneath our feet, how shall the Father give
us a Father’s rewards? If we subdue not one so placed in subjection to
us, what confidence shall we have to enter into our Father’s house? For,
tell me, suppose thou hadst a son, and, that he, disregarding the
well-disposed part of thy household, should associate with them that
have distressed thee, with them that have been expelled his father’s
house, with them that spend their time at the gaming table, and that he
should go on so doing to the very last; will he not be disinherited? It
is plain enough he will. And so too shall we; if, disregarding the
Angels who have well pleased our Father and whom He hath set over us, we
have our conversation with the devil, inevitably we shall be dis<span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-Page_163"></span>inherited, which God forbid; but let
us engage in the war we have to wage with him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p66"></span>If any one hath an enemy, if any one
hath been wronged by him, if any one is exasperated, let him collect
together all that wrath, all that fierceness, and pour it out upon the
head of the devil. Here wrath is a good thing, here anger is profitable,
here revenge is praiseworthy, for just as amongst the heathen, revenge
is a vice, so truly here is revenge a virtue. So then if thou hast any
failings, rid thyself of them here. And if thou art not able thyself to
put them away, do it, though with thy members also. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) Hath any one struck thee? Bear malice
against the devil, and never relinquish thy hatred towards him. Or
again, hath no one struck thee? Yet bear him malice still, because he
insulted, because he offended thy Lord and Master, because he injures
and wars against thy brethren. With him be ever at enmity, ever
implacable, ever merciless. Thus shall he be humbled, thus despicable,
thus shall he be an easy prey. If we are fierce towards him, he shall
never be fierce towards us. If we are compliant, then he will be fierce;
it is not with him as it is with our brethren. He is the foe and enemy,
both of life and salvation, both ours and his own. If he loves not
himself, how shall he be able to love us? Let us then put ourselves in
array and wound him, having for our mighty confederate the Lord Jesus
Christ, who can both render us impregnable to his snares, and worthy of
the good things to come; which God grant that we may all attain, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom,
together with the Holy Ghost, be unto the Father, glory, might, and
honor, now and ever, and throughout all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_451"></span>[157:452](1130035.htm#fr_451) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span> \[The words, “or evil,” ἢκακόν, are
not in the text of this passage at all, though Chrysostom has them.
Chrysostom and the Patristic writers in general often quote the New
Testament without exactness. They quote often from memory, and are
seldom critical. Cf. Schaff, *Companion to Greek Testament*, p.
164.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_452"></span>[157:453](1130035.htm#fr_452) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p8"></span> \[“Wrong. It means those who are
‘your human masters,’ in distinction from Christ, the ‘divine’
master.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_453"></span>[157:454](1130035.htm#fr_453) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p10"></span> \[“With fear and trembling, i.e.
with that zeal which is ever keenly apprehensive of not doing
enough.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_454"></span>[158:455](1130035.htm#fr_454) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p15"></span> \[“From the heart” (ἐκ ψυχῆς) is
joined by Chrysostom with what follows. (So Westcott and Hort.) But as
μετ᾽ εὐνοίας expresses the well-meaning disposition, it already includes
the sense of ἐκ ψυχῆς. So that ἐκ ψυχῆς belongs to what precedes. So
Meyer, Ellicott, and Rev. Ver.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_455"></span>[158:456](1130035.htm#fr_455) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p16"></span> ἀρπαγῆς.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[158:457](1130035.htm#fr_456) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p22"></span> \[The second καὶ (καὶ αὐτῶν καὶ
ὑμῶν) is omitted in Chrysostom’s text of this passage, and in the
*textus receptus*, so that it does not appear in the Authorized English
Version. The Revised Version has it, however, and correctly so.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_457"></span>[158:458](1130035.htm#fr_457) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p23"></span> \[Meyer quotes Seneca, *Thyest*.
607:—

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p24"></span>Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p25"></span>Major hoc vobis dominus minatur.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p26"></span>Omne sub regno graviore regnum
est.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_458"></span>[159:459](1130035.htm#fr_458) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p31"></span> \[He seems to refer slavery to three
causes: 1. covetousness; 2. rebellion against parents; 3. war, where
prisoners are taken and made slaves.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_459"></span>[159:460](1130035.htm#fr_459) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p37"></span> \[This is very beautiful, but hardly
correct exegesis. “The word ‘finally’ introduces a general, final
exhortation, winding up the whole parenetic portion of the epistle
([Eph. 4.1-6.9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p37.1"></span>.).”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_460"></span>[160:461](1130035.htm#fr_460) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p42"></span> μεθοδεύων.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[160:462](1130035.htm#fr_461) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p44"></span> \[“Flesh and blood, i.e. ‘feeble
men,’ just as in [Gal. 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016), [Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p44.1"></span>. The word πάλη, which means nothing else
than a ‘wrestling,’ is specially chosen by the Apostle (who elsewhere
uses ἀγών or μάχη), in order to bring out the more strongly in
connection with πρὸς αἷμα καὶ σάρκα the contrast between this less
perilous form of contest and that which follows.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_462"></span>[160:463](1130035.htm#fr_462) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p46"></span> ἐν τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[160:464](1130035.htm#fr_463) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p47"></span> ἐν τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[160:465](1130035.htm#fr_464) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p48"></span> \[“The word ἐν does *not* mean ‘for’
or ‘on account of,’ and the phrase is here *local* ([Eph.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p48.1"></span>.).”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_465"></span>[160:466](1130035.htm#fr_465) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p49"></span> τὸ ἐν ὑπέρ ἐστι, καὶ τὸ ἐν, διά
ἐστιν.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[160:467](1130035.htm#fr_466) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p52"></span> κοσμοκράτορας.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[160:468](1130035.htm#fr_467) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p55"></span> \[“The use of ἡμέρᾳ, rather than αἰ&
242·νι ([Gal. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p55.1"></span>.) is opposed to the interpretation of
Chrysostom. Still more untenable is the view of Meyer, that Paul is here
specifying the day when the last great Satanic outbreak was to take
place. Paul has at heart what he knew was much more present and more
constantly impending, namely, the day of violent
temptation.”—Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_468"></span>[160:469](1130035.htm#fr_468) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p56"></span> Not ἐργασάμενοι, but κατεργασάμενοι.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[161:470](1130035.htm#fr_469) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p58"></span> i.e. “but a ‘day.’”

<span id="fn_470"></span>[161:471](1130035.htm#fr_470) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p60"></span> \[This entire sentence and the
preceding one, though attested by three <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p60.1"></span>mss</span>. and read by Savile, are
wanting in the text of Field, who has, in their stead, Νῦν οὖν ἦλθε,
φησὶν, ἐμοὶ παλαῖσαι, “Now then,” says some one, “he has come to wrestle
with me,” which seems to leave the sense incomplete, and does not suit
the following sentence. See note on page 82.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_471"></span>[161:472](1130035.htm#fr_471) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p61"></span> λαβάς.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[161:473](1130035.htm#fr_472) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p63"></span> \[This text in Rom. has, “from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_473"></span>[162:474](1130035.htm#fr_473) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64"></span> \[The words, “I fear,” φοβοῦμαι γὰρ,
are not in the text of [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p64.1"></span>. See note 1 on page 157.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_474"></span>[163:475](1130035.htm#fr_474) <span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiii-p67"></span> \[We have here followed the text of
Savile (supported by three <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiii-p67.1"></span>mss</span>.), as follows: εἰ δὲ μὴ
δύνασαι αὐτὸς ἀποθέσθαι, κἂν μετὰ τῶν μελῶν τῶν σῶν, in preference to
the text of Field, which has εἰ μὴ δύνασαι αὐτὰ ἀπθοέσθαι, ἢ μετὰ τῶν
μελῶν τῶν σῶν.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 6:14](1130036)
