[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130071)  [Next](1130073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.i"></span> <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="iv.v.i-Page_323"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>homilies of St. John Chrysostom,</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="iv.v.i-p2.1"></span>archbishop of constantinople,</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.v.i-p3.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.v.i-p4.1"></span>first epistle of St. paul the apostle</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv.v.i-p5.1"></span>to the</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.v.i-p6.1"></span>thessalonians.</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>————————————

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.v.i-p8.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p9.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.v.i-p9.2"></span>[1 Thessalonians i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.v.i-p9.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>*“Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, unto the
Church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you, and peace.* <span id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) *We
give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our
prayers; remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of
love and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and
Father.”*

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.v.i-p12.1"></span>Wherefore</span> then, when writing to the
Ephesians, <span id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) and having Timothy
with him, did he not include him with himself (in his salutation), known
as he was to them and admired, for he says, “Ye know the proof of him,
that as a child serveth the father, so he served with me in the Gospel”
([Philip. ii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.v.i-p13.2"></span>.); and again, “I have no man like-minded who
will care truly for your state” ([Philip.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020)<span id="iv.v.i-p13.3"></span>.);
but here he does associate him with himself? It seems to me, that he was
about to send him immediately, and it was superfluous for him to write,
who would overtake the letter. For he says, “Him therefore I hope to
send forthwith.” ([Philip. ii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.v.i-p13.4"></span>.) But here it was not so; but he had just
returned to him, so that he naturally joined in the letter. For he says,
“Now when Timothy came from you unto us.” ([1 Thess. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.i-p13.5"></span>.) But
why does he place Silvanus before him, <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) though he testifies to his numberless
good qualities, and prefers him above all? Perhaps Timothy wished and
requested him to do so from his great humility; for when he saw his
teacher so humble-minded, as to associate his disciple with himself, he
would much the more have desired this, and eagerly sought it. For he
says,

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span>“Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, unto the
Church of the Thessalonians.” Here he gives himself no title—not “an
Apostle,” not “a Servant”; I suppose, because the men were newly
instructed, and had not yet had any experience of him, <span
id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) he does not apply the title; and it
was as yet the beginning of his preaching to them.

<span id="iv.v.i-p17"></span>“To the Church of the Thessalonians,” he
says. And well. For it is probable there were few, and they not yet
formed into a body; on this account he consoles them with the name of
the Church. For where much time had passed, and the congregation of the
Church was large, he does not apply this term. But because the name of
the Church is for the most part a name <span id="page_324">p. 324</span>
<span id="iv.v.i-Page_324"></span>of multitude, and of a system <span
id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) now compacted, on this account he
calls them by that name.

<span id="iv.v.i-p19"></span>“In God the Father,” he says, “and the Lord
Jesus Christ.” “Unto the Church of the Thessalonians,” he says, “which
is in God.” Behold again the expression, “in,” <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) applied both to the Father and to the
Son. For there were many assemblies, <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) both Jewish and Grecian; but he says,
“to the (Church) that is in God.” It is a great dignity, and to which
there is nothing equal, that it is “in God.” God grant therefore that
this Church may be so addressed! But I fear that it is far from that
appellation. For if any one were the servant of sin, he cannot be said
to be “in God.” If any one walks not according to God, he cannot be said
to be “in God.” <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)

<span id="iv.v.i-p23"></span>“Grace be unto you, and peace.” <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) Do you perceive that the very
commencement of his Epistle is with encomiums? “We give thanks to God
always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers.” For to give
thanks to God for them is the act of one testifying to their great
advancement, when they are not only praised themselves, but God also is
thanked for them, as Himself having done it all. He teaches them also to
be moderate, all but saying, that it is all of the power of God. That he
gives thanks for them, therefore, is on account of their good conduct,
but that he remembers them in his prayers, proceeds from his love
towards them. Then as he often does, he says that he not only remembers
them in his prayers, but apart from his prayers. “Remembering without
ceasing,” he says, “your work of faith and labor of love and patience of
hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.” What is
remembering without ceasing? Either remembering before God and the
Father, or remembering your labor of love that is before God and the
Father, or simply, “Remembering you without ceasing.” Then again, that
you may not think that this “remembering you without ceasing” is said
simply, he has added, “before our God and Father.” And because no one
amongst men was praising their actions, no one giving them any reward,
he says this, “You labor before God.” What is “the work of faith”? That
nothing has turned aside your steadfastness. For this is the work of
faith. If thou believest, suffer all things; if thou dost not suffer,
thou dost not believe. For are not the things promised such, that he who
believes would choose to suffer even ten thousand deaths? The kingdom of
heaven is set before him, and immortality, and eternal life. He
therefore who believes will suffer all things. Faith then is shown
through his works. Justly might one have said, not merely did you
believe, but through your works you manifested it, through your
steadfastness, through your zeal.

<span id="iv.v.i-p25"></span>And your labor “of love.” Why? what labor
is it to love? Merely to love is no labor at all. But to love genuinely
is great labor. For tell me, when a thousand things are stirred up that
would draw us from love, and we hold out against them all, is it not
labor? For what did not these men suffer, that they might not revolt
from their love? Did not they that warred against the Preaching go to
Paul’s host, and not having found him, drag Jason before the rulers of
the city? ([Acts 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.i-p25.1"></span>.)
Tell me, is this a slight labor, when the seed had not yet taken root,
to endure so great a storm, so many trials? And they demanded security
of him. And having given security, he says, Jason sent away Paul. <span
id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) Is this a small thing, tell me? Did
not Jason expose himself to danger for him? and this he calls a labor of
love, because they were thus bound to him.

<span id="iv.v.i-p27"></span>And observe: first he mentions their good
actions, then his own, that he may not seem to boast, nor yet to love
them by anticipation. <span id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937) “And
patience,” he says. For that persecution was not confined to one time,
but was continual, and they warred not only with Paul, the teacher, but
with his disciples also. For if they were thus affected towards those
who wrought miracles, those venerable men; what think you were their
feelings towards those who dwelt among them, their fellow-citizens, who
had all of a sudden revolted from them? Wherefore this also he testifies
of them, saying, “For ye became imitators of the Churches of God which
are in Judæa.”

<span id="iv.v.i-p29"></span>“And of hope,” he says, “in our Lord Jesus
Christ, before our God and Father.” For all these things proceed from
faith and hope, so that what happened to them showed not their fortitude
only, but that they believed with full assurance in the rewards laid up
for them. For on this account God permitted that persecutions should
arise immediately, that no one might say, that the Preaching was
established lightly or by flattery, and that their fervor might be
shown, and that it was not human persuasion, but the power of God, that
persuaded the souls of the believers, so that they were prepared even
for ten thousand deaths, which would not have been the case, if the
Preaching had not immediately been deeply fixed and remained unshaken.

<span id="iv.v.i-p30"></span><span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span
id="iv.v.i-Page_325"></span>[1 Thess.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.i-p30.1"></span>.
“Knowing, brethren beloved of God, your election, how that our Gospel
came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance; even as ye know what manner of men we
showed ourselves among <span id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) you for
your sake.”

<span id="iv.v.i-p32"></span>Knowing what? How “we showed ourselves
among you”? Here he also touches upon his own good actions, but
covertly. For he wishes first to enlarge upon their praises, and what he
says is something of this sort. I knew that you were men of great and
noble sort, that you were of the Elect. For this reason we also endure
all things for your sake. For this, “what manner of men we showed
ourselves among you,” is the expression of one showing that with much
zeal and much vehemence we were ready to give up our lives for your
sake; and for this thanks are due not to us, but to you, because ye were
elect. On this account also he says elsewhere, “And these things I
endure for the Elect’s sake.” ([2 Tim. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.i-p32.1"></span>.)
For what would not one endure for the sake of God’s beloved ones? And
having spoken of his own part, he all but says, For if you were both
beloved and elect, we suffer all things with reason. For not only did
his praise of them confirm them, but his reminding them that they too
themselves had displayed a fortitude corresponding to their zeal: he
says,

<span id="iv.v.i-p33"></span>[1 Thess.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.i-p33.1"></span>.
“And ye became imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the
word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="iv.v.i-p34"></span>Strange! what an encomium is here! The
disciples have suddenly become teachers! They not only heard the word,
but they quickly arrived at the same height with Paul. But this is
nothing; for see how he exalts them, saying, “Ye became imitators of the
Lord.” How? “Having received the word in much affliction, with joy of
the Holy Ghost.” Not merely with affliction, but with much affliction.
And this we may learn from the Acts of the Apostles, how they raised a
persecution against them. ([Acts xvii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.i-p34.1"></span>.)
And they troubled all the rulers of the city, and they instigated the
city against them. And it is not enough to say, ye were afflicted
indeed, and believed, and that grieving, but even rejoicing. Which also
the Apostles did: “Rejoicing,” it is said, “that they were counted
worthy to suffer dishonor for the Name.” ([Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="iv.v.i-p34.2"></span>.)
For it is this that is admirable. Although neither is that a slight
matter, in any way to bear afflictions. But this now was the part of men
surpassing human nature, and having, as it were, a body incapable of
suffering.

<span id="iv.v.i-p35"></span>But how were they imitators of the Lord?
Because He also endured many sufferings, but rejoiced. For He came to
this willingly. For our sakes He emptied Himself. He was about to be
spit upon, to be beaten and crucified, and He so rejoiced in suffering
these things, that He said to the Father, “Glorify Me.” ([John xvii.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p35.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.i-p36"></span>“With joy of the Holy Ghost,” he says. That
no one may say, how speakest thou of “affliction”? how “of joy”? how can
both meet in one? he has added, “with joy of the Holy Ghost.” The
affliction is in things bodily, and the joy in things spiritual. How?
The things which happened to them were grievous, but not so the things
which sprang out of them, for the Spirit does not allow it. <span
id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939) So that it is possible both for him
who suffers, not to rejoice, when one suffers for his sins; and being
beaten to take pleasure, when one suffers for Christ’s sake. For such is
the joy of the Spirit. In return for the things which appear to be
grievous, it brings out delight. They have afflicted you, he says, and
persecuted you, but the Spirit did not forsake you, even in those
circumstances. As the Three Children in the fire were refreshed with
dew, <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) so also were you refreshed
in afflictions. But as there it was not of the nature of the fire to
sprinkle dew, but of the “whistling wind,” <span
id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) so also here it was not of the nature
of affliction to produce joy, but of the suffering for Christ’s sake,
and of the Spirit bedewing them, and in the furnace of temptation
setting them at ease. Not merely with joy, he says, but “with much joy.”
For this is of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.v.i-p40"></span>[1 Thess.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007)<span id="iv.v.i-p40.1"></span>.
“So that ye became ensamples <span id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942) to
all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.”

<span id="iv.v.i-p42"></span>And yet it was later that he went to them.
But ye so shone, he says, that ye became teachers of those who received
(the word) before you. And this is like the Apostle. For he did not say,
so that ye became ensamples in regard to believing, but ye became an
ensample to those who already believed; how one ought to believe in God,
ye taught, who from the very beginning entered into your conflict.

<span id="iv.v.i-p43"></span>“And in Achaia,” he says; that is, in
Greece.

<span id="iv.v.i-p44"></span>Do you see how great a thing is zeal? that
it does not require time, nor delay, nor procrastination, but it is
sufficient only to venture one’s self, and all is fulfilled. Thus then
though coming in later to the Preaching, they became teachers of those
who were before them.

<span id="iv.v.i-p45"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.v.i-p45.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let no one therefore despair,
even though he has lost much time, and has done nothing. It is possible
for him even in a little <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="iv.v.i-Page_326"></span>while to do so much, as he never has done in
all his former time. For if he who before did not believe, shone so much
at the beginning, how much more those who have already believed! Let no
one, again, upon this consideration be remiss, because he perceives that
it is possible in a short time to recover everything. For the future is
uncertain, and the Day of the Lord is a thief, setting upon us suddenly
when we are sleeping. But if we do not sleep, it will not set upon us as
a thief, nor carry us off unprepared. For if we watch and be sober, it
will not set upon us as a thief, but as a royal messenger, summoning us
to the good things prepared for us. But if we sleep, it comes upon us as
a thief. Let no one therefore sleep, nor be inactive in virtue, for that
is sleep. Do you not know how, when we sleep, our goods are not in
safety, how easy they are to be plotted against? But when we are awake,
there needs not so much guarding. When we sleep, even with much guarding
we often perish. There are doors, and bolts, and guards, and outer
guards, and the thief has come upon us.

<span id="iv.v.i-p46"></span>Why then do I say this? Because, if we wake
we shall not need the help of others; but if we sleep, the help of
others will profit us nothing, but even with this we perish. It is a
good thing to enjoy the prayer of the Saints, but it is when we
ourselves also are on the alert. And what need, you say, have I of
another’s prayer, if I am on the alert myself. And in sooth, do not
place yourself in a situation to need it; I do not wish that you should;
but we are always in need of it, if we think rightly. Paul did not say,
what need have I of prayer? and yet those who prayed were not worthy of
him, <span id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) or rather not equal to him;
and you say, what need have I of prayer? Peter did not say, What need
have I of prayer, for “prayer,” it says, “was made earnestly of the
Church unto God for him.” ([Acts xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.i-p47.1"></span>.) And
thou sayest, What need have I of prayer? On this account thou needest
it, because thou thinkest that thou hast no need. Yea, though thou
become as Paul, thou hast need of prayer. Do not exalt thyself, lest
thou be humbled.

<span id="iv.v.i-p48"></span>But, as I said, if we be active also
ourselves, the prayers for us avail too. Hear Paul saying, “For I know
that this shall turn to my salvation, through your supplication, and the
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.” ([Philip. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019)<span id="iv.v.i-p48.1"></span>.)
And again, “That for the gift bestowed upon us by means of many, thanks
may be given by many persons on our behalf.” ([2 Cor. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span id="iv.v.i-p48.2"></span>.)
And thou sayest, what need have I of prayer? But if we be idle, no one
will be able to profit us. What did Jeremiah profit the Jews? Did he not
thrice draw nigh to God, and the third time hear, “Pray not thou for
this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer, for I will not hear thee”?
([Jer. vii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)<span
id="iv.v.i-p48.3"></span>.) What did Samuel profit Saul? Did he not
mourn for him even to his last day, and not merely pray for him only?
What did he profit the Israelites? Did he not say, “God forbid that I
should sin in ceasing to pray for you”? ([1 Sam. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023)<span id="iv.v.i-p48.4"></span>.)
Did they not all perish? Do prayers then, you say, profit nothing? They
profit even greatly: but it is when we also do something. For prayers
indeed coöperate and assist, but a man coöperates with one <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) that is operating, and assists one
that is himself also working. But if thou remainest idle, thou wilt
receive no great benefit.

<span id="iv.v.i-p50"></span>For if prayers had power to bring us to the
kingdom while we do nothing, why do not all the Greeks become
Christians? Do we not pray for all the world? Did not Paul also do this?
Do we not intreat that all may be converted? Why do not the wicked
become good without contributing anything of themselves? Prayers, then,
profit greatly, when we also contribute our own parts.

<span id="iv.v.i-p51"></span>Would you learn how much prayers have
profited? consider, I pray, Cornelius, Tabitha. ([Acts
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003), [Acts
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)<span id="iv.v.i-p51.1"></span>.)
Hear also Jacob saying to Laban, “Except the Fear of my father had been
with me, surely thou hadst now sent me away empty.” ([Gen. xxxi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042)<span id="iv.v.i-p51.2"></span>.)
Hear also God again, saying, “I will defend this city for Mine own sake,
and for My servant David’s sake.” ([2 Kings ix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#034)<span id="iv.v.i-p51.3"></span>.)
But when? In the time of Hezekiah, who was righteous. Since if prayers
availed even for the extremely wicked, why did not God say this also
when Nebuchadnezzar came, and why did He give up the city? Because
wickedness availed more. Again, Samuel himself also prayed for the
Israelites, and prevailed. But when? When they also pleased God, then
they put their enemies to flight. And what need, you say, of prayer from
another, when I myself please God? Never, O man, say this. There is
need, aye, and need of much prayer. For hear God saying concerning the
friends of Job; “And he shall pray for you, and your sin shall be
forgiven you.” <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945) ([Job xlii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008)<span id="iv.v.i-p52.1"></span>.)
Because they had sinned indeed, but not a great sin. But this just man,
who then saved his friends by prayer, in the season of the Jews was not
able to save the Jews who were perishing. And that you may learn this,
hear God saying through the prophet; “If Noah, Daniel, and Job stood,
they shall not deliver their sons and their daughters.” ([Ezek.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016)<span id="iv.v.i-p52.2"></span>.)
Because wickedness prevailed. And again, “Though Moses and Samuel
stood.” ([Jer. xv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)<span
id="iv.v.i-p52.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.i-p53"></span>And see how this is said to the two
Prophets, <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="iv.v.i-Page_327"></span>because both prayed for them, and did not
prevail. For Ezekiel says, “Ah Lord, dost thou blot out the residue of
Israel?” ([Ezek. ix. 8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008)<span
id="iv.v.i-p53.1"></span>.) Then showing that He does this justly, He
shows him their sins; and showing that not through despising him does He
refuse to accept his supplication for them, he says, Even these things
are enough even to persuade thee, that not despising thee, but on
account of their many sins, I do not accept thy supplication.
Nevertheless He adds, “Though. Noah, Job, and Daniel stood.” (From
[Ezek. xiv](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#000)<span
id="iv.v.i-p53.2"></span>.) And with good reason does He the rather say
this to him, because it is he who suffered so many things. Thou badest
me, he says, eat upon dung, and I ate upon it. <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) Thou badest me, and I shaved my head.
Thou badest me, and I lay upon one side. Thou badest me go out through a
hole in the wall, bearing a burden, and I went out. Thou tookest away my
wife, and badest me not mourn, and I did not mourn, but bore it with
fortitude. ([Ezek. xxiv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#018)<span
id="iv.v.i-p54.2"></span>.) Ten thousand other things have I wrought for
their sake: I entreat for them, and dost Thou not comply? Not from
despising thee, says he, do I do this, but though Noah, Job, and Daniel
were there, and were entreating for sons and daughters, I would not
comply.

<span id="iv.v.i-p55"></span>And again to Jeremiah, who suffered less
from the commandments of God, but more from their wickedness, what does
He say? “Seest thou not what these do?” ([Jer. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.i-p55.1"></span>.)
“Yea,” he says, “they do so—but do Thou do it for my sake.” On this
account He says to him, “Though Moses and Samuel stood.” Their first
lawgiver, who often delivered them from dangers, who had said, “If now
thou forgivest their sins, forgive it; but if not, blot me out also.”
([Ex. xxxii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="iv.v.i-p55.2"></span>, Sept.) If therefore he were now alive, and
spoke thus, he would not have prevailed,—nor would Samuel, again, who
himself also delivered them, and who from his earliest youth was
admired. For to the former indeed I said, that I conversed with him as a
friend with a friend, and not by dark sayings. And of the latter I said,
that in his first youth I was revealed to him, and that on his account,
being prevailed upon, I opened the prophecy that had been shut up. For
“the word of the Lord,” it is said, “was precious in those days; there
was no open vision.” ([1 Sam. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p55.3"></span>.) If
these men, therefore, stood before Me, they would profit nothing. And of
Noah He says, “Noah was a righteous man, and perfect in his
generations.” ([Gen. vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.v.i-p55.4"></span>.) And concerning Job, He was “blameless, just,
true, fearing God.” ([Job i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.v.i-p55.5"></span>, Sept.) And concerning Daniel, whom they even
thought a God; and they will not deliver, says he, their sons and
daughters. Knowing these things, therefore, let us neither despise the
prayers of the Saints, nor throw everything upon them: that we may not,
on the one hand, be indolent and live carelessly; nor on the other
deprive ourselves of a great advantage. But let us both beseech them to
pray and lift up the hand for us, and let us adhere to virtue; that we
may be able to obtain the blessings promised to those who love Him by
the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_927"></span>[323:928](1130072.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iv.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span> \[Some <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.v.i-p11.1"></span>mss</span>. and editions add, “from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ,” as it is added in Text. Rec. of the
N.T.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_928"></span>[323:929](1130072.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iv.v.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span> This mistake cannot be charged on the
transcribers, as Timothy is mentioned in [Philip. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p13.1"></span> \[and
it is Philippians that he proceeds to quote from.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_929"></span>[323:930](1130072.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iv.v.i-p13.6"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span> \[The natural explanation is that Silas
was an older man, Timothy being at the time of writing 1 Thess. (prob.
A.D. 52) quite young, and indeed still noticeably young a dozen years
later ([1 Tim. iv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v.i-p14.1"></span>.). Chrys. seems to have made no systematic
study of the chronology of the Epistles.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_930"></span>[323:931](1130072.htm#fr_930) <span
id="iv.v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span> αὐτοῦ, perhaps “of the thing.”

<span id="fn_931"></span>[324:932](1130072.htm#fr_931) <span
id="iv.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p18"></span> \[Here the same Greek word (*systema*) is
translated “body,” “congregation,” and “system.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_932"></span>[324:933](1130072.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iv.v.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p20"></span> \[Most editions have “the word God,” and
one <span class="c16"><span id="iv.v.i-p20.1"></span>ms</span>. has “in
God,” both obviously alterations, and really unsuitable to the
connection.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_933"></span>[324:934](1130072.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iv.v.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p21"></span> ἐκκλησίαι. Churches, or assemblies. New
converts would be more familiar with the word in its secular sense.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[324:935](1130072.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iv.v.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p22"></span> \[Most editions omit this sentence, but it
is found in several <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>mss</span>., and the amplification is quite
after the manner of Chrys.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_935"></span>[324:936](1130072.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iv.v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p24"></span> \[This seems to belong (as Hales
suggested) after the next sentence, which is a remark upon the
foregoing.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_936"></span>[324:937](1130072.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iv.v.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p26"></span> See [Acts xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#009)<span id="iv.v.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[324:938](1130072.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iv.v.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p28"></span> προλήψει. Assuming good of them before
trial.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[325:939](1130072.htm#fr_938) <span
id="iv.v.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p31"></span> \[It is very doubtful whether Rev. Ver. of
N.T. is here right in omitting ἐν (as in [1 Thess.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.i-p31.1"></span>.),
and so translating “towards.” Chrys. has the ἐν, and so must be tr.
“among.”—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_939"></span>[325:940](1130072.htm#fr_939) <span
id="iv.v.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p37"></span> οὐκ ἀφίησι. Perhaps, “does not forsake
us,” as just below.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[325:941](1130072.htm#fr_940) <span
id="iv.v.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p38"></span> <span id="iv.v.i-p38.1"></span>Song, ver.
27.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[325:942](1130072.htm#fr_941) <span
id="iv.v.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p39"></span> διασυρίζοντος, as Sept. [Dan. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)<span id="iv.v.i-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[325:943](1130072.htm#fr_942) <span
id="iv.v.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p41"></span> \[Rev. Ver. right for N.T., “an ensample”;
but Chrys. has the plural, employing (as he commonly does) that which
spread from Constantinople, and became the prevalent text.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_943"></span>[326:944](1130072.htm#fr_943) <span
id="iv.v.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p47"></span> i.e. worthy to pray for him.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[326:945](1130072.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iv.v.i-p48.5"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p49"></span> So B. Edd. om. one, &c.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[326:946](1130072.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iv.v.i-p51.4"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p52"></span> \[Quoting from memory. So below.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_946"></span>[327:947](1130072.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iv.v.i-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p54"></span> i.e. food baked on it. [Ezek.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015)<span id="iv.v.i-p54.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians 1:8-10](1130073)
