[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130110)  [Next](1130112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="v.iii.xix-Page_471"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p2"></span><span id="v.iii.xix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iii.xix-p2.2"></span>[1 Timothy vi.
13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p3"></span>“I give thee charge in the sight of God,
Who quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, Who before Pontius
Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this commandment
without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:
which in his times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only Potentate,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; Whom no man hath
seen, nor can see; to Whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>Again</span> he calls God to witness, as he
had done a little before, at once to increase his disciple’s awe, and to
secure his safety, and to show that these were not human commandments,
that receiving the commandment as from the Lord Himself, and ever
bearing in mind the Witness <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308)
before Whom he heard it, he may have it more fearfully impressed upon
his mind.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p6"></span>“I charge thee,” he says, “before God,
Who quickeneth all things.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p7"></span>Here is at once consolation in the
dangers which awaited him, and a remembrance of the resurrection
awakened in him.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p8"></span>“And before Jesus Christ, Who before
Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p9"></span>The exhortation again is derived from the
example of his Master, and what he means is this; as He had done, so
ought ye to do, for for this cause He “witnessed” ([1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="v.iii.xix-p9.1"></span>.),
that we might tread in His steps.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p10"></span>“A good confession.” <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309) What he does in his Epistle to the
Hebrews,—“Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith; Who
for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For
consider Him that endured such contradiction of sinners against Himself,
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds” ([Heb.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p11.1"></span>.),—that he now does to his disciple
Timothy. As if he had said, Fear not death, since thou art the servant
of God, Who can give life to all things.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p12"></span>But to what “good confession” does he
allude? To that which He made when Pilate asked, “Art thou a King?” “To
this end,” He said, “was I born.” And again, “I came, that I might bear
witness to the Truth. Behold, these have heard Me.” ([John xviii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)<span id="v.iii.xix-p12.1"></span>.)
He may mean this, or that when asked, “Art thou the Son of God?” He
answered, “Thou sayest, that I am (the Son of God).” ([Luke xxii.
70](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#070)<span id="v.iii.xix-p12.2"></span>.)
And many other testimonies and confessions did He make.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p13"></span>[1 Tim.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p13.1"></span>. “That thou keep this commandment without
spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p14"></span>That is, till thy end, thy departure
hence, though he does not so express it, but that he may the more arouse
him, says, “till His appearing.” But what is “to keep the commandment
without spot”? To contract no defilement, either of doctrine or of life.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p15"></span>[1 Tim.
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p15.1"></span>. “Which in His times He shall show, Who is
the blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords, Who
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p16"></span>Of whom are these things said? Of the
Father, or of the Son? Of the Son, undoubtedly: and it is said for the
consolation of Timothy, that he may not fear nor stand in awe of the
kings of the earth.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p17"></span>“In His times,” that is, the due and
fitting times, that he may not be impatient, because it has not yet
come. And whence is it manifest, that He will show it? Because He is the
Potentate, the “only Potentate.” He then will show it, Who is “blessed,”
nay blessedness itself; and this is said, to show that in that appearing
there is nothing painful or uneasy.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p18"></span>But he says, “only,” either in
contradistinction to men, or because He was unoriginated, <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) or as we sometimes speak of a man
whom we wish to extol.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p20"></span>“Who only hath immortality.” What then?
hath not the Son immortality? Is He not immortality itself? How should
not He, who is of the same substance with the Father, have immortality?

<span id="v.iii.xix-p21"></span>“Dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto.” Is He then Himself one Light, and is there another in
which He dwells? is He then circumscribed by place? Think not of it. By
this expression is represented the Incomprehensibleness of the Divine
Nature. Thus he speaks of God, in the best way he is able. Observe, how
when the tongue would utter something great, it fails in power.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p22"></span>“Whom no man hath seen nor can see.” As,
indeed, no one hath seen the Son, nor can see Him. <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311)

<span id="v.iii.xix-p24"></span><span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="v.iii.xix-Page_472"></span>“To whom be honor and power everlasting.
Amen.” Thus properly, and much to the purpose, has he spoken of God. For
as he had called Him to witness, he speaks much of that Witness, that
his disciple may be in the greater awe. In these terms he ascribes glory
to Him, and this is all we can do, or say. We must not enquire too
curiously, who He is. If power everlasting is His, fear not. Yea though
now it take not place, <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312) to Him
is honor, to Him is power evermore.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p26"></span>[1 Tim.
6.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p26.1"></span>. “Charge them that are rich in this world
that they be not high-minded.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p27"></span>He has well said, “rich in this world.”
For there are others rich in the future world. And this advice he gives,
knowing that nothing so generally produces pride and arrogance as
wealth. To abate this, therefore, he immediately adds, “Nor trust in
uncertain riches”; since that was the source of pride; inasmuch as he
who hopes in God, is not elated. Why dost thou place thy hopes upon what
is instantly transferable? For such is wealth! and why hopest thou on
that of which thou canst not be confident? But you say, how can they
avoid being high-minded? By considering the instability and uncertainty
of riches, and that hope in God is infinitely more valuable; God being
the Author of wealth itself.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p28"></span>[1 Tim.
6.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p28.1"></span>. “But in the living God,” he says, “who
giveth us richly all things to enjoy.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p29"></span>This “all things richly” is justly
spoken, in reference to the changes of the year, to air, light, water,
and other gifts. For how richly and ungrudgingly are all these bestowed!
If thou seekest riches, seek those that are stable and enduring, and
which are the fruit of good works. He shows that this is his meaning by
what follows.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p30"></span>[1 Tim.
6.18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p30.1"></span>. “That they do good,” he says, “that they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p31"></span>The first phrase refers to wealth, the
second to charity. For to be willing to communicate, implies that they
are sociable and kind.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p32"></span>[1 Tim.
6.19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p32.1"></span>. “Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p33"></span>There nothing is uncertain, for the
foundation being firm, there is no instability, all is firm, fixed,
immovable, fast, and enduring.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p34"></span>[1 Tim.
6.19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p34.1"></span>. “That they may lay hold,” he says, “on
eternal life.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p35"></span>For the doing of good works can secure
the enjoyment of eternal life.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p36"></span>[1 Tim.
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p36.1"></span>. “O Timothy, keep that which is committed
to thy trust.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p37"></span>Let it not suffer diminution. It is not
thy own. Thou art intrusted with the property of another, do not lessen
it.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p38"></span>[1 Tim.
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p38.1"></span>. “Avoiding profane and vain babblings, and
oppositions of science falsely so called.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p39"></span>Well did he thus call it. For where
there is not faith, there is not knowledge; when anything springs from
our reasonings, it is not knowledge. Or perhaps he says this, because
some then assumed the name of Gnostics, as knowing more than others.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p40"></span>[1 Tim.
6.21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#021)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p40.1"></span>. “Which some professing have erred
concerning the faith.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p41"></span>You see how again he commands Timothy
not even to meet them. “Avoiding opposition.” There are therefore
oppositions to which we ought not to vouchsafe an answer, because they
turn men from faith, and do not suffer one to be firmly established or
fixed in it. Let us not then pursue this science, but adhere to faith,
that unshaken rock. For neither floods nor winds assailing will be able
to harm us, since we stand on the rock immovable. Thus even in this
life, if we choose Him, Who is truly the foundation, we stand, and no
harm assails us. For what can hurt him who hath chosen the riches, the
honor, the glory, the pleasure of the life to come? They are all firm,
in them there is no variableness; all things here subject to reverse,
and are for ever changing. For what wouldest thou have? glory? The
Psalmist says, “His glory shall not descend after him.” ([Ps. xlix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017)<span id="v.iii.xix-p41.1"></span>.)
And often it abides not with him whilst he lives. But it is not so with
virtue, all things which pertain to her are permanent. Here, he who
obtains glory from his office, upon another succeeding to his office,
becomes a private man and inglorious. The rich man is reduced to poverty
by the attack of robbers, or the snares of sycophants and knaves. It is
not so with Christians. The temperate man, if he take heed to himself,
will not be robbed of his virtue. He who rules himself, cannot become a
common man and a subject.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p42"></span>And that this rule is superior to any
other, will appear upon examination. For of what advantage, tell me, is
it to reign over nations of our fellow-men, and to be the slaves of our
own passions? Or what are we the worse for having no one under our rule,
if we are superior to the tyranny of the passions? That indeed is
Freedom, that is Rule, that is Royalty and Sovereignty. The contrary is
slavery, though a man be invested with countless diadems. For when a
multitude of masters sway him from within, the love of money, the love
of pleasure, and anger, and other passions, what avails his <span
id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span id="v.iii.xix-Page_473"></span>diadem?
The tyranny of those passions is more severe, when not even his crown
has power to deliver him from their subjection. As if one who had been a
king should be reduced to slavery by barbarians, and they wishing to
show their power the more absolutely, should not strip him of his purple
robe and his diadem, but oblige him to work in them, and to perform all
menial offices, to draw water, and to cook their food, that his disgrace
and their honor might be the more apparent: so do our passions domineer
over us more barbarously than any barbarians. For he that despises them
can despise the barbarians too; but he that submits to them, will suffer
more severely than from barbarians. The barbarian, when his power
prevails, may afflict the body, but these passions torture the soul, and
lacerate it all over. When the barbarian has prevailed, he delivers one
to temporal death, but these to that which is to come. So that he alone
is the free man, who has his freedom in himself; and he who submits to
these unreasonable passions, is the slave.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p43"></span>No master, however inhuman, imposes such
severe and inhuman commands. They say to him, in effect, “Disgrace thy
soul without end or object,—offend thy God,—be deaf to the claims of
nature; though it be thy father or thy mother, be not ashamed to set
thyself against them.” Such are the commands of avarice. “Sacrifice to
me, she says, not calves, but men.” The prophet indeed says, “Sacrifice
men, for the calves have failed.” ([Hosea xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xix-p43.1"></span>,
Sept.) But avarice says, “Sacrifice men, though there are yet calves.
Sacrifice those who have never injured thee, yea slay them, though they
have been thy benefactors.” Or again, “Be at war, and go about as the
common enemy of all, of nature herself, and of God. Heap up gold, not
that thou mayest enjoy it, but that thou mayest keep it, and work
greater torture to thyself.” For it is not possible that the lover of
money should be able to enjoy it, since he fears lest his gold should be
diminished, lest his hoards should fail. “Be watchful,” it says, “be
suspicious of every one, even domestics and friends. Have an eye to the
goods of other men. Though you see the poor man perishing with hunger,
give him nothing; but strip him, if it be possible, even of his skin.
Break thine oaths, lie, swear. Be an accuser, a false informer. Refuse
not, if it be necessary, to rush into fire, to submit to a thousand
deaths, to perish with hunger, to struggle with disease.” Does not
avarice impose these laws? “Be offensive and impudent, shameless and
bold, villainous and wicked, ungrateful, unfeeling, unfriendly,
faithless, devoid of affection, a parricide, a beast rather than a man.
Surpass the serpent in bitterness, the wolf in rapacity. Exceed in
brutality even the beast, nay should it be necessary to proceed even to
the malignity of the devil, refuse not. Be a stranger to thy
benefactor.”

<span id="v.iii.xix-p44"></span>Does not avarice say all this, and is it
not listened to? God on the contrary says, Be a friend to all, be
gentle, beloved by all, give offense causelessly to no one. “Honor thy
father and thy mother.” Win an honorable reputation. Be not a man, but
an angel. Utter nothing immodest, nothing false, nor even think of it.
Relieve the poor. Bring not trouble on thyself, by ravaging others. Be
not bold nor insolent. God says this, but no one hearkens. Is not hell
then justly threatened, and the fire, and the worm that dieth not? How
long are we thus to thrust ourselves down the precipice? How long are we
to walk upon thorns, and pierce ourselves with nails, and be grateful
for it? We subject ourselves to cruel tyrants, and refuse the gentle
Master, who imposes nothing grievous, nor barbarous, nor burdensome, nor
unprofitable, but all things such as are useful, and valuable, and
beneficial. Let us then arouse ourselves, and be self-collected, and
gather our forces. Let us love God as we ought, that we may obtain the
blessings promised to those that love Him, through the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the Father, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[471:1309](1130111.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p5"></span> Edd. ἀφ᾽ οὗ, “from whom”; but B. has ἐφ᾽
οὗ, and Old Lat. *sub quo*, which is much better.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[471:1310](1130111.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p11"></span> Savile’s punctuation. Ben. joins this
to the preceding clause, but so it is scarcely grammatical.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[471:1311](1130111.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p19"></span> ἀνέννητον.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[471:1312](1130111.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p23"></span> That is, in His divine nature,
considered apart from the human. See on [Philip. ii.
5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)<span
id="v.iii.xix-p23.1"></span>, Hom. vii. p. 78, and note g, and compare
[John 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), [John
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046), [John
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009), [Luke
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039), [John
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024), [2 Cor.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017), [1 Tim.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016), [1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xix-p23.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[472:1313](1130111.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="v.iii.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xix-p25"></span> μὴ γένηται. He either means that though
not yet fully *come*, His Kingdom, when come, shall be eternal, or puts
γένεσθαι, “to take place,” in opposition to εἶναι, “to be.” The former
word refers to events in time, the latter to the real constitution of
things. [Phil. 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010), [Heb.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span id="v.iii.xix-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homilies on 2 Timothy.](1130112)
