[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130117)  [Next](1130119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi-Page_496"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.vi-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.iv.vi-p2.2"></span>[2 Tim.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p3"></span>“But in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some
to honor, and some to dishonor. If a man therefore purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the
master’s use, and prepared unto every good work.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>Many</span> men are still even now perplexed to
account for the fact, that the wicked are suffered to remain, and are
not yet destroyed. Now doubtless various reasons may be assigned for
this, as, that they may be converted, or that by their punishment they
may be made an example to the multitude. But Paul here mentions a
similar case. For he says,

<span id="v.iv.vi-p5"></span>“In a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth.” Showing by
this, that as in a great house it is likely there should be a great
difference of vessels, so here also, in the whole world, for he speaks
not of the Church only, but of the world at large. For think not, I
pray, that he means it of the Church; for there he would not have any
vessels of wood or of earth, but all of gold or silver where is the body
of Christ, where is that “pure virgin, without spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing.” ([Eph. v. 27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>.) And this is what he means to say: Let it not
disturb thee that there are corrupt and wicked men. For in a great house
there are such vessels. But what then? they do not receive the same
honor. But some are to honor and some to dishonor. “Nay,” says one, “in
a house they may be of some use, but not at all in the world.” Though
God employs them not for such honorable service, he makes use of them
for other purposes. For instance, the vainglorious man builds much, so
does the covetous man, the merchant, the tradesman, the magistrate;
there are certain works in the world suited to these. But the golden
vessel is not of such a nature. It is employed about the royal table. He
does not say however that wickedness is a necessary thing, (for how
should it be?) but that the wicked also have their work. For if all were
of gold or of silver, there would be no need of the viler sort. For
instance, if all were hardy, there would be no need of houses; if all
were free from luxury, there would be no need of dainties. If all were
careful only for necessaries, there would be no need of splendid
building.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p6"></span>“If therefore a man purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified.” Seest thou that it
is not of nature, nor of the necessity of matter, to be a vessel of gold
or of earth, but of our own choice? For otherwise the earthen could not
become gold, nor could the golden descend to the vileness of the other.
But in this case there is much change, and alteration of state. Paul was
an earthen vessel, and became a golden one. Judas was a golden vessel,
and became an earthen one. The earthen vessels, therefore, are such from
uncleanness. The fornicator and the covetous man become earthen vessels.
“But how then does he say elsewhere, ‘We have this treasure in earthen
vessels,’ so that he does not despise but honor the earthen vessel,
speaking of it as the recipient of the treasure?” There he shows the
nature itself, and not the form of the material. For he means to say
that our body is an earthen vessel. For as earthenware is nothing else
but baked clay, so is our body nothing but clay consolidated by the heat
of the soul; for that it is earthen, is evident. For as such a vessel is
often by falling broken and dashed to pieces, so our body falls and is
dissolved by death. For how do our bones differs from a potsherd, hard
and dry as they are? or our flesh from clay, being, like it, composed of
water? But, as I said, how is it that he does not speak contemptuously
of it? Because there he is discoursing of its nature, here of our
choice. “If a man,” he says, “purge himself from these,” not merely
“cleanse,” but “cleanse out,” <span id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381)
that is, cleanse himself perfectly, “he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Master’s use.” The others therefore are
useless for any good purpose, though some use is made of them. “And
prepared <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382) unto every good
work.” Even though he do it not, he is fit for it, and has a capacity
for it. We ought therefore to be prepared for everything, even for
death, for martyrdom, for a life of virginity, or for all these.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p9"></span>[2 Tim.
2.22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>.
“Flee also youthful lusts.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p10"></span>Not only the lust of fornication, but
every inordinate desire is a youthful lust. Let the aged learn that they
ought not to do the deeds of the youthful. If one be given to insolence,
or a lover of power, of riches, of bodily pleasures, it is a youthful
lust, and foolish. These things must proceed from a heart not yet
established, from a mind not deeply grounded, but in a wavering state.
What then does he advise in order <span id="page_497">p. 497</span>
<span id="v.iv.vi-Page_497"></span>that none may be captivated by these
things? “Flee youthful” imaginations, but

<span id="v.iv.vi-p11"></span>“Follow righteousness, faith, charity,
peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p12"></span>He calls virtue in general,
“righteousness”: godliness of life, “faith, meekness, charity.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p13"></span>What is meant by “those that call upon the
Lord out of a pure heart”? It is as if he said, Rejoice not in those who
only call upon the Lord; but those who call upon Him sincerely and
unfeignedly, who have nothing of deceit about them, who approach Him in
peace, who are not contentious. With these associate thyself. But with
others be not easy, but only as far as lies in you, be peaceable.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p14"></span>[2 Tim.
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.vi-p14.1"></span>.
“But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender
strifes.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p15"></span>Do you see how he everywhere draws him off
from questions; not that he was not able to overthrow them; for he was
well able. For had he not been able he would have said, Be diligent,
that thou mayest be able to refute them; as when he says, “Give
attendance to reading, for by so doing thou shalt both save thyself and
them that hear thee.” ([1 Tim. 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.vi-p15.1"></span>.)
But he knew that it was useless to enter at all into these disputes,
that there will be no end of it, save contentions, enmities, insults,
and reproaches. These “questions” therefore “avoid”; so that there are
other questions, some relating to the Scriptures, some to other things.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p16"></span>[2 Tim.
2.24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span id="v.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>.
“And the servant of the Lord must not strive.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p17"></span>Not even in questions ought he to strive,
for the servant of the Lord must keep far from strife, since God is the
God of peace, and what should the servant of the God of peace have to do
with strife?

<span id="v.iv.vi-p18"></span>“But be gentle unto all men.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p19"></span>How is it then he says, “Rebuke with all
authority” ([Tit. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p19.1"></span>.); and again, “Let no man despise thy youth”
([1 Tim. iv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p19.2"></span>.): and again, “Rebuke them sharply”? ([Tit.
i. 13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p19.3"></span>.) Because this is consistent with meekness.
For a strong rebuke, if it be given with gentleness, is most likely to
wound deeply: for it is possible, indeed it is, to touch more
effectually by gentleness, than one overawes by boldness.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p20"></span>“Apt to teach”; that is, those who are
willing to be taught. For “a man that is an heretic,” he says, “after
the first and second admonition reject.” ([Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>.)
“Patient.” He has well added this, for it is a quality which a teacher
above all things ought to possess. All things are vain without it. And
if fishermen do not despair, though often they cast their nets for a
whole day without catching anything, much more should not we. For see
what is the result. From constant teaching, it often happens that the
plow of the word, descending to the depth of the soul, roots out the
evil passion that troubled it. For he that hears often will at length be
affected. A man cannot go on hearing continually without some effect
being produced. Sometimes therefore, when he was on the point of being
persuaded, he is lost by our becoming weary. For the same thing occurs,
as if an unskillful husbandman should in the first year dig about the
vine he had planted, and seeking to reap some fruit in the second year,
and again in the third, and gathering nothing, should after three years
despair, and in the fourth year, when he was about to receive the
recompense of his labors, abandon his vine. And having said, “Patient,”
he is not satisfied, but goes on to say,

<span id="v.iv.vi-p21"></span>[2 Tim.
2.25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span id="v.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>.
“In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p22"></span>For he that teaches must be especially
careful to do it with meekness. For a soul that wishes to learn cannot
gain any useful instruction from harshness and contention. For when it
would apply, being thus thrown into perplexity, it will learn nothing.
He who would gain any useful knowledge ought above all things to be well
disposed towards his teacher, and if this be not previously attained,
nothing that is requisite or useful can be accomplished. And no one can
be well disposed towards him who is violent and overbearing. How is it
then that he says, “A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject”? He speaks there of one incorrigible, of one whom he
knows to be diseased beyond the possibility of cure.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p23"></span>“If God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p24"></span>[2 Tim.
2.26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026)<span id="v.iv.vi-p24.1"></span>.
“And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil.”

<span id="v.iv.vi-p25"></span>What he says amounts to this. Perhaps
there will be a reformation. Perhaps! for it is uncertain. So that we
ought to withdraw only from those, of whom we can show plainly, and
concerning whom we are fully persuaded, that whatever be done, they will
not be reformed. “In meekness,” he says. In this temper, you see, we
ought to address ourselves to those who are willing to learn, and never
cease from conversing with them till we have come to the
demonstration. <span id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383)

<span id="v.iv.vi-p27"></span>“Who are taken captive by him at his
will.” It is truly said, “Who are taken captive,” <span
id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) for meanwhile they float in error.
Observe here how he teaches to be humble-minded. He has not said, if
peradventure you should be able, but, “if peradventure God should grant
them a recovery”; if anything be done, therefore, all <span
id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span id="v.iv.vi-Page_498"></span>is of the
Lord. Thou plantest, thou waterest but He soweth and maketh it produce
fruit. Let us not therefore be so affected, as if we ourselves wrought
the persuasion, even if we should persuade any one. “Taken captive by
him,” he says, “to His will.” <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385)
This no one will say relates to doctrine, but to life. For “His will” is
that we live rightly. But some are in the snare of the devil by reason
of their life, we ought not therefore to be weary even with respect to
these.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p30"></span>“If peradventure,” he says, “they may
recover, that are taken captive, unto His will.” Now “If peradventure,”
implies much longsuffering. For not to do the will of God is a snare of
the devil.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p31"></span>For as a sparrow, though it be not wholly
enclosed, but only caught by the foot, is still under the power of him
who set the snare; so though we be not wholly subverted, both in faith
and life, but in life only, we are under the power of the devil. For
“Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven”; and again, “I know you not; depart from me, ye that
work iniquity.” ([Matt. vii.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p31.1"></span>.) You see there is no advantage from our
faith, when our Lord knows us not: and to the virgins he says the same,
“I know you not.” ([Matt. xxv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p31.2"></span>.) What then is the benefit of virginity, or
of many labors, when the Lord knows us not? And in many places we find
men not blamed for their faith, but punished for their evil life only;
as elsewhere, not reproved for evil lives, but perishing for their
pravity of doctrine. For these things hold together. <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386) You see that when we do not the
will of God, we are under the snare of the devil. And often not only
from a bad life, but from one defect, we enter into Hell, where there
are not good qualities to counterbalance it, since the virgins were not
accused of fornication or adultery, nor of envy or ill-will, nor of
drunkenness, nor of unsound faith, but of a failure of oil, that is,
they failed in almsgiving, for that is the oil meant. <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) And those who were pronounced
accursed in the words, “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire,” were not accused of any such crimes, but because they had not fed
Christ.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p34"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p34.1"></span>Moral.</span> Seest thou that a failure in
alms-giving is enough to cast a man into hell fire? For where will he
avail who does not give alms? Dost thou fast every day? So also did
those virgins, but it availed them nothing. Dost thou pray? What of
that? prayer without alms-giving is unfruitful, without that all things
are unclean and unprofitable. The better part of virtue is destroyed.
“He that loveth not his brother,” it is said, “knoweth not God.” ([1
John iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p34.2"></span>.) And how dost thou love him, when thou dost
not even impart to him of these poor worthless things? Tell me,
therefore, dost thou observe chastity? On what account? From fear of
punishment? By no means. It is of a natural endowment that thou
observest it, since if thou wast chaste from fear of punishment, and
didst violence to nature in submitting to so severe a rule, much more
oughtest thou to do alms. For to govern the desire of wealth, and of
bodily pleasures, is not the same thing. The latter is much more
difficult to restrain. And wherefore? Because the pleasure is natural,
and the desire of it is innate and of natural growth in the body. It is
not so with riches. Herein we are able to resemble God, in showing mercy
and pity. When therefore we have not this quality, we are devoid of all
good. He has not said, “ye shall be like unto your Father, if ye fast,”
nor “if ye be virgins,” nor “if ye pray,” hath He said, “ye shall be
like unto your Father,” for none of these things can be applied to God,
nor are they His acts. But what? “Be ye merciful, as your Father in
Heaven is merciful.” ([Luke vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036)<span id="v.iv.vi-p34.3"></span>.)
This is the work of God. If therefore thou hast not this, what hast
thou? He says: “I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.” ([Hosea vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.vi-p34.4"></span>.)
God made Heaven, and earth, and sea. Great works these, and worthy of
His wisdom! But by none of these has He so powerfully attracted human
nature to Himself, as by mercy and the love of mankind. For that indeed
is the work of power and wisdom and goodness. But it is far more so that
He became a servant. Do we not for this more especially admire Him? are
we not for this still more amazed at Him? Nothing attracts God to us so
much as mercy. And the prophets from beginning to end discourse upon
this subject. But I speak not of mercy that is accompanied with
covetousness. That is not mercy. For it is not the root of the thorn but
of the olive that produces the oil <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) ; so it is not the root of
covetousness, of iniquity, or of rapine, that produces mercy. Do not put
a slander on almsgiving. Do not cause it to be evil spoken of by all. If
thou committest robbery for this, that thou mayest give alms, nothing is
more wicked than thy almsgiving. For when it is produced by rapine, it
is not almsgiving, it is inhumanity, it is cruelty, it is an insult to
God. If Cain so offended, by offering inferior gifts of his own, shall
he not <span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi-Page_499"></span>offend, who offers the goods of another? An
offering is nothing else but a sacrifice, a purification, not a
pollution. And thou who darest not to pray with unclean hands, dost thou
offer the dirt and filth of robbery, and think thou doest nothing wrong?
Thou sufferest not thy hands to be full of dirt and filth, but having
first cleansed these, thou offerest. Yet that filth is no charge against
thee, while the other deserves reproach and blame. Let it not therefore
be our consideration, how we may offer prayers and oblations with clean
hands, but how the things offered may be pure. If one, after having
washed a vessel clean, should fill it with unclean gifts, would it not
be ridiculous mockery? Let the hands be clean; and they will be so, if
we wash them not with water only, but first with righteousness. This is
the purifier of the hands. But if they be full of unrighteousness,
though they be washed a thousand times, it avails nothing. “Wash you,
make you clean” ([Isa. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p35.1"></span>.), He says, but does He add, “Go to the
baths, the lakes, the rivers”? No; but what? “Put away the evil of your
doings from your souls.” This is to be clean. <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) This it is to be cleansed from
defilement. This is real purity. The other is of little use; but this
bestows upon us confidence towards God. The one may be obtained by
adulterers, thieves, murderers, by worthless, and dissolute, and
effeminate persons, and especially the latter. For they are ever careful
of the cleanliness of their bodies, and scented with perfumes, cleansing
their sepulcher. <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) For their
body <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) is but a sepulcher,
since the soul is dead within it. This cleanness therefore may be
theirs, <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) but not that which is
inward.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p40"></span>To wash the body is no great matter. That
is a Jewish purification, senseless <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) and unprofitable, where purity
within is wanting. Suppose one to labor under a putrefying sore, or
consuming ulcer; let him wash his body ever so much, it is of no
advantage. And if the putrefaction of the body receives no benefit from
cleansing and disguising the outward appearance; when the soul is
infected with rottenness, what is gained by the purity of the body?
Nothing! Our prayers ought to be pure, and pure they cannot be, if they
are sent forth from a corrupt soul, and nothing so corrupts the soul as
avarice and rapine. But there are some who after committing numberless
sins during the day, wash themselves in the evening and enter the
churches, holding up their hands with much confidence, as if by the
washing of the bath they had put off all their guilt. And if this were
the case, it would be a vast advantage to use the bath daily! I would
not myself cease to frequent the baths, <span
id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) if it made us pure, and cleansed us
from our sins! But these things are trifling and ridiculous, the toys of
children. It is not the filth of the body, but the impurity of the soul,
to which God is averse. For He says, “Blessed are the pure”—does He say
in body? No—“in heart: for they shall see God.” ([Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi-p42.1"></span>.)
And what says the Prophet: “Create in me a clean heart, O God.” ([Ps.
li. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p42.2"></span>.) And again, “Wash my heart from wickedness.”
([Jer. iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p42.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv.vi-p43"></span>It is of great use to be in the habit of
doing good actions. See how trifling and unprofitable these washings
are. But when the soul is prepossessed by a habit, it does not depart
from it, nor does it venture to draw nigh in prayer, till it has
fulfilled these ceremonies. For instance, we have brought ourselves to a
habit of washing and praying, and without washing we do not think it
right to pray. And we do not willingly pray with unwashed hands, as if
we should offend God, and violate our conscience. Now if this trifling
custom has so great power over us, and is observed every day; if we had
brought ourselves to a habit of almsgiving, and had determined so
constantly to observe it, as never to enter a house of prayer with empty
hands, the point would be gained. For great is the power of habit both
in good things and in evil, and when this carries us on, there will be
little trouble. Many are in the habit of crossing <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) themselves continually, and they
need no one to remind them of it, but often when the mind is wandering
after other things, the hand is involuntarily drawn by custom, as by
some living teacher, to make the sign. Some have brought themselves into
a habit of not swearing at all, and therefore neither willingly nor
unwillingly do they ever do it. Let us then bring ourselves into such a
habit of almsgiving.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p45"></span>What labors were it worth to us to
discover such a remedy. For say, were there not the relief of
almsgiving, while we still by our numberless sins rendered ourselves
liable to Divine vengeance, should we not have lamented sadly? Should we
not have said, O that it were possible by our wealth to wash away our
sins, and we would have parted with it all! O that by our riches we
could put away the wrath of God, then we would not spare our substance?
For if we do this in sickness, and at the point of death we say, “If it
were possible to buy off death, such an one would give all his
possessions”; much more in this matter. For see how great is the love of
God for man. He has granted us power to buy off not temporal but <span
id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span id="v.iv.vi-Page_500"></span>eternal
death. Do not purchase, He says, this short life, but that life that is
everlasting. It is that I sell thee, not the other: I do not mock thee.
Didst thou gain the present life, thou hadst gained nothing. I know the
worth of that which I offer thee. The bargainers and traffickers in
worldly goods do not act thus. They, when they can <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) impose on whom they will, give a
little to receive a great deal. It is not so with God. He gives the
greater by far for the less.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p47"></span>Tell me, if you were to go to a merchant,
and he were to set before you two stones, one of little worth, <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) and the other very precious, and
sure to fetch a large amount of wealth; if he allowed you for the price
of the cheap one to carry off the more costly, should you complain of
him? No! You would rather admire his liberality. So now, two lives are
set before us, the one temporal, the other eternal. These God offers us
for sale, but He would sell us the latter rather than the former. Why do
we complain, like silly children, that we receive the more
precious? <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) Is it possible then
to purchase life for money? Yes, when what we bestow is our own, and not
the property of another; when we do not practice an imposture. But, you
say, henceforth the goods are mine. They are not thine after rapine.
They are still thy neighbor’s, though thou wert a thousand times the
master of them. For if thou shouldest receive a deposit, it would not be
thine own even for the short season that the depositor was traveling,
though it might be laid up with thee. If therefore that is not ours,
which we received with the consent and thanks of those who deposited it,
even for the short period that we retain it, much less is that ours,
which we plundered against the will of its owner. He is the master of
it, however long thou mayest withhold it. But Virtue is <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) really our own; as for money, even
our own is not strictly ours, much less that of others. Today it is
ours, to-morrow it belongs to another. What is of virtue is our own
possession. This does not suffer loss, like other things, but is
entirely possessed by all who have it. This therefore let us acquire,
and let us despise riches, that we may be able to attain those real
goods, of which God grant that we may be thought worthy to partake,
through the grace and lovingkindness, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[496:1382](1130118.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p7"></span> ἐκκαθάρῃ.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[496:1383](1130118.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p8"></span> B. “They are not, however, ‘prepared,’”
&c.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[497:1384](1130118.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p26"></span> That is, we ought not to be provoked by
their slowness of apprehension to break off.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[497:1385](1130118.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p28"></span> ἐζωγρημένοι, “taken alive,” applied to
fish enclosed in a net.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[498:1386](1130118.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p29"></span> Gr. “To His will.” As αὐτοῦ and ἐκείνου
must refer to two different persons, the meaning probably is, “that they
who are taken captive by the devil may be recovered to the will of God.”
And so he takes it.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[498:1387](1130118.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p32"></span> Sav. ἀλλήλων ἔχεται. Ben. ἔρχεται, which
would be hardly Greek even with a preposition.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[498:1388](1130118.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p33"></span> So he takes it on [Matt.
xxv.](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.vi-p33.1"></span>
Hom. lxxviii. al. lxxix. See also on [Philip. i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#030)<span id="v.iv.vi-p33.2"></span>,
Hom. iv. 15, and notes, and on [Rom. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.vi-p33.3"></span>, and
on [Rom. xiv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p33.4"></span>. St. Jerome and St. Aug. take the oil more
generally of good works, with allusion to [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.vi-p33.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[498:1389](1130118.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p34.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p35"></span> He plays, as elsewhere, on the words
ἔλεον and ἔλαιον.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[499:1390](1130118.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p36"></span> B., though usually here far inferior to
the printed text, seems best in these words. Sav. has, “That is, be
clean: this it is that cleanses,” &c.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[499:1391](1130118.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p37"></span> σῆμα.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[499:1392](1130118.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p38"></span> σῶμα.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[499:1393](1130118.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p39"></span> B. reads μετεῖναι, for μετιέναι.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[499:1394](1130118.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p41"></span> Sav. “useless.”

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[499:1395](1130118.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p42"></span> This was thought too luxurious for
persons of devout life. See Euseb. ii. 23, and St. Clem. Al. Pædag. iii.
9, who recommends providing for cleanliness by other means.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[499:1396](1130118.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p44"></span> σφραγίζειν.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[500:1397](1130118.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p46"></span> B. ἐξῇ for ἐξῆν.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[500:1398](1130118.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p48"></span> B. counterfeit.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[500:1399](1130118.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p49"></span> B. reads ὄψει for ὅτι. “We take the value
by sight.”

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[500:1400](1130118.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="v.iv.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p50"></span> B. “those other things are.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy 3:1-7](1130119)
