[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130047)  [Next](1130049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>[Philippians ii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>“Have this mind in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, counted it not a prize
to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a
servant, being made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion
as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death, yea,
the death of the cross.”

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>Our</span> Lord Jesus Christ, when exhorting
His disciples to great actions, places before them Himself, and the
Father, and the Prophets, as examples; as when He says, “For thus they
did unto the Prophets which were before you” ([Matt.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md), [Luke
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p4.2"></span>.); and again, “If they persecuted Me, they
will also persecute you” ([John xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p4.3"></span>.); and, “Learn of me, for I am meek”
([Matt. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p4.4"></span>.); and again, “Be ye merciful, as your
Father which is in heaven is merciful.” ([Luke vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4.5"></span>..md)
This too the blessed Paul did; in exhorting them to humility, he brought
forward Christ. And he does so not here only, but also when he
discourses of love towards the poor, he speaks in this wise. “For ye
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet
for your sakes He became poor.” ([2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4.6"></span>..md)
Nothing rouses a great and philosophic soul to the performance of good
works, so much as learning that in this it is likened to God. What
encouragement is equal to this? None. This Paul well knowing, when he
would exhort them to humility, first beseeches and supplicates them,
then to awe <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) them he says, “That
ye stand fast in one Spirit”; he says also, that it “is for them an
evident token of perdition, but of your salvation.” ([Phil.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>.) And last of all he says this, “Have this
mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in the form of
God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied
Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant.” ([Philip. ii.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.3"></span>.) Attend, I entreat you, and rouse
yourselves. For as a sharp two-edged sword, wheresoever it falls, though
it be among ten thousand phalanxes, easily cuts through and destroys,
because it is sharp on every side, and nought can bear its edge; so are
the words of the Spirit. ([Heb. 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md),
[Rev. 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.4"></span>.) For by these words he has laid low the
followers of Arius of Alexandria, of Paul of Samosata, of Marcellus the
Galatian, of Sabellius the Libyan, of Marcion that was of Pontus, of
Valentinus, of Manes, of Apollinarius of Laodicea, of Photinus, of
Sophronius, and, in one word, all the heresies. Rouse yourselves then to
behold so great a spectacle, so many armies falling by one stroke, lest
the pleasure of such a sight should escape you. For if when chariots
contend in the horse race there is nothing so pleasing as when one of
them dashes against and overthrows whole chariots with their drivers,
and after throwing down many with the charioteers that stood thereon,
drives by alone towards the goal, and the end of the course, and amid
the applause and clamor which rises on all sides to heaven, with
coursers winged as it were by that joy and that applause, sweeps over
the whole ground; how much greater will the pleasure be here, when by
the grace of God we overthrow at once and in a body the combinations and
devilish machinations of all these heresies together with their
charioteers?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p6"></span>And if it seem good to you, we will
first <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_207"></span>arrange the heresies themselves in
order. Would you have them in the order of their impiety, or of their
dates? In the order of time, for it is difficult to judge of the order
of their impiety. First then let Sabellius <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) the Libyan come forward. What does he
assert? that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are mere names given to
one Person. Marcion <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) of Pontus
says, that God the Creator of all things is not good, nor the Father of
the good Christ, but another righteous one, <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) and that he did not take flesh for us.
Marcellus, <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) and Photinus, <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) and Sophronius assert, that the Word
is an energy, and that it was this energy that dwelt in Him who was of
the seed of David, and not a personal substance.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p12"></span>Arius confesses indeed the Son, but
only in word; he says that He is a creature, and much inferior to the
Father. And others say that He has not a soul. Seest thou the chariots
standing? See then their fall, how he overthrows them all together, and
with a single stroke. How? “Have the same mind in you,” he says, “which
was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, counted it not a
prize to be on an equality with God.” And Paul <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) of Samosata has fallen, and Marcellus,
and Sabellius. For he says, “Being in the form of God.” If “in the form”
how sayest thou, O wicked one, that He took His origin from Mary, and
was not before? and how dost thou say that He was an energy? For it is
written, “The form of God took the form of a servant.” “The form of a
servant,” is it the energy of a servant, or the nature of a servant? By
all means, I fancy, the nature of a servant. Thus too the form of God,
is the nature of God, and therefore not an energy. Behold also Marcellus
of Galatia, Sophronius and Photinus have fallen.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p14"></span>Behold Sabellius too. It is written,
“He counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God.” Now equality
is not predicated, where there is but one person, for that which is
equal hath somewhat to which it is equal. Seest thou not the substance
of two Persons, and not empty names without things? Hearest thou not the
eternal pre-existence of the Only-begotten?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p15"></span>Lastly, What shall we say against
Arius, <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md) who asserts the Son is of
a different substance? Tell me now, what means, “He took the form of a
servant”? It means, He became man. Wherefore “being in the form of God,”
He was God. For one “form” and another “form” is named; if the one be
true, the other is also. “The form of a servant” means, Man by nature,
wherefore “the form of God” means, God by nature. And he not only bears
record of this, but of His equality too, as John also doth, that he is
no way inferior to the Father, for he saith, “He thought it not a thing
to seize, <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md) to be equal with God.”
Now what is their wise reasoning? Nay, say they, he proves the very
contrary; for he says, that, “being in the form of God, He seized not
equality with God.” How if He were God, how was He able “to seize upon
it”? and is not this without meaning? Who would say that one, being a
man, seized not on being a man? for how would any one seize on that
which he is? No, say they, but he means that being a little God, He
seized not upon being equal to the great God, Who was greater than He.
Is there a great and a little God? And do ye bring in the doctrines of
the Greeks upon those of the Church? With them there is a great and a
little God. If it be so with you, I know not. For you will find it
nowhere in the Scriptures: there you will find a great God throughout, a
little one nowhere. If He were little, how would he also be God? If man
is not little and great, but one nature, and if that which is not of
this one nature is not man, how can there be a little God and a great
one?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p18"></span>He who is not of that nature is not
God. For He is everywhere called great in Scripture; “Great is the Lord,
and highly to be praised.” ([Ps. xlviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>..md)
This is said of the Son also, for it always calls Him Lord. “Thou art
great, and doest wondrous things. Thou art God alone.” ([Ps. lxxxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p18.2"></span>.) And again, “Great is our Lord, and great
is His power, and of His greatness there is no end.” ([Ps. cxlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p18.3"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p19"></span>But the Son, he says, is little. But it
is thou that sayest this, for the Scripture says the contrary: as of the
Father, so it speaks of the Son; for listen to Paul, saying, “Looking
for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of our great God.”
([Tit. ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p19.1"></span>.) But can he have said “appearing” of the
Father? Nay, that he may the more convince you, he has added with
reference to the appearing “of the great God.” Is it then not said of
the Father? By no means. For the sequel suffers it not which says, “The
appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md) See, the Son is great also. How then
speakest thou of small and great?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p21"></span>Listen to the Prophet too, calling him
“The Messenger <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) of great
counsel.” ([Isa. ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p22.3"></span>.) “The Messenger of great counsel,” is He
not great <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_208"></span>Himself? “The mighty God,” is He small
and not great? What mean then these shameless and reckless men when they
say, that being little He is a God? I repeat ofttimes what they say,
that ye may the more avoid them. He being a lesser God seized not for
Himself to be like the greater God! Tell me now (but think not that
these words are mine), if he were little, as they say, and far inferior
to the Father in power, how could He possibly have seized to Himself
equality with God? For an inferior nature could not seize for himself
admission into that which is great; for example, a man could not seize
on becoming equal to an angel in nature; a horse could not, though he
wished it, seize on being equal to a man in nature. But besides all
that, I will say this too. What does Paul wish to establish by this
example? Surely, to lead the Philippians to humility. To what purpose
then did he bring forward this example? For no one who would exhort to
humility speaks thus; “Be thou humble, and think less of thyself than of
thine equals in honor, for such an one who is a slave has not risen
against his master; do thou imitate him.” This, any one would say, is
not humility, but arrogance. <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md)
Learn ye what humility is, ye who have a devilish pride! What then is
humility? To be lowly minded. And he is lowly minded who humbles
himself, not he who is lowly by necessity. To explain what I say; and do
ye attend; he who is lowly minded, when he has it in his power to be
high minded, is humble, but he who is so because he is not able to be
high minded, is no longer humble. For instance, If a King subjects
himself to his own officer, he is humble, for he descends from his high
estate; but if an officer does so, he will not be lowly minded; for how?
he has not humbled himself from any high estate. It is not possible to
show humble-mindedness except it be in our power to do otherwise. For if
it is necessary for us to be humble even against our will, that
excellency comes not from the spirit or the will, but from necessity.
This virtue is called humble-mindedness, because it is the humbling of
the mind.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p24"></span>If he who has it not in his power to
snatch at another’s goods, continues in the possession of his own;
should we praise him, think you, for his justice? I trow not, and why?
The praise of free choice is taken away by the necessity. If he, who has
it not in his power to usurp and be a king, remains a private citizen,
should we praise him for his quietness? I trow not. The same rule
applies here. For praise, O ye most senseless ones, is not given for
abstaining from these things, but for the performance of good deeds; for
the former is free indeed from blame, but partakes not yet of praise,
while eulogy of the other is meet. Observe accordingly that Christ gives
praise on this principle, when He says, “Come, ye blessed of My Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was an hungered, and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave
Me drink.” ([Matt. 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p24.1"></span>.) He did not say, Because ye have not been
covetous, because ye have not robbed; these are slight things; but
because “ye saw Me an hungered, and fed Me.” Who ever praised either his
friends or his enemies in this sort? No one ever praised even Paul. Why
say Paul? no one ever praised even a common man, as thou dost praise
Christ, because he did not take that rule which was not his due. To
admire for such things as this, is to give evidence of much evil. And
why? because with evil men this is a matter of praise, as of one that
stealeth, if he steal no more; but it is otherwise among good men.
([Eph. iv. 28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p24.2"></span>.) Because a man has not seized on a rule
and an honor which was not his due, is he praiseworthy? What folly is
this?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p25"></span>Attend, I entreat you, for the
reasoning is long. Again, who would ever exhort to humility from such
grounds as this? Examples ought to be much greater than the subject, to
which we are exhorting, for no one will be moved by what is foreign to
the subject. For instance, when Christ would lead us to do good to our
enemies, He brought a great example, even that of His Father, “For He
maketh His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the
just and the unjust.” ([Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>.) When He would lead to endurance of wrong
He brought an example, “Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.”
([Matt. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p25.2"></span>.) And again, “If I your Lord and Master do
these things, how much more should ye”? ([John xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p25.3"></span>.) Seest thou how these examples are not
distant, <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md) for there is no need
they should be so distant, for indeed we also do these things,
especially as in this case the example is not even near. And how? If He
be a servant, He is inferior, and subject to Him that is greater; but
this is not lowliness of mind. It was requisite to show the contrary,
namely, that the greater person subjected himself to the lesser. But
since he found not this distinction in the case of God, between greater
and lesser, he made at least an equality. Now if the Son were inferior,
this were not a sufficient example to lead us to humility. And why?
because it is not humility, for the lesser not to rise against the
greater, not to snatch at rule, and to be “obedient unto death.”

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p27"></span><span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_209"></span>Again, consider what he says after the
example, “In lowliness of mind, each counting other better than
themselves.” ([Philip. ii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>.) He says, “counting,” for as ye are one
in substance, and in the honor which cometh of God, it follows that the
matter is one of estimation. Now in the case of those who are greater
and lesser, he would not have said “counting,” but honor them that are
better than yourselves, as he says in another place, “Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit to them.” ([Heb. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p27.2"></span>.) In that instance subjection is the
result of the nature of the case, in this of our own judgment. “In
lowliness of mind,” he says, “each counting other better than
themselves,” as Christ also did.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p28"></span>Thus are their explanations overthrown.
It remains that I speak of our own after I have first spoken of theirs
summarily. When exhorting to lowliness of mind, Paul would never have
brought forward a lesser one, as obedient to a greater. If he were
exhorting servants to obey their masters, he might have done so with
propriety, but when exhorting the free to obey the free, to what purpose
could he bring forward the subjection of a servant to a master? of a
lesser to a greater? He says not, “Let the lesser be subject to the
greater,” but ye who are of equal honor with each other be ye subject,
“each counting other better than themselves.” Why then did he not bring
forward even the obedience of the wife, and say, As the wife obeys her
husband, so do ye also obey. Now if he did not bring forward that state
in which there is equality and liberty, since in that the subjection is
but slight, how much less would he have brought forward the subjection
of a slave? I said above, that no one so praises a man for abstaining
from evil, nor even mentions him at all; no one who desires to praise a
man for continence would say, he has not committed adultery, but, he has
abstained from his own wife; for we do not consider abstinence from evil
as a matter of praise at all, it would be ridiculous.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p29"></span>I said that the “form of a servant” was
a true form, and nothing less. Therefore “the form of God” also is
perfect, and no less. Why says he not, “being made in the form of God,”
but “being in the form of God”? This is the same as the saying, “I am
that I am.” ([Ex. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>.) “Form” implies unchangeableness, so far
as it is form. It is not possible that things of one substance should
have the form of another, as no man has the form of an angel, neither
has a beast the form of a man. How then should the Son?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p30"></span>Now in our own case, since we men are
of a compound nature, form pertains to the body, but in the case of a
simple and altogether uncompounded nature it is of the substance. But if
thou contendest that he speaks not of the Father, because the word is
used without the article, in many places this is meant, though the word
be used without the article. Why say I, in many places? for in this very
place he says, “He counted it not a prize to be on an equality with
God,” using the word without the article, though speaking of God the
Father.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p31"></span>I would add our own explanation, but I
fear that I shall overwhelm your minds. Meanwhile remember what has been
said for their refutation; meanwhile let us root out the thorns, and
then we will scatter the good seed after that the thorns have been
rooted out, and a little rest has been given to the land; that when rid
of all the evil thence contracted, it may receive the divine seed with
full virtue.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p32"></span>Let us give thanks to God for what has
been spoken; let us entreat Him to grant us the guarding and safe
keeping thereof, that both we and ye may rejoice, and the heretics may
be put to shame. Let us beseech Him to open our mouth for what follows,
that we may with the same earnestness lay down our own views. Let us
supplicate Him to vouchsafe us a life worthy of the faith, that we may
live to His glory, and that His name may not be blasphemed through us.
For, “woe unto you,” it is written, “through whom the name of God is
blasphemed.” ([Isa. lii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p32.1"></span>, LXX. nearly.) For if, when we have a son,
(and what is there more our own than a son,) if therefore when we have a
son, and are blasphemed through him, we publicly renounce him, turn away
from him, and will not receive him; how much more will God, when He has
ungrateful servants who blaspheme and insult Him, turn away from them
and hate them? And who will take up him whom God hates and turns away
from, but the Devil and the demons? And whomsoever the demons take, what
hope of salvation is left for him? what consolation in life?

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p33"></span>As long as we are in the hand of God,
“no one is able to pluck us out” ([John x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>.), for that hand is strong; but when we
fall away from that hand and that help, then are we lost, then are we
exposed, ready to be snatched away, as a “bowing wall, and a tottering
fence” ([Ps. lxii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.2"></span>.); when the wall is weak, it will be easy
for all to surmount. Think not this which I am about to say refers to
Jerusalem alone, but to all men. And what was spoken of Jerusalem? “Now
will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved touching His
vineyard. My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and I
made a fence about it, and surrounded it with a dike, and planted it
with the vine of Sorech, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also
dug a wine press in it, and I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
and it brought forth <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_210"></span>thorns. And now, O men of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge between Me and My vineyard. What should
have been done to My vineyard, that I have not done to it? Wherefore,
when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
thorns? Now therefore I will tell you what I will do to My vineyard: I
will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be for a prey, and I will
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. And I will
leave My vineyard, and it shall not be pruned or digged, but thorns
shall come up upon it, as upon a desert land. I will also command the
clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of
Sabaoth is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah His pleasant plant.
I looked that it should do judgment, but it did iniquity, and a cry
instead of righteousness.” ([Isa. v.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.3"></span>, LXX.) This is spoken also of every soul.
For when God who loveth man hath done all that is needful and man then
bringeth forth thorns instead of grapes, He will take away the fence,
and break down the wall, and we shall be for a prey. For hear what
another prophet speaks in his lamentations: “Why hast thou broken down
her fences, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck her? The
boar out of the wood doth ravage it, and the wild beasts of the field
feed on it.” ([Ps. 80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.4"></span>.) In the former place He speaks of the
Mede and the Babylonian, here nought is said of them, but “the boar,”
and “the solitary beast” is the Devil and all his host, because of the
ferocity and impurity of his disposition. For when it would show us his
rapacity, it saith, “As a roaring lion he walketh about, seeking whom he
may devour” ([1 Pet. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.5"></span>.): when his poisonous, his deadly, his
destructive nature, it calleth him a snake, and a scorpion; “For tread,”
saith He, “upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the
enemy” ([Luke x. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.6"></span>.): when it would represent his strength as
well as his venom, it calleth him a dragon; as when it says, This dragon
“whom thou hast formed to take his pastime therein.” ([Ps. civ.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.7"></span>.) Scripture everywhere calleth him a
dragon, and a crooked serpent, and an adder ([Ps.
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.8"></span>.); he is a beast of many folds, and varied
in his devices, and his strength is great, he moves all things, he
disturbs all things, he turns all things up and down. ([Isa.
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001.md), [Isa.
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009.md), [Ezek.
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003.md), [Ezek.
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p33.9"></span>.) But fear not, neither be afraid; watch
only, and he will be as a sparrow; “for,” saith He, “tread upon serpents
and scorpions.” If we will, He causes him to be trodden down under our
feet.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p34"></span>See now what scorn is it, yea, what
misery, to see him standing over our heads, who has been given to us to
tread down. And whence is this? it is of ourselves. If we choose, he
becomes great; and if we choose, he becomes of small power. If we take
heed to ourselves, and take up our stand with Him who is our King, he
draws himself in, and will be no better than a little child in his
warfare against us. Whensoever we stand apart from Him, he puffeth
himself up greatly, he uttereth terrible sounds, he grindeth his teeth,
because he finds us without our greatest help. For he will not approach
to us, except God permit him; for if he dared not to enter into the herd
of swine, except by God’s permission, how much less into men’s souls.
But God does permit him, either chastening or punishing us, or making us
more approved, as in the case of Job. Seest thou that he came not to
him, neither dared to be near him, but trembled and quaked? Why speak I
of Job? When he leaped upon Judas, he dared not to seize on him wholly,
and to enter into him, until Christ had severed him from the sacred
band. He attacked him indeed from without, but he dared not enter in,
but when he saw him cut off from that holy flock, he leaped upon him
with more than wolfish vehemence, and left him not till he had slain him
with a double death.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p35"></span>These things are written for our
admonition. What gain have we from knowing that one of the twelve was a
traitor? what profit? what advantage? Much. For, when we know whence it
was that he arrived at this deadly counsel, we are on our guard that we
too suffer not the like. Whence came he to this? From the love of money.
He was a thief. For thirty pieces of silver he betrayed his Lord. So
drunken was he with the passion, he betrayed the Lord of the world for
thirty pieces of silver. What can be worse than this madness? Him to
whom nothing is equivalent, nothing is equal, “before whom the nations
are as nothing” ([Isa. xl. 15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>.), Him did he betray for thirty pieces of
silver. A grievous tyrant indeed is the love of gold, and terrible in
putting the soul beside itself. A man is not so beside himself through
drunkenness <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) as through love of
money, not so much from madness and insanity as from love of money.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p37"></span>For tell me, why didst thou betray Him?
He called thee, when a man unmarked and unknown. He made thee one of the
twelve, He gave thee a share in His teaching, He promised thee ten
thousand good things, He caused thee to work wonders, thou wert sharer
of the same table, the same journeys, the same company, the same
intercourse, as the rest. And were not these things sufficient to
restrain thee? For what reason didst thou betray Him? What hadst thou to
charge Him with, O wicked one? Rather, what good didst thou not receive
at His hands? He knew thy mind, and ceased <span id="page_211">p.
211</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_211"></span>not to do His part. He
often said, “One of you shall betray Me.” ([Matt. xxvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p37.1"></span>.) He often marked thee, and yet spared
thee, and though He knew thee to be such an one, yet cast thee not out
of the band. He still bore with thee, He still honored thee, and loved
thee, as a true disciple, and as one of the twelve, and last of all (oh,
for thy vileness!), He took a towel, and with His own unsullied hands He
washed thy polluted feet, and even this did not keep thee back. Thou
didst steal the things of the poor, and that thou mightest not go on to
greater sin, He bore this too. Nothing persuaded thee. Hadst thou been a
beast, or a stone, wouldest thou not have been changed by these
kindnesses towards thee, by these wonders, by these teachings? Though
thou wast thus brutalized, yet still He called thee, and by wondrous
works He drew thee, thou wast more senseless than a stone, to Himself.
Yet for none of these things didst thou become better.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p38"></span>Ye wonder perhaps at such folly of the
traitor; dread therefore that which wounded him. He became such from
avarice, from the love of money. Cut out this passion, for to these
diseases does it give birth; it makes us impious, and causes <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) us to be ignorant of God, though we
have received ten thousand benefits at His hands. Cut it out, I entreat
you, it is no common disease, it knoweth how to give birth to a thousand
destructive deaths. We have seen his tragedy. Let us fear lest we too
fall into the same snares. For this is it written, that we too should
not suffer the same things. Hence did all the Evangelists relate it,
that they might restrain us. Flee then far from it. Covetousness
consisteth not alone in the love of much money, but in loving money at
all. It is grievous avarice to desire more than we need. Was it talents
of gold that persuaded the traitor? For thirty pieces of silver he
betrayed his Lord. Do ye not remember what I said before, that
covetousness is not shown in receiving much, but rather in receiving
little things? See how great a crime he committed for a little gold,
rather not for gold, but for pieces of silver.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p40"></span>It cannot, it cannot be that an
avaricious man should ever see the face of Christ! This is one of the
things which are impossible. It is a root of evils, and if he that
possesses one evil thing, falls from that glory, where shall he stand
who bears with him the root? He who is the servant of money cannot be a
true servant of Christ. Christ Himself hath declared that the thing is
impossible. “Ye cannot,” He says, “serve God and Mammon,” and, “No man
can serve two masters” ([Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p40.1"></span>.), for they lay upon us contrary orders.
Christ says, “Spare the poor”; Mammon says, “Even from the naked <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md) strip off the things they have.”
Christ says, “Empty thyself of what thou hast”; Mammon says, “Take also
what thou hast not.” Seest thou the opposition, seest thou the strife?
How is it that a man cannot easily obey both, but must despise one? Nay,
does it need proof? How so? Do we not see in very deed, that Christ is
despised, and Mammon honored? Perceive ye not how that the very words
are painful? How much more then the thing itself? But it does not appear
so painful in reality, because we are possessed with the disease. Now if
the soul be but a little cleansed of the disease, as long as it remains
here, it can judge right; but when it departs elsewhere, and is seized
by the fever, and is engaged in the pleasure of the thing, it hath not
its perception clear, it hath not its tribunal uncorrupt. Christ says,
“Whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all that he hath, he cannot
be My disciple” ([Luke xiv. 33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p41.2"></span>.); Mammon says, “Take the bread from the
hungry.” Christ says, “Cover the naked” ([Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p41.3"></span>.); the other says, “Strip the naked.”
Christ says, “Thou shalt not hide thyself from thine own flesh,” ([Isa.
lviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p41.4"></span>.) and those of thine own house; <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) Mammon says, <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) “Thou shalt not pity those of thine
own seed; though thou seest thy mother or thy father in want, despise
them.” Why say I father or mother? “Even thine own soul,” he says,
“destroy it also.” And he is obeyed! Alas! he who commands us cruel, and
mad, and brutal things, is listened to rather than He who bids us gentle
and healthful things! For this is hell appointed; for this, fire; for
this, a river of fire; for this, a worm that dieth not.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p44"></span>I know that many hear me say these
things with pain, and indeed it is not without pain I say them. But why
need I say these things? I could wish the things concerning the kingdom
to be ever my discourse, of the rest, of the waters of rest, of the
green pastures, as the Scripture says, “He maketh me to lie down in
green pastures, He leadeth me beside the still waters” ([Ps. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p44.1"></span>.), there He maketh me to dwell. I could
wish to speak of the place, whence “sorrow and sighing shall flee away.”
([Isa. li. 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p44.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p45"></span>I could wish to discourse of the
pleasures of being with Christ, though they pass all expression and all
understanding. Yet would I speak of these things according to my power.
But what shall I do? it is not possible to speak concerning a
kingdom <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611.md) to one that is diseased
and in fever; then we must needs speak of health. <span id="page_212">p.
212</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_212"></span>It is not possible to
speak of honor to one that is brought to trial, for at that time his
desire is that he be freed from judgment, and penalty, and punishment.
If this be not effected, how shall the other be? It is for this cause
that I am continually speaking of these things, that we may the sooner
pass over to those other. For this cause does God threaten hell, that
none may fall into hell, that we all may obtain the kingdom; for this
cause we too make mention continually of hell, that we may thrust you
onward towards the kingdom, that when we have softened your minds by
fear, we may bring you to act worthily of the kingdom. Be not then
displeased at the heaviness of our words, for the heaviness of these
words lightens our souls from sin. <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) Iron is heavy, and the hammer is
heavy, but it forms vessels fit for use, both of gold and silver, and
straightens things which are crooked; and if it were not heavy, it would
have no power to straighten the distorted substance. Thus too our heavy
speech has power to bring the soul into its proper tone. Let us not then
flee from heaviness of speech, nor the strokes it gives; the stroke is
not given that it may break in pieces or tear the soul, but to
straighten it. We know how we strike, how by the grace of God we inflict
the stroke, so as not to crush the vessel, but to polish it, to render
it straight, and meet for the Master’s use, to offer it glittering in
soundness, skillfully wrought against that Day of the river of fire, to
offer it having no need of that burning pile. For if we expose not
ourselves to fire here, we must needs be burned there, it cannot be
otherwise; “For the day of the Lord is revealed by fire.” ([1 Cor. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p47.1"></span>.) Better is it that ye be burned for a
little space by our words, than for ever in that flame. That this will
indeed be so, is plain, and I have ofttimes given you reasons <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613.md) which cannot be gainsaid. We ought
truly to be persuaded from the Scriptures, but forasmuch as some are
contentious, we have also brought forward many arguments from reason.
Nothing hinders that I now mention them, and what were they? God is
just. We all acknowledge this, both Greeks and Jews, and Heretics, and
Christians. But many sinners have had their departure without
punishment, many righteous men have had their departure after suffering
ten thousand grievous things. If then God be just, where will He reward
their good to the one, and their punishment to the other, if there be no
hell, if there be no resurrection? This reason then do ye constantly
repeat <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614.md) to them and to
yourselves, and it will not suffer you to disbelieve the resurrection,
and whoso disbelieves not the resurrection will take care to live with
all heed so as to obtain eternal happiness, of which may we all be
counted worthy, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_593"></span>[206:594](1130048.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p4.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5"></span> ἐντριπτικῶς, usually to “shame,” here
rather to “make serious,” i.e. by representing to them the presence of
the Holy Spirit. See [Phil. 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[207:595](1130048.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p7"></span> See Euseb. vii. 6. His heresy had been
held before by Praxeas; he was himself later than Marcion.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[207:596](1130048.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p8"></span> Euseb. iv. 11. Tertullian wrote a
treatise against him.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[207:597](1130048.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p9"></span> Tert. adv. Marc. i. 6.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[207:598](1130048.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p10"></span> Theod. ii. 6, 8. Socr. ii. 19, 20.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[207:599](1130048.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p11"></span> Theodoret v. 11.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[207:600](1130048.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p13"></span> Euseb. vii. 27–30.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[207:601](1130048.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p16"></span> See St. Ath. Disc. i. c. xi. § 4.
\[For the various heretics here mentioned, see in Smith’s Dict.
Christian Biog., or in the Schaff-Herzog Encyc. of Religious
Knowledge.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_601"></span>[207:602](1130048.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p17"></span> \[Rev. Ver. “a prize,” a thing seized,
or a thing to be seized.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_602"></span>[207:603](1130048.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p20"></span> \[Chrys.’s whole argument shows that
he understands this passage as here translated, after Rev. Ver. Comp.
Ellicott on Titus.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_603"></span>[207:604](1130048.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p22"></span> See also [Jer. xxxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p22.1"></span>.
Some copies of LXX. omit the latter part of [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p22.2"></span>,
probably because it was not understood.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[208:605](1130048.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p23"></span> ἀπονοίας. He means either that calling
it humility were arrogance, or “this is not a question of humility, but
of presumption.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[208:606](1130048.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p25.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p26"></span> This sentence is difficult, but it
seems to mean that the example of our Lord as Man is less evidently
“distant” than that given just before, but is still above the lesson;
whereas this passage explained as by Arians would be far short of its
purpose.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[210:607](1130048.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p36"></span> See on [Rom. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p36.1"></span>,
Hom. xiii., Tr. p. 438.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[211:608](1130048.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p39"></span> παρασκευάζει, which, when used without
a preposition, is more immediate than “prepares.”

<span id="fn_608"></span>[211:609](1130048.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p41"></span> \[So the best group of <span
class="c16"><span id="iv.iii.vii-p41.1"></span>mss</span>. Field retains
from the editions the feebler phrase of the altered text, “Mammon says,
Strip off even the things they have.” To strip even the naked is a
phrase quite in Chrys.’s vein.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_609"></span>[211:610](1130048.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p41.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p42"></span> See [1 Tim.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008.md), [Gal.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[211:611](1130048.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p43"></span> See [Mark vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[211:612](1130048.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p46"></span> He means an earthly kingdom in the
first instance.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[212:613](1130048.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p47"></span> Al. “is the very thing that gives
occasion to our souls to fly from sins.”

<span id="fn_613"></span>[212:614](1130048.htm#fr_613.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p48"></span> See on [Rom. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p48.1"></span>,
Hom. xxxi., Tr. p. 556.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[212:615](1130048.htm#fr_614.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p49"></span> κατεπᾴδετε, sing as a charm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 2:5-11](1130049.md)
