[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130131)  [Next](1130133.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="v.vi.ii-Page_547"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Homily I.</span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p2"></span>[Philemon i.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)<span id="v.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p3"></span>“Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and
Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and
fellow-laborer, And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our
fellow-soldier, and to the Church in thy house: Grace to you, and peace,
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>These</span> things are said to a master in
behalf of a servant. Immediately at the outset, he has pulled down his
spirit, and not suffered him to be ashamed, he has quenched his anger;
calling himself a prisoner, he strikes him with compunction, and makes
him collect himself, and makes it appear that present things are
nothing. For if a chain for Christ’s sake is not a shame but a boast,
much more is slavery not to be considered a reproach. And this he says,
not exalting himself, but for a good purpose doing this, showing thence
that he was worthy of credit; and this he does not for his own sake, but
that he may more readily obtain the favor. As if he had said, “It is on
your account that I am invested with this chain.” As he also has said
elsewhere, there indeed showing his concern, but here his
trustworthiness.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p5"></span>Nothing is greater than this boast, to be
called “the stigmatized <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538.md) of
Christ.” “For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.” ([Gal. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="v.vi.ii-p6.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.vi.ii-p7"></span>“The prisoner of the Lord.” For he had been
bound on His account. Who would not be struck with awe, who would not be
humbled when he hears of the chains of Christ? Who would not be ready to
give up even his own life, much less one domestic?

<span id="v.vi.ii-p8"></span>“And Timothy our brother.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p9"></span>He joins another also with himself, that
he, being entreated by many, may the more readily yield and grant the
favor.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p10"></span>“Unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and
fellow-laborer.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p11"></span>If “beloved,” then his confidence is not
boldness nor forwardness, but a proof of much affection. If a
“fellow-laborer,” then not only may he be instructed in such a matter,
but he ought to acknowledge it as a favor. For he is gratifying himself,
he is building up the same work. So that apart from any request, he
says, thou hast another necessity for granting the favor. For if he is
profitable to the Gospel, and thou art anxious to promote the Gospel,
then oughtest thou not to be entreated, but to entreat.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p12"></span>[Philem.
2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md)<span id="v.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>.
“And to our beloved Apphia.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p13"></span>It seems to me that she was his partner in
life. Observe the humility of Paul; he both joins Timothy with him in
his request, and asks not only the husband, but the wife also, and some
one else, perhaps a friend.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p14"></span>“And Archippus,” he says, “our
fellow-soldier.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p15"></span>Not wishing to effect such things by
command, and not taking it ill, if he did not immediately comply with
his request; but he begs them to do what a stranger might have
done <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539.md) to aid his request. For
not only the being requested by many, but the petition being urged to
many, contributes to its being granted. And on this account he says,
“And Archippus our fellow-soldier.” If thou art a fellow-soldier, thou
oughtest also to take a concern in these things. But this is the
Archippus, about whom he says in his Epistle to the Colossians, “Say to
Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it.” ([Col. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)<span id="v.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>..md)
It seems to me too, that he, whom he joins with him in this request, was
also one of the Clergy. And he calls him his fellow-soldier, that he may
by all means cooperate with him.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p17"></span>“And to the Church in thy house.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p18"></span>Here he has not omitted even the slaves.
For he knew that often even the words of slaves have power to overthrow
their master; and more especially when his request was in behalf of a
slave. And perhaps it was they particularly who exasperated him. He does
not suffer them therefore to fall into envy, <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540.md) having honored them by including
them in a salutation with their masters. And neither does he allow the
master to take offense. For if he had made mention of them by name,
perhaps he would have been angry. And if he had not mentioned them at
all, he <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541.md) might have been
displeased. Observe therefore how prudently he has found a way by his
manner of mentioning them, both to honor them by his mention of them,
and not to wound him. For the name of the “Church” does not suffer
masters to be angry, even though they are reckoned together with their
servants. For the Church knows not the distinction of master and
servant. By good actions and by sins she defines the one and the other.
If then it is a <span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="v.vi.ii-Page_548"></span>Church, be not displeased that thy slave is
saluted with thee. “For in Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free.”
([Gal. iii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md)<span
id="v.vi.ii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.ii-p21"></span>“Grace to you, and peace.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p22"></span>By mentioning “grace,” he brings his own
sins to his remembrance. Consider, he says, how great things God has
pardoned in thee, how by grace thou art saved. Imitate thy Lord. And he
prays for “peace” to him; and naturally: for it comes then when we
imitate Him, then grace abides. Since even that servant who was
unmerciful to his fellow-servants, until he demanded the hundred pence,
had the grace of his master abiding on him. But when he made that
demand, it was taken from him, and he was delivered to the tormentors.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p23"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="v.vi.ii-p23.1"></span>Moral.</span> Considering these things, then,
let us also be merciful and forgiving towards those who have trespassed
against us. The offenses against us here are a hundred pence, but those
from us against God are ten thousand talents. But you know that offenses
are also judged by the quality of the persons: for instance, he who has
insulted a private person has done wrong, but not so much as he who has
insulted a magistrate, and he who has offended a greater magistrate
offends in a higher degree, and he who offends an inferior one in a
lower degree; but he who insults the king offends much more. The injury
indeed is the same, but it becomes greater by the excellence of the
person. And if he who insults a king receives intolerable punishment, on
account of the superiority <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542.md) of
the person; for how many talents will he be answerable who insults God?
so that even if we should commit the same offenses against God, that we
do against men, even so it is not an equal thing: but as great as is the
difference between God and men, so great is that between the offenses
against Him and them.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p25"></span>But now I find also that the offenses
exceed, not only in that they become great by the eminence of the
person, but by their very nature. And it is a horrible saying that I am
about to utter, and truly awful, but it is necessary to be said, that it
may even so shake our minds and strike them with terror, showing that we
fear men much more than God, and we honor men much more than God. For
consider, he that commits adultery knows that God sees him, yet he
disregards Him; but if a man see him, he restrains his lust. Does not
such a one not only honor men above God, not only insult God, but, which
is even much more dreadful, whilst he fears them, despise Him? For if he
sees them, he restrains the flame of lust, but rather what flame? it is
not a flame, but a willfulness. For if indeed it was not lawful to have
intercourse with a woman, the matter perhaps would be a flame, but
now <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543.md) it is insult and
wantonness. For if he should see men, he desists from his mad passion,
but for the longsuffering of God he has less regard. Again, another who
steals, is conscious that he is committing robbery, and endeavors to
deceive men, and defends himself against those who accuse him, and
clothes his apology with a fair show; but though he cannot thus prevail
with God, he does not regard Him, nor stand in awe of Him, nor honor
Him. And if the king indeed commands us to abstain from other men’s
goods, or even to give away our own, all readily contribute, but when
God commands not to rob, not to gather other men’s goods, we do not
forbear.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p27"></span>Do you see then that we honor men more
than God? It is a sad and grievous saying, a heavy charge. But show that
it is grievous; flee from the fact! But if you fear not the fact, how
can I believe you when you say, We fear your words, you lay a burden on
us! It is you that by the deed lay a burden on yourselves, and not our
words. And if I but name the words of which you do the deeds, you are
offended. And is not this absurd?

<span id="v.vi.ii-p28"></span>May the thing spoken by me prove false! I
would rather myself in That Day bear the imputation of ill language, as
having vainly and causelessly reproached you, than see you accused of
such things.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p29"></span>But not only do you honor men more than
God, but you compel others to do so likewise. Many have thus compelled
their domestics and slaves. Some have drawn them into marriage against
their will, and others have forced them to minister to disgraceful
services, to infamous love, to acts of rapine, and fraud, and violence:
so that the accusation is twofold, and neither can they obtain pardon
upon the plea of necessity. For if you yourself do wrong things
unwillingly, and on account of the command of the ruler, not even so is
it by any means a sufficient excuse: but the offense becomes heavier,
when you compel them also to fall into the same sins. For what pardon
can there be any more for such an one?

<span id="v.vi.ii-p30"></span>These things I have said, not from a wish
to condemn you, but to show in how many things we are debtors to God.
For if by honoring men even equally with God, we insult God, how much
more, when we honor men above Him? But if those offenses that are
committed against men are shown to be much greater against God; how much
more when the actual offense is greater and more grievous in its own
quality.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p31"></span>Let any one examine himself, and he will
see <span id="page_549">p. 549</span> <span
id="v.vi.ii-Page_549"></span>that he does everything on account of men.
Exceedingly blessed we should be, if we did as many things for the sake
of God, as we do for the sake of men, and of the opinion of men, and for
the dread or the respect of men. If then we have so many things to
answer for, we ought with all alacrity to forgive those who injure us,
who defraud us, and not to bear malice. For there is a way to the
forgiveness of our sins that needs no labors, nor expense of wealth, nor
any other things, but merely our own choice. We have no need to set out
upon our travels, nor go beyond the boundaries of our country, nor
submit to dangers and toils, but only to will.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p32"></span>What excuse, tell me, shall we have in
things that appear difficult, <span id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544.md)
when we do not do even a light thing, attended too with so much gain and
so much benefit, and no trouble? Canst thou not despise wealth? Canst
thou not spend thy substance on the needy? Canst thou not will anything
that is good? Canst thou not forgive him that has injured thee? For if
thou hadst not so many things to answer for, and God had only commanded
thee to forgive, oughtest thou not to do it? But now having so many
things to answer for, dost thou not forgive? and that too, knowing that
thou art required to do it on account of things which thou hast from
Him? If indeed we go to our debtor, he knowing it, receives us
courteously, and shows us honor, and pays us every attention in a
liberal way; and that though he is not paying off his debt, but because
he wishes to render us merciful in our demand of payment: and thou, who
owest so much to God, and art commanded to forgive that thou mayest
receive in return, dost not thou forgive? And wherefore not, I beseech
you? Woe is me! How much of goodness do we receive, and what wickedness
do we show in return! What sleepiness! what indolence! How easy a thing
is virtue, attended too with much advantage; and how laborious a thing
is vice! But we, flying from that which is so light, pursue that which
is heavier than lead.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p34"></span>Here there is no need of bodily strength,
nor of wealth, nor possessions, nor of power, nor of friendship, nor of
any other thing; but it is sufficient only to will, and all is
accomplished. Hath some one grieved thee, and insulted thee, and mocked
thee? But consider, how often thou hast done such things to others, and
even to the Lord Himself; and forbear, and forgive him it. Consider that
thou sayest, “Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.”
([Matt. vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013.md)<span
id="v.vi.ii-p34.1"></span>.) Consider, that if thou dost not forgive,
thou wilt not be able to say this with confidence: but if thou
forgivest, thou demandest the matter as a debt, not by reason of the
nature of the thing, but on account of the lovingkindness of Him that
hath granted it. And wherein is it equal, that one who forgives his
fellow-servants should receive remission of the sins committed against
the Lord? but nevertheless we do receive such great lovingkindness,
because He is rich in mercy and pity.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p35"></span>And that I may show that even without
these things, and without the remission, thou art a gainer by forgiving,
consider how many friends such a person has, how the praises of such an
one are everywhere sounded by men who go about saying, “This is a good
man, he is easily reconciled, he knows not to bear malice, he is no
sooner stricken than he is healed.” When such an one falls into any
misfortune, who will not pity him? when he has offended, who will not
pardon him? When he asks a favor of others, who will not grant it to
him? Who will not be willing to be the friend and servant of so good a
soul? Yea, I entreat you, let us do all things for Him, <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545.md) not to our friends, not to our
relations only, but even to our domestics. For He says, “Forbearing
threatening, knowing that your Master also is in heaven.” ([Eph. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span id="v.vi.ii-p36.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.vi.ii-p37"></span>If we forgive our neighbors their
trespasses, ours will be forgiven to us, if we bestow alms, if we be
humble. For this also taketh away sins. For if the publican, only for
saying, “God be merciful to me a sinner” ([Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.ii-p37.1"></span>..md),
went down justified, much more we also, if we be humble and contrite,
shall be able to obtain abundant lovingkindness. If we confess our own
sins and condemn ourselves, we shall be cleansed from the most of our
defilement. For there are many ways that purify. Let us therefore in
every way war against the devil. I have said nothing difficult, nothing
burdensome. Forgive him that has injured thee, have pity on the needy,
humble thy soul, and though thou be a grievous sinner, thou wilt be able
to obtain the kingdom, by these means purging off thy sins themselves,
and wiping off their stain. And God grant that we all, having purified
ourselves here by confession from all the filth of our sins, may there
obtain the blessings promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[547:1539](1130132.htm#fr_1538.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p6"></span> στιγματίας. Literally, “branded slave.”

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[547:1540](1130132.htm#fr_1539.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p16"></span> He may mean a stranger to Onesimus.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[547:1541](1130132.htm#fr_1540.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p19"></span> i.e. of Onesimus.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[547:1542](1130132.htm#fr_1541.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p20"></span> Some suggest the plural, “they,” but
there is no <span class="c16"><span id="v.vi.ii-p20.1"></span>ms</span>.
authority for it. The last editor defends the singular, as the
expression used would please Philemon.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[548:1543](1130132.htm#fr_1542.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p24"></span> Edd. ἀξιοπιστίαν, literally, “worthiness
of credit,” but in later Greek “of consideration.” Sav. mar. B. and Ven.
have ὑπεροχὴν.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[548:1544](1130132.htm#fr_1543.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p26"></span> Sav. mar. B. and Ven. “but now, with most
men, what is lawful is despised,” and, “but what is forbidden made much
of, it is all,” &c.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[549:1545](1130132.htm#fr_1544.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p33"></span> Raphelius (ap. Par.) notes that he means
“what presumption is there that we would do them if we could?”

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[549:1546](1130132.htm#fr_1545.md) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p36"></span> Or, “to this purpose,” as the Latin. But
it seems to be an unexpected turn upon the last clause. Compare the
general argument of Bp. Butler’s Sermons on the Love of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon 1:4-6](1130133.md)
