[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130044)  [Next](1130046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>[Philippians i.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>“And therein I rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your
supplication, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, according to
my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing shall I be put to
shame, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall
be magnified in my body, whether by life, or by death.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>None</span> of the grievous things which are
in this present life can fix their fangs upon that lofty soul, which is
truly philosophic, neither enmity, nor accusations, nor slanders, nor
dangers, nor plots. It flies for refuge as it were to a mighty fortress,
securely defended there against all that attack it from this lower
earth. Such was the soul of Paul; it had taken possession of a place
higher than any fortress, the seat of spiritual wisdom, that is, true
philosophy. For that of those without, i.e. the heathen, is mere words,
<span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv-Page_194"></span>and childish toys. But it is not of these
we now speak, but at present concerning the things of Paul. That blessed
one had both the Emperor for his enemy, and in addition, many other foes
many ways afflicting him, even with bitter slander. And what says he?
Not only do I not grieve nor sink beneath these things, but “I even
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice,” not for a season, but always will I
rejoice for these things. “For I know that this shall turn out to my
salvation,” that which is to come, when even their enmity and jealousy
towards me further the Gospel. “Through your supplication,” he adds,
“and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ according to my earnest
expectation and hope.” Behold the humble-mindedness of this blessed one;
he was striving in the contest, he was now close to his crown, he had
done ten thousand exploits, for he was Paul, and what can one add to
this? still he writes to the Philippians, I may be saved “through your
supplication,” I who have gained salvation through countless
achievements. “And the supply,” saith he, “of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ.” It is as though he said, if I am thought worthy of your
prayers, I shall also be thought worthy of more grace. For the meaning
of “supply” is this, if the Spirit be supplied to me, be given to me
more abundantly. Or he is speaking of deliverance, “unto salvation”;
that is, I shall also escape the present as I did the former danger. Of
this same matter he says, “At my first defense no one took my part, but
all forsook me; may it not be laid to their account. But the Lord stood
by me, and strengthened me.” ([2 Tim. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>.)
This then he now predicts: “Through your supplication and the supply of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, according to my earnest expectation and
hope,” for thus do I hope. For that he may persuade us not to leave the
whole matter to the prayers made for us, <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) and contribute nothing ourselves,
behold how he lays down his own part, which is Hope, the source of all
good, as the Prophet says. “Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according
as we have hoped in Thee.” ([Ps. xxxiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#022)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>.)
And as it is written in another place, “Look to the generations of old
and see, did any one hope in the Lord, and was made ashamed?”
([Ecclesiasticus 2.10](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>.) And again, this same blessed one says,
“Hope putteth not to shame.” ([Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5.3"></span>.)
This is Paul’s hope, the hoping that I shall nowhere be put to shame.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>“According to my earnest expectation and
hope,” says he, “that in nothing shall I be put to shame.” Do you see
how great a thing it is to hope in God? Whatever happens, he says, I
shall not be put to shame, i.e. they will not obtain the mastery, over
me, “but with all boldness, as always, so now also, Christ shall be
magnified in my body.” They forsooth expected to catch Paul in this
snare, and to quench the preaching of the Gospel, as though their
craftiness were of any power. This then, he says, shall not be so, I
shall not now die, but “as always, so now also, Christ shall be
magnified in my body.” How so? Ofttimes have I fallen into dangers, when
all men gave us up, and what is more, when I myself did. For “we had the
answer of death within ourselves” ([2 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>.),
but from all the Lord delivered me, so now too he shall be magnified in
my body. What then? Lest any one should suppose and say, If you die,
will He not then be magnified? Yes, he answers, I know He will; for this
cause I did not say that my life alone shall magnify him, but my death
too. At present he means “by life”; they will not destroy me; even did
they so, Christ will even thus be magnified. How so? Through life,
because He delivered me, but through my death, because even death itself
could not persuade me to deny Him, since He gave me such readiness, and
made me stronger than death. On the one hand because He freed me from
peril; on the other, because He suffered me not to fear the tyranny of
death: thus shall he be magnified through life and death. And this he
says, not as though he were about to die, but lest on his death they
should be affected as men are apt to be.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>But that you may know these his words did
not point to immediate death, the thought that pained them most, see how
he relieves it by almost saying, These things I say, not as one about to
die; wherefore he soon after adds, “And having this confidence I know
that I shall abide, yea and abide with you all.” “In nothing,” says he,
“shall I be put to shame”; that is, death brings no shame to me, but
rather great gain. Why so? Because I am not immortal, but I shall shine
more brightly than if I were so, for it is not the same thing for one
immortal, and for one who is mortal, to despise death; so that not even
instant death is shame to me, yet shall I not die; “in nothing shall I
be put to shame,” neither in life nor death. For I will bear either
nobly, whether life or death. Well says he! This is the part of a
Christian soul! but he adds, “with all boldness.” Seest thou how
entirely I am freed from shame? For if the fear of death had cut short
my boldness, death would have been worthy of shame, but if death at its
approach cast no terror on me, no shame is here; but whether it be
through life I shall not be put to shame, for I still preach the
Preaching, or whether it be through death I shall not be put <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span id="iv.iii.iv-Page_195"></span>to
shame; fear does not hold me back, since I still exhibit the same
boldness. Do not, when I mention my bonds, think shame of the matter; so
manifold good hath it caused to me, that it hath even given confidence
to others. For that we should be bound for Christ, is no shame, but for
fear of bonds to betray aught that is Christ’s, this is shame. When
there is no such thing, bonds are even a cause of boldness. But since I
have ofttimes escaped dangers, and have this to boast of to the
unbelievers, do not straightway think I am put to shame, if now it
should turn out otherwise. The one event no less than the other gives
you boldness. Note how he brings this forward in his own person, which
he does in many places, as in the Epistle to the Romans; “For I am not
ashamed of the Gospel.” ([Rom. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>.)
And again in that to the Corinthians; “And these things I have in a
figure transferred to myself and Apollos.” ([1 Cor. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p7.2"></span>.)—“Whether by life or by death”: this he
says not as in ignorance, (for he knew that he was not then to die, but
some time after); yet even now does he prepare their soul.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span>[Philip.
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>.
“For to me,” he says, “to live is Christ, and to die is gain.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>For even in dying, he means, I shall not
have died, for I have my life in myself: then would they truly have
slain me, had they had power through this fear to cast faith out of my
soul. But as long as Christ is with me, even though death overtake me,
still I live, and in this present life, not this, but Christ is my life.
Since, then, not even in the present life is it so, “but that life which
I now live in the flesh I live in faith;” so I say in that state also,
“I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” ([Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>.)
Such ought a Christian to be! I live not, he says, the common life. How
livest thou then, O blessed Paul? Dost thou not see the sun, dost thou
not breathe the common air? art thou not nourished with the same food as
others? dost thou not tread the earth as we? needest thou not sleep, nor
clothing, nor shoes? what meanest thou by, “I live not”? how dost thou
not live? Why boastest thou thyself? No boasting is here. For if indeed
the fact did not witness to him, a man might with some show have called
it boasting; but if facts do witness, how is boasting here? Let us then
learn how he lives not, for he himself says in another place, “I have
been crucified to the world, and the world to me.” ([Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>.)
Hear then how he says, “I no longer live.” And how he says, “to me to
live is Christ.” The word “life” is much significant, beloved, as also
the word “death.” There is this life of the body, there is the life of
sin, as he himself elsewhere says, “But if we died to sin, how shall we
any longer live therein?” ([Rom. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.3"></span>.)
It is then possible to live the life of sin. Attend diligently, I
entreat you, lest my labor be vain. There is the life everlasting and
immortal; with eternal life the heavenly; “for our citizenship,” says
he, “is in heaven” ([Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.4"></span>.)
There is the life of the body whereof he speaks, “through him we live
and move and have our being.” ([Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.5"></span>.)
He does not then deny that he lives the natural life, but that of sin,
which all men live. He who desires not the present life, how does he
live it? He who is hastening to another, how does he live this life? He
who despiseth death, how does he live this life? He who desires nothing,
how does he live it? For as one made of adamant, though he were struck a
thousand blows, would never attend to it, no more would Paul. And “I
live,” says he, “but no longer I,” that is, no longer the old man; as
again elsewhere, “Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me out of
the body of this death!” ([Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.6"></span>.)
How too does he live who does nought for the sake of food, nought for
the sake of clothing, nought for any of these present things? Such an
one does not even live the natural life: he who takes thought for none
of the things which sustain life, lives not. We live this life, whose
every action regards it. But he lived not; he busied himself about
nought of the things here. How then lived he? Just as we are accustomed
to say, in common matters, such an one is not with me, when he does
nothing that pertains to me. Again, in like sort, such a man lives not
for me. Elsewhere he shows that he rejects not the natural life: “The
life which I now live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me” ([Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.7"></span>.);
i.e. a certain new life I live, an altered one. And truly all these
things he said to comfort the Philippians. Think not, says he, that I
shall be deprived of this life, for neither whilst alive did I live this
life, but that which Christ willed. For tell me? He who despises money,
luxury, hunger, thirst, dangers, health, safety, does he live this life?
He who has nothing here, and is ofttimes willing to cast life away, if
need be, and clings not to it, does he live this life? By no means. This
I must make clear to you by a kind of example. Let us imagine some one
in great wealth, with many servants, and much gold, and who makes no use
of all these things; is such an one rich for all his wealth? By no
means. Let him see his children dissipating his property, strolling idly
about; let him feel no concern for them; when beaten let him not even be
pained; shall we call him a man of wealth? By no means; although his
wealth is his own. “To me,” he says, “to live is Christ;” if you will
enquire of my life, it is He. “And to die is gain.” Wherefore? Because I
shall more <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv-Page_196"></span>clearly be present with Him; so that my
death is rather a coming to life; they who kill me will work on me no
dreadful thing, they will only send me onward to my proper life, and
free me from that which is not mine. What then, while thou wert here,
wert thou not Christ’s? Yes, and in a high degree.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>[Philip.
1.22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>. “But if to live in the flesh,—if this is
the fruit of my work, then what I shall choose I wot not.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>Lest any should say, If what you say is
life, wherefore hath Christ left you here? “It is,” he says, “the fruit
of my work;” so that it is possible to use to good purpose the present
life, while not living it. Lest you should think that reproach is cast
upon life. For if we gain no advantage here, wherefore do we not make
away with ourselves, nor slay ourselves? By no means, he answers. It is
open to us to profit even here, if we live not this, but another life.
But perchance one will say, does this bear thee fruit? Yes! he answers.
Where are now the heretics? Behold now; “to live in the flesh,” this is
“the fruit of his work.” “That which I now live in the flesh, I live in
faith;” therefore it is “the fruit of my work.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span>“And what I shall choose I know not.”
Marvelous! How great was his philosophy! How hath he both cast out the
desire of the present life, and yet thrown no reproach upon it! For in
that he saith, “to die is gain,” by this he hath cast out the desire,
but in that he saith, “to live in the flesh is the fruit of my work,”
here he shows that the present life also is needful, if we use it as
need is, if we bear fruit; since if it be unfruitful, it is no longer
life. For we despise those trees which bear no fruit, as though they
were dry, and give them up to the fire. Life itself belongs to that
middle class of indifferent things, whilst to live well or ill is in
ourselves. We do not then hate life, for we may live well too. So even
if we use it ill, we do not even then cast the blame on it. And
wherefore? Because not itself, but the free choice of those who use it
ill is to blame. For God hath made thee live, that thou mayest live to
Him. But thou, by living through corruption unto sin, makest thyself
accountable for all blame. What sayest thou, tell me. Thou knowest not
what to choose? Here hath he revealed a great mystery, in that his
departure was in his own power; for where choice is, there have we
power. “What I shall choose,” says he, “I know not.” Is it in thine own
power? Yes, he answers, if I would ask this grace of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>[Philip.
1.23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>. “I am in a strait betwixt the two, having
the desire.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14"></span>See the affection of this blessed one;
in this way too he comforts them, when they see that he is master of his
own choice, and that this is done not by man’s sin, but by the
dispensation of God. Why mourn ye, says he, at my death? It had been far
better to have passed away long since. “For to depart,” he says, “and to
be with Christ, is very far better.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15"></span>[Philip.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>. “Yet to abide in the flesh is more needful
for your sake.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p16"></span>These words were to prepare them for his
death when it came, that they might bear it nobly: this was to teach
true wisdom. “It is good for me to depart and be with Christ,” for even
death is a thing indifferent; since death itself is no ill, but to be
punished after death is an ill. Nor is death a good, but it is good
after our departure “to be with Christ.” What follows death is either
good or ill.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p17"></span>Let us then not simply grieve for the
dead, nor joy for the living simply. But how? Let us grieve for sinners,
not only when dying, but also while living. Let us joy for the just, not
only while living, but also when dead. For those though living are dead,
while these although dead, yet live: those even while here are to be
pitied of all, because they are at enmity with God; the other even when
they have departed Thither, are blessed, because they are gone to
Christ. Sinners, wherever they are, are far from the King. Therefore
they are subjects for tears; while the just, be they here, or be they
there, are with the King; and there, in a higher and nearer degree, not
through an entrance, <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) or by
faith, but “face to face.” ([1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p19"></span>Let us then not make wailings for the
dead simply, but for those who have died in sins. They deserve wailing;
they deserve beating of the breast and tears. For tell me what hope is
there, when our sins accompany us Thither, where there is no putting off
sins? As long as they were here, perchance there was great expectation
that they would change, that they would become better; but when they are
gone to Hades, where nought can be gained from repentance (for it is
written, “In Sheol who shall give thee thanks?”) ([Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>.),
are they not worthy of our lamentation? Let us wail for those who depart
hence in such sort; let us wail, I hinder you not; yet in no unseemly
way, not in tearing our hair, or baring our arms, or lacerating our
face, or wearing black apparel, but only in soul, shedding in quiet the
bitter tear. For we may weep bitterly without all that display. And not
as in sport only. For the laments which many make differ not from sport.
Those public mournings do not proceed from sympathy, but from display,
from emulation and vainglory. Many women do this as of their craft. Weep
bitterly; moan at home, when no one sees you; this is the part of true
sym<span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv-Page_197"></span>pathy; by this you profit yourself too.
For he who laments another in such sort, will be much the more earnest
never to fall into the same sins. Sin henceforth will be an object of
dread to thee. Weep for the unbelievers; weep for those who differ in
nowise from them, those who depart hence without the illumination, <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) without the seal! they indeed deserve
our wailing, they deserve our groans; they are outside the Palace, with
the culprits, with the condemned: for, “Verily I say unto you, Except a
man be born of water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom
of Heaven.” Mourn for those who have died in wealth, and did not from
their wealth think of any solace for their soul, who had power to wash
away their sins and would not. Let us all weep for these in private and
in public, but with propriety, with gravity, not so as to make
exhibitions of ourselves; let us weep for these, not one day, or two,
but all our life. Such tears spring not from senseless passion, but from
true affection. The other sort are of senseless passion. For this cause
they are quickly quenched, whereas if they spring from the fear of God,
they always abide with us. Let us weep for these; let us assist them
according to our power; let us think of some assistance for them, small
though it be, yet still let us assist them. How and in what way? By
praying and entreating others to make prayers for them, by continually
giving to the poor on their behalf. This deed hath some consolation; for
hear the words of God Himself, when He says, “I will defend this city
for Mine own sake, and for My servant David’s sake.” ([2 Kings xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>.)
If the remembrance only of a just man had so great power when deeds are
done for one, how great power will it not have? Not in vain did the
Apostles order <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) that remembrance
should be made of the dead in the dreadful Mysteries. They know that
great gain resulteth to them, great benefit; for when the whole people
stands with uplifted hands, a priestly assembly, and that awful
Sacrifice lies displayed, how shall we not prevail with God by our
entreaties for them? And this we do for those who have departed in
faith, <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) whilst the catechumens
are not thought worthy even of this consolation, but are deprived of all
means of help save one. And what is this? We may give to the poor on
their behalf. This deed in a certain way refreshes them. For God wills
that we should be mutually assisted; else why hath He ordered us to pray
for peace and the good estate of the world? why on behalf of all men?
since in this number are included robbers, violaters of tombs, thieves,
men laden with untold crimes; and yet we pray on behalf of all;
perchance they may turn. As then we pray for those living, who differ
not from the dead, so too we may pray for them. Job offered sacrifice
for his children, and freed them from their sins. “It may be,” said he,
“that they have renounced God in their hearts.” ([Job i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.4"></span>.)
Thus does one provide for one’s children! He said not, as many do
nowadays, I will leave them property; he said not, I will procure them
honor; he said not, I will purchase an office; he said not, I will buy
them land; but, “it may be that they have renounced God in their
hearts.” For what profit is there in those things? None at all, in those
that remain here. I will make the King of all things favorable to them,
and then they will no more want any thing. “The Lord,” saith one, “is my
Shepherd, I shall not want.” ([Ps. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.5"></span>.)
This is great wealth, this is treasure. If we have the fear of God, we
want nothing; if we have not this, though we have royalty itself, we are
the poorest of all men. Nothing is like the man that feareth the Lord.
For “the fear of the Lord,” it is said, “surpasseth all things.”
([Ecclesiasticus 25.11](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p22.6"></span>.) This let us procure; let us do all things
for its sake. If need be that we lay down our lives, if our body must be
mangled, let us not spare them; let us do all, to obtain this fear. For
thus shall we abound above all men; and shall obtain those good things
to come in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_555"></span>[194:556](1130045.htm#fr_555) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span> This may possibly refer especially to
departed Saints. See Hom. vi. on Stat. fin. \[But does it not manifestly
mean the prayers which others now living make for us, as the Philippians
then did for Paul?—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_556"></span>[196:557](1130045.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18"></span> διὰ εἰσόδου Ben. διὰ εἰδους, “through a
figure,” but it should probably be δι᾽ ἐσόπτρου, “in a mirror,” as in
the text ([1 Cor. xiii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>.).

<span id="fn_557"></span>[197:558](1130045.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20"></span> \[A common expression among the Fathers
for baptism.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_558"></span>[197:559](1130045.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p21"></span> \[The reference doubtless is to the
so-called “Apostolical Constitutions,” which direct the observance of
the Eucharist in commemoration of the departed. See Smith’s Dict. Chr.
Antiq., pp. 1436 f.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_559"></span>[197:560](1130045.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22"></span> See Hom. vi. on the Statues, Tr. p.
387, note 6; also on [1 Cor. xv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>.
Hom. xli. \[8\]. On Stat. xxi. 15 Tr. p. 487. St. Chrys. makes Flavian
speak to Theodosius of the prayers for him after death, that might be
won by an act of mercy. Comp. S. Ambr. de ob. Theod. § 37. Tert. de
Corona, c. iii. speaks of oblations for the deceased as a general
tradition in his time. St. Cyprian, Ep. 66<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>, forbids Eucharistic prayer for one who
makes a clergyman his executor. Euseb. Vit. Const. iv. 71, speaks of
Constantine sharing in the prayers of the faithful in connection with
his burial near the relics of the Apostles. He does not directly mention
this as depending on his “Baptism,” but the terms of the Eucharistic
prayer seem to have marked this, and it is implied in the rule given by
St. Cyprian, and the whole principle of that commemoration stated in the
passage cited of St. Chrys. on [1 Cor.
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.3"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians 1:22-26](1130046)
