[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130019)  [Next](1130021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p2"></span>[Eph.
3.8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p3"></span>*“Unto me, who am less than the least
of all saints, was this grace given, to preach unto the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all men see what is the
dispensation of the mystery, which from all ages hath been hid in God,
who created all things:* <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) *to the
intent that now unto the principalities and the powers in the heavenly
places might be made known through the Church the manifold wisdom of
God, according to the eternal purpose, which He purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord.”*

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p5"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>They</span> who go to the physician’s have
not merely to go there and nothing further; they have to learn how to
treat themselves, and to apply remedies. And so with us then who come
here, we must not do this and nothing else, we must learn our lesson,
the surpassing lowliness of Paul. What? when he was about to speak of
the vastness of the grace of God, hear what he saith, “Unto me, who am
less than the least of all saints, was this grace given.” Lowliness
indeed it was even to bewail his former sins, although blotted out, and
to make mention of them, and to hold himself within his true measure as
where he calls himself “a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious;”
([1 Tim. i. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.2"></span>.) yet nothing was <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> <span id="iii.iv.viii-Page_80"></span>equal to this: for
“formerly,” saith he, such was I; and again he calls himself, “one born
out of due time.” ([1 Cor. xv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.3"></span>.) But that after so many great and good
deeds and at that time he should thus humble himself, and call himself
“less than the least of all,” this is indeed great and surpassing
moderation. “To one who am less than the least of all saints;” he saith
not, “than the Apostles.” So that that expression is less strong than
this before us. There his words are, “I am not meet to be called an
Apostle.” ([1 Cor. xv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.4"></span>.) Here he says that he is even “less than
the least of all saints;” “to me,” saith he, “who am less than the least
of all saints was this grace given.” What grace? “To preach unto the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what
is the dispensation of the mystery, which from all ages hath been hid in
God, who created all things, to the intent that now unto the
principalities and the powers in the heavenly places, might be made
known through the Church the manifold wisdom of God.” True, to man it
was not revealed; and art thou enlightening Angels and Archangels and
Principalities and Powers? I am, saith he. For it was “hid in God,” even
“in God who created all things.” And dost thou venture to utter this? I
do, saith he. But whence hath this been made manifest to the Angels? By
the Church. Again he saith, not merely the manifold (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.viii-p5.5"></span>ποικίλος</span>) but
the much-manifold (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.6"></span>πολυποίκιλος</span>) wisdom, that is, “the
multiplied and varied.” What then is this? Did not Angels know it? No,
nothing of it; for if Principalities knew it not, much less could Angels
ever have known it. What then? Did not even Archangels know it? No, nor
even they. But whence were they going to know it? Who was to reveal it?
When we were taught it, then were they also by us. <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) For hear what the Angel saith to
Joseph; “Thou shalt call His Name Jesus, for it is He that shall save
His people from their sins.” ([Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p7"></span>Paul himself was sent to the Gentiles,
the other Apostles to the Circumcision. So that the more marvellous and
astonishing commission was given, saith he, “to me, who am less than the
least.” And this too was of grace, that he that was least should have
the greatest things entrusted to him; that he should be made the herald
of these tidings. For he that is made a herald of the greater tidings,
is in this way great.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p8"></span>“To preach unto the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) of Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p10"></span>If His “riches are unsearchable,” and
that too after his appearing, much more is His essence. If it is still a
mystery, much more was it before it was made known; for a mystery he
calls it on this account, because neither did the Angels know it, nor
was it manifest to any one else.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p11"></span>“And to make all men see,” saith he,
“what is the dispensation of the mystery which from all ages hath been
hid in God, who created all things.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p12"></span>Angels knew only this, that “The
Lord’s portion was His people.” ([Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>.) And again it is said, “The Prince of
Persia withstood me.” ([Dan. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>.) So that it is nothing to be wondered at
that they were ignorant of this; for if they were ignorant of the
circumstances of the return from the Captivity, much more would they be
of these things. For this is the gospel. “It is He that shall save,” it
saith, “His people.” ([Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p12.3"></span>.) Not a word about the Gentiles. But what
concerns the Gentiles the Spirit revealeth. That they were called
indeed, the Angels knew, but that it was to the same privileges as
Israel, yea, even to sit upon the throne of God, this, who would ever
have expected? who would ever have believed?

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p13"></span>“Which hath been hid,” saith he, “in
God.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p14"></span>This “dispensation,” however, he more
clearly unfolds in the Epistle to the Romans. “In God,” he continues,
“who created all things by Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) And he does well to say “by Jesus
Christ;” forasmuch as He who created all things by Him, revealeth also
this by Him; for He hath made nothing without Him; for “without Him,” it
is said, “was not any thing made.” ([John i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p16"></span>In speaking of “principalities” and
“powers,” he speaks both of those above and those beneath.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p17"></span>“According to the eternal purpose.” It
hath been now, he means, brought to pass, but not now decreed, it had
been planned beforehand from the very first. “According to the eternal
purpose which He purposed <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) in
Christ Jesus our Lord.” That is, according to the eternal foreknowledge;
foreknowing the things to come, i.e., he means the ages to come; for He
knew what was to be, and thus decreed it. According to the purpose of
the ages, of those, perhaps, which He hath made by Christ Jesus, <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span id="iii.iv.viii-Page_81"></span>because
it was by Christ that every thing was made.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p19"></span>[Eph.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p19.1"></span>. “In whom we have,” saith he, “boldness,
and access in confidence through our faith in him.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p20"></span>“Have access,” not as prisoners, he
says, nor yet, as persons candidates for pardon, nor as sinners; for,
saith he, we have even “boldness with confidence,” that is, accompanied
with cheerful trust; arising from what source? “through our faith in
Him.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p21"></span>[Eph.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p21.1"></span>. “Wherefore <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) I ask that ye faint not at my
tribulations for you, which are your glory.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p23"></span>How is it “for them?” How is it “their
glory?” It is because God so loved them, as to give even the Son for
them, and to afflict His servants for them: for it was in order that
they might attain so many blessings, that Paul was in prison. Surely
this was from God’s exceeding love towards them: it is what God also
saith concerning the Prophets, “I have slain them by the words of my
mouth.” ([Hos. vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>.) But how was it that they fainted, when
another was afflicted? He means, they were troubled, were distressed.
This also he says when writing to the Thessalonians, “that no man be
moved by these afflictions.” ([1 Thes. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p23.2"></span>.) For not only ought we not to grieve,
but we ought even to rejoice. If ye find consolation in the forewarning,
we tell you beforehand that here we have tribulation. And why pray?
Because thus hath the Lord ordered.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p24"></span>[Eph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>. “For this cause <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) I bow my knees unto the Father from
whom every family in heaven and on earth is named.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p26"></span>He here shows the spirit of his prayer
for them. He does not say simply, “I pray,” but manifests the
supplication to be heartfelt, by the “bowing of the knees.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p27"></span>“From whom every family.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p28"></span>That is, no longer, he means,
reckoned, according to the number of Angels, but according to Him who
hath created the tribes both in heaven above and in earth beneath, not
as the Jewish.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p29"></span>[Eph.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p29.1"></span>. “That He would grant you according to
the riches of His glory that ye may be strengthened with power through
His Spirit in the inward man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts
through faith.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p30"></span>Mark with what insatiable earnestness
he invokes these blessings upon them, that they may not be tossed about.
But how shall this be effected? By the “Holy Spirit in your inward man,
that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith.” How again shall
this be?

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p31"></span>[Eph.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>. “To the end that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, may be strong to apprehend with all the saints, what
is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth, <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) and to know the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p33"></span>Thus is his prayer now again, the very
same as when he began. For what were his words in the beginning? “That
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory may give unto you
a Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him; having the
eyes of your heart enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of His
calling, what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints;
and what the exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who believe.”
And now again he says the same. “That ye may be strong to apprehend with
all the saints what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth;”
i.e., to know perfectly the mystery which hath been providentially
ordered in our behalf: <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) “and the
breadth, and length, and height, and depth;” that is, too, the immensity
of the love of God, and how it extends every where. And he outlines it
by the visible dimensions of solid bodies, pointing as it were to a man.
He comprehends the upper and under and sides. I have thus spoken indeed,
he would say, yet is it not for any words of mine to teach you these
things; that must be the work of the Holy Spirit. “By His might,” saith
he, is it that ye must be “strengthened” against the trials that await
you, and in order to remain unshaken; so that there is no other way to
be strengthened but by the Holy Ghost, both on account of trials and
carnal reasonings.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p35"></span>But how doth Christ dwell in the
hearts? Hear what Christ Himself saith, “I and my Father will come unto
him, and make our abode with him.” ([John xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p35.1"></span>.) He dwelleth in those hearts that are
faithful, in those that are “rooted” in His love, those that remain firm
and unshaken.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p36"></span>“That ye may be” thoroughly “strong,”
saith he; so that there is great strength needed.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p37"></span> <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) “That ye may be filled unto all the
fulness of God.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p39"></span><span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-Page_82"></span>What he means is this. Although the love
of Christ lies above the reach of all human knowledge, yet shall ye know
it, if ye shall have Christ dwelling in you, yea, not only shall know
from Him this, but shall even “be filled unto all the fulness of God;”
meaning by the “fulness of God,” either the knowledge how God is
worshipped in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or else urging
them thus to use every effort, in order to be filled with all virtue, of
which God is full.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p40"></span>[Eph.
3.20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p40.1"></span>. “Now unto Him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the
power that worketh in us.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p41"></span>That God hath done “abundantly above
all that we ask or think,” is evident from what the Apostle himself hath
written. For I indeed, saith he, pray, but He of Himself, even without
any prayer of mine, will do works greater than all we ask, not simply
“greater,” nor “abundantly greater,” but “exceeding abundantly.” And
this is evident from “the power, that worketh in us:” for neither did we
ever ask these things, nor did we expect them.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p42"></span>[Eph.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>. “Unto Him be the glory,” he concludes,
“in the Church and in Christ Jesus, unto all generations forever and
ever. Amen.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p43"></span>Well does he close the discourse with
prayer and doxology; for right were it that He, who hath bestowed upon
us such vast gifts, should be glorified and blessed, so that this is
even a proper part of our amazement at His mercies, to give glory for
the things advanced to us at God’s hands through Jesus Christ.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p44"></span>“The glory in the Church.” Well might
he say this, forasmuch as the Church alone can last on to eternity.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p45"></span>It seems necessary to state what are
meant by “families.” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>πατριαί</span>) Here on earth, indeed
there are “families” that is races sprung from one parent stock; but in
heaven how can this be, where none is born of another? Surely then, by
“families,” <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) he means either the
assemblies and orders of heavenly beings; as also we find it written in
Scripture, “the family of Amattari:” ([1 Sam. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p46.5"></span>. See Septuagint.) or else that it is from
Him from whom earthly fathers have their name of father.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p47"></span>However, he does not ask the whole of
God, but demands of them also faith and love, and not simply love, but
love “rooted and grounded,” so that neither any blasts can shake it, nor
any thing else overturn it. He had said, that “tribulations” are
“glory,” and if mine are so to you, he would say, much more will your
own be: so that to be afflicted is no token of men being forsaken, for
He who hath wrought so great things for us, never would do this.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p48"></span>Again, if in order to understand the
love of God, it was necessary for Paul to pray, and there was need of
the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, who by following mere reasonings
shall understand the nature of Christ? And why is it a difficult thing
to learn that God loveth us? Beloved, it is extremely difficult. For
some know not even this; wherefore, they even say, numberless evils come
to be in the world; and others know not the extent of this love. Nor,
indeed, is Paul seeking to know its extent, nor with any view to measure
it; for how could he? but only to understand this, that it is
transcendent, and great. And this very thing, he says, he is able to
show, even from the knowledge which hath been vouchsafed to us.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p49"></span>However, what is higher than the being
“strengthened with might,” in order to have Christ within? Vast are the
things we ask, saith he, yet is He able to do above even them, so that
not only doth He love us, but doth so intensely. Be it our care
therefore, beloved, to understand the love of God. A great thing indeed
is this; nothing is so beneficial to us, nothing so deeply touches us:
more availing this to convince our souls than the fear of hell itself.
Whence then shall we understand it? Both from the sources now mentioned,
and from the things which happen every day. For from what motive have
these things been done for us? from what necessity on His part? None
whatever. Over and over again he lays down love as the cause. But the
highest degree of love is that where men receive a benefit, without any
prior service on their part to call for it.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p50"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p50.1"></span>Moral.</span> And let us then be followers
of Him; let us do good to our enemies, to them that hate us, let us draw
near to those who turn their backs upon us. This renders us like unto
God. “For if ye love them that love you,” saith Christ, “what reward
have ye?” “Do not even the Gentiles the same.” ([Matt. v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p50.2"></span>.) But what is a sure proof of love? To
love him <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-Page_83"></span>that hates thee. I wish to give you some
example, (pardon me,) and since I find it not among them that are
spiritual, I shall quote an instance from them that are without. See ye
not those lovers? How many insults are wreaked upon them by their
mistresses, how many artifices practised, how many punishments
inflicted: yet they are enchained to them, they burn for them, and love
them better than their own souls, passing whole nights before their
thresholds. From them let us take our example, not indeed to love such
as those,—women, I mean, that are harlots; no, but thus to love our
enemies. For tell me, do not harlots treat their lovers with greater
insolence than all the enemies in the world, and squander away their
substance, and cast insult in their face, and impose upon them more
servile tasks than upon their own menials? And yet still they desist
not, though no one hath so great an enemy in any one, as the lover in
his mistress. Yea, this beloved one disdains, and reviles, and
oftentimes maltreats him, and the more she is loved, the more she scorns
him. And what can be more brutal than a spirit like this? Yet
notwithstanding he loves her still.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p51"></span>But possibly we shall find love like
this in spiritual characters also, not in those of our day, (for it has
“waxed cold,”) ([Matt. xxiv. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p51.1"></span>.) but in those great and glorious men of
old. Moses, the blessed Moses, surpassed even those that love with human
passion. How, and in what way? First, he gave up the court, and the
luxury, and the retinue, and the glory attending it, and chose rather to
be with the Israelites. Yet is this not only what no one else would ever
have done, but would have even been ashamed, were another to have
discovered him, of being found to be a kinsman of men, who were slaves
and not only slaves, but were looked upon as even execrable. Yet was he
not only not ashamed of his kindred, but with all his spirit defended
them, and threw himself into dangers for their sake. ([Acts. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p51.2"></span>.) How? Seeing, it is said, one doing an
injury to one of them, he defended him that suffered the injury, and
slew him that inflicted it. But this is not as yet for the sake of
enemies. Great indeed is this act of itself, but not so great as what
comes afterwards. The next day, then, he saw the same thing taking
place, and when he saw him whom he had defended <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) doing his neighbor wrong, he
admonished him to desist from his wrong-doing. But he said, with great
ingratitude, “Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?” ([Acts. vii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p52.3"></span>.) Who would not have taken fire at these
words? Had then the former act been that of passion and frenzy, then
would he have smitten and killed this man also; for surely he on whose
behalf it was done, never would have informed against him. But because
they were brethren, it is said, he spoke thus. When he \[the Hebrew\]
was being wronged, he uttered no such word “Who made thee a ruler and a
judge over us?” “Wherefore saidst thou not this yesterday?” Moses would
say, “Thy injustice, and thy cruelty, these make me a ruler and a
judge.”

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p53"></span>But now, mark, how that some, in fact,
say as much even to God Himself. Whenever they are wronged indeed, they
would have Him a God of vengeance, and complain of His long suffering;
but when themselves do wrong, not for a moment.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p54"></span>However, what could be more bitter
than words like these? And yet notwithstanding, after this, when he was
sent to that ungrateful, to that thankless race, he went, and shrunk not
back. Yea, and after those miracles, and after the wonders wrought by
his hand, oftentimes they sought to stone him to death and he escaped
out of their hands. They kept murmuring too incessantly, and yet still,
notwithstanding, so passionately did he love them, as to say unto God,
when they committed that heinous sin, “Yet now if Thou wilt forgive,
forgive their sin; and if not, blot even me also out of the book which
Thou hast written.” ([Ex. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p54.1"></span>.) Fain would I perish, saith he, with
them, rather than without them be saved. Here, verily, is love even to
madness, verily, unbounded love. What sayest thou, Moses? Art thou
regardless of Heaven? I am, saith he, for I love those who have wronged
me. Prayest thou to be blotted out? Yea, saith he, what can I do, for it
is love? And what again after these things? Hear what the Scripture
saith elsewhere; “And it went ill with Moses for their sakes.” ([Ps.
cvi. 32](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p54.2"></span>.) How often did they wax wanton? How
often did they reject both himself and his brother? How often did they
seek to return back to Egypt? and yet after all these things did he
burn, yea, was beside himself with love for them, and was ready to
suffer for their sakes.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p55"></span>Thus ought a man to love his enemies;
by lamentation, by unwearied endurance, by doing everything, by showing
all favor, to aim at their salvation.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p56"></span>And what again, tell me, did Paul? did
he not ask even to be accursed in their stead? ([Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.1"></span>.) But the great pattern we must of
necessity derive from the Lord, for thus doth He also Himself, where he
saith, “For He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and the good,” ([Matt.
v. 45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.2"></span>.) adducing the example from His Father;
but we from Christ Himself. He came unto <span id="page_84">p. 84</span>
<span id="iii.iv.viii-Page_84"></span>them, in His Incarnation, I mean,
He became a servant for their sakes, “He humbled Himself, He emptied
Himself, He took the form of a servant.” ([Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.3"></span>.) And when He came unto them, He went not
Himself aside “into any way of the Gentiles,” ([Matt. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.4"></span>.) and gave the same charge to His
disciples, and not only so, but “He went about healing all manner of
disease, and all manner of sickness.” ([Matt. iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.5"></span>.) And what then? All the rest indeed were
astonished, and marvelled, and said, “Whence, then, hath this man all
these things?” ([Matt. xiii. 56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.6"></span>.) But these, the objects of His
beneficence, these said, “He hath a devil,” ([John x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.7"></span>.) and “blasphemeth,” ([John x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.8"></span>.) and “is mad,” and is a “deceiver,”
([John 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012), [Matt.
27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.9"></span>.) Did he therefore cast them away? No, in
no wise, but when He heard these sayings, He even yet more signally
bestowed His benefits upon them, and went straightway to them that were
about to crucify Him, to the intent that He might but only save them.
And after He was crucified, what were His words? “Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do.” ([Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p56.10"></span>.) Both cruelly treated before this, and
cruelly treated after this, even to the very latest breath, for them He
did every thing, in their behalf He prayed. Yea, and after the Cross
itself, what did He not do for their sakes? Did He not send Apostles?
Did He not work miracles? Did He not shake the whole world?

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p57"></span>Thus is it we ought to love our
enemies, thus to imitate Christ. Thus did Paul. Stoned, suffering
unnumbered cruelties, yet did he all things for their good. Hear his own
words. “My heart’s desire and my supplication to God is for them that
they may be saved.” ([Rom. 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p57.1"></span>.) And again; “For I bear them witness
that they have a zeal for God.” And again; “If thou, being a wild olive
tree wast grafted in, how much more shall these be grafted into their
own olive tree?” ([Rom. xi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p57.2"></span>.) How tender, thinkest thou, must be the
affection from which these expressions proceed, how vast the
benevolence? it is impossible to express it, impossible.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p58"></span>Thus is it we ought to love our
enemies. This is to love God, Who hath enjoined it, Who hath given it as
His law. To imitate Him is to love our enemy. Consider it is not thine
enemy thou art benefiting, but thyself; thou art not loving him, but art
obeying God. Knowing therefore these things, let us confirm our love one
to another, that we may perform this duty perfectly, and attain those
good things that are promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the
Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, and honor, now,
and for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[79:248](1130020.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p4"></span> \[The words ‘through Jesus Christ’
(διὰ ᾽Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ) which are here found in Chrysostom’s text have
gotten into the *textus receptus* from the few late and mostly cursive
<span class="c16"><span id="iii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. which
present the Byzantine or Constantinopolitan text and from which the
*textus receptus* was made. Chrysostom is the chief witness of this
Byzantine text. Schaff, *Companion to Greek Testament*, pp. 205–6. The
words are omitted by Aleph A B C D, most Versions and Editors.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_248"></span>[80:249](1130020.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p6"></span> S. Chrysostom says the same, *Orat.*
iv.*in Anom.* 2. and *Hom*. i. *in Joan*. 2. (ed. Ben.) vid. also
Theodoret *in Ps*. 23. 7, 8. S. Greg. Nyss. *Hom*. 8 *in Cant*. p. 596.
S. Jerome *in loc*. \[Comp. [1 Pet. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>,
which things angels desire to look into.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_249"></span>[80:250](1130020.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p9"></span> \[“The whole divine fulness of
salvation, of which Christ is the possessor and bestower, and which is
of such a nature that the human intellect cannot explore it so as to
form an adequate conception of it. This does not hinder the proclamation
which, on the contrary, is rendered possible by
revelation.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_250"></span>[80:251](1130020.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p15"></span> \[See note on these words
above.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_251"></span>[80:252](1130020.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p18"></span> \[This verb, ἐποίησεν, has been
applied by many to the ‘forming’ of the purpose. (So Rev. Ver.) But it
seems best to refer it to the ‘execution’ of it, regarded as an
accomplished fact. Riddle in *Popular Commentary* and in *Lange*. Braune
in *Lange*. Meyer, Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_252"></span>[81:253](1130020.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p22"></span> \[Wherefore, “in view of my position
as minister of such a gospel.”—Riddle.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_253"></span>[81:254](1130020.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p25"></span> \[This τούτου χάριν is a resumption
of the first verse of the chapter which was left unfinished by reason of
the digression concerning his office as apostle of the Gentiles, which
forms a section by itself. ([Eph.
3.2-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>.)—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_254"></span>[81:255](1130020.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p32"></span> \[“A sensuous illustration of the
idea; ‘how great in every relation.’”—Meyer. G.A.\]

<span id="fn_255"></span>[81:256](1130020.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p34"></span> \[“Of what are these dimensions
predicated? Not of the work of redemption as Chrysostom (τὸ μυστήριον τὸ
ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν οἰκονομηθεν) because after a new portion of the discourse is
begun at [Eph. 3.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p34.1"></span>, the μυστὴριον is not again mentioned;
nor of the love of God to us, as Chrysostom again, for the ἑν ἀγάπῃ
preceding does not refer to God’s love; but of the love of Christ to men
as shown in [Eph. 3.19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p34.2"></span>.”—Meyer. So Ellicott, Braune,
Riddle.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_256"></span>[81:257](1130020.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p38"></span> \[This entire paragraph is omitted
from Field’s text. But as it is supported by several excellent
authorities, as it is in Chrysostom’s style and as it contains a very
noble thought, we have ventured to retain it. “Field seems to rely on
the probability that the shorter text is the original. One of his main
authorities seems to be a Catena which would naturally abridge the
portions extracted especially in a writer so given to amplifications as
Chrysostom.” We have in the main followed Field’s text in spite of this
probability, but in exceptional cases, like the present, we have
ventured to demur.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_257"></span>[82:258](1130020.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p46"></span> This text has various
interpretations. S. Athanasius uses it to imply that God, as Father of
the Son, is the only true Father, and that all created paternity is a
shadow of the true. *Orat. in Arian*. i. 23. S. Jerome says, “As He who
alone is good, ([Luke xviii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p46.1"></span>.) makes men good, and who is alone
immortal, ([1 Tim. vi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p46.2"></span>.) bestows immortality, and who alone is
true ([Rom. iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p46.3"></span>.) imparts the name of truth; so too the
only Father, in that He is Creator of all, and the cause of substance to
all, gives to the rest to be called Father.” *in loc*. He considers that
the Angels are said in the text to share His paternity, in a spiritual
sense, as Christ says to the sick man, “Son,” and to His disciples,
“Little children.” Theodoret seems to say the same. *in loc*. v. also
Hooker, E. P. V. liv. 2. \[“The reference must be to those larger
classes and communities into which, as we may also infer from other
passages ([Eph. 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021), [Col.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p46.4"></span>.) the celestial hosts appear to be
divided; and to the races and tribes of men every one of which owes the
very title of πατριά, by which it is defined to the great πατήρ of all
the πατριαί both of angels and men.”—Ellicott. “The Apostle seems
regarding God as the Father of us His adopted children in Christ, to go
forth into the fact that He in this relation to us is the great original
and prototype of the paternal relation, wherever found.” Alford in
Riddle in *Pop. Com*.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_258"></span>[83:259](1130020.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p52"></span> \[It does not appear from the account
in [Exodus ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p52.1"></span> ff. or from that in [Acts vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv.viii-p52.2"></span>
ff. that the Hebrew who did his brother wrong was the same that Moses
had defended on the preceeding day, as Chrysostom here takes for
granted.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 4:1,2](1130021)
