[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130015)  [Next](1130017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>[Eph.
1.15-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>“For this cause I also, having heard of
the faith in the Lord Jesus, which is among you, and which ye show
toward all the saints, cease not to give thanks for you, making mention
of you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of glory, may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Him: having the eyes of your heart enlightened; that ye may
know what is the hope of His calling, what the riches of the glory of
His inheritance in the saints, and what the exceeding greatness of His
power to us-ward who believe, according to that working of the strength
of His might, which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the
dead.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>Never</span> was anything equal to the
yearnings of the Apostle, never anything like the sympathy and the
affectionateness of the blessed Paul, who made his every prayer in
behalf of whole cities and peoples, and writes the same to all, <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) “I thank my God for you, making
mention of you in my prayers.” Think how many he had in his mind, whom
it were a labor so much as to remember; how many he made mention of in
his prayers, giving thanks to God for them all as though he himself had
received the greatest blessing.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>“Wherefore,” he says, i.e., because of
what is to come, <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) because of the
good things that are laid up in store for them who rightly believe and
live. And it is meet then to give thanks to God both for all the things
which mankind have received at His hands, both heretofore and hereafter;
and meet to give Him thanks also for the faith of them that believe.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>“Having heard,” saith he, “of the faith
in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and which ye show <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) toward all the saints.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>He on all occasions knits together and
combines faith and love, a glorious pair; nor does he mention the saints
of that country only, but all.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p11"></span><span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_60"></span>“I cease not to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p12"></span>What is thy prayer, and what thy
entreaty? It is

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p13"></span>“That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation.” <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) Two things he
requires them to understand, as it is their duty to understand them; to
what blessings they are called, and how they have been released from
their former state. He says, however, himself, that these points are
three. How then are they three? In order that we may understand touching
the things to come; for from the good things laid up for us, we shall
know His ineffable and surpassing riches, and from understanding who we
were, and how we believed, we shall know His power and sovereignty, in
turning again to Himself those who had been so long time estranged from
Him, “For the weakness of God is stronger than men.” ([1 Cor. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>.)
Inasmuch as it is by the self-same power by which He raised Christ from
the dead, that He hath also drawn us to Himself. Nor is that power
limited to the resurrection, but far exceeds it.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>[Eph.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>.
“And made Him to sit at His right hand, in the Heavenly places, far
above all rule and authority, and power and dominion, and every name
that is named: and He put all things in subjection under His feet, and
gave Him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is His body,
the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p16"></span>Vast indeed are the mysteries and
secrets of which He hath made us partakers. And these it is not possible
for us to understand otherwise than by being partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and by receiving abundant grace. And it is for this reason that
Paul prays. “The Father of glory,” that is, He that hath given us vast
blessings, for he constantly addresses Him according to the subject he
is upon, as, for instance, when he says, “The Father of mercies and God
of all comfort.” ([2 Cor. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.) And, again, the Prophet says, “The Lord
is my strength and my might.” ([Ps. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p17"></span>“The Father of glory.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p18"></span>He has no name by which he may represent
these things, and on all occasions calls them “glory,” which is in fact,
with us, the name and appellation of every kind of magnificence. Mark,
he says, the Father of glory; (cf. [Acts vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>.)
but of Christ the God. <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) What
then? Is the Son inferior to the glory? No, there is no one, not even a
maniac, would say so.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p20"></span>“May give unto you,”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p21"></span>That is, may raise and wing your
understanding, for it is not possible otherwise to understand these
things. “For the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God; for they are foolishness unto him.” ([1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>.)
So then, there is need of spiritual “wisdom,” that we may perceive
things spiritual, that we may see things hidden. That Spirit “revealeth”
all things. He is going to set forth the mysteries of God. Now the
knowledge of the mysteries of God, the Spirit alone comprehends, who
also searcheth the deep things of Him. It is not said, “that Angel, or
Archangel, or any other created power, may give,” that is, confer upon
you a spiritual gift. And if this be of revelation, then is the
discovery of arguments consequently vain. For he that hath learned God,
and knoweth God, shall no longer dispute concerning any thing. He will
not say, This is impossible, and That is possible, and How did the other
thing come to pass? If we learn God, as we ought to know Him; if we
learn God from Him from whom we ought to learn Him, that is from the
Spirit Himself; then shall we no longer dispute concerning any thing.
And hence it is that he says,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p22"></span>“Having the eyes of your heart
enlightened in the knowledge of Him.” <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p24"></span>He that hath learned what God is, will
have no misgiving about His promises, and disbelief about what hath been
already brought to pass. He prays, then, that there may be given them “a
spirit of wisdom and revelation.” Yet still he also establishes it, as
far as he can himself, by arguments, and from “already” existing facts.
For, whereas he was about to mention some things which had already come
to pass, and others which had not as yet happened; he makes those which
have been brought to pass, a pledge of those which have not: in some
such way, I mean, as this,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p25"></span>“That ye may know,” saith he, “what is
the hope of His calling.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p26"></span>It is as yet, he means, hidden, but not
so to the faithful.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p27"></span>“And,” again, “what is the riches of the
glory of His inheritance in the saints.” <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p29"></span><span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_61"></span>This too is as yet hidden.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30"></span>But what is clear? that through His
power we have believed that He hath raised Christ. For to persuade
souls, is a thing far more miraculous than to raise a dead body. I will
endeavor to make this clear. Hearken then. Christ said to the dead,
“Lazarus, come forth,” ([John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30.1"></span>.)
and straightway he obeyed. Peter said, “Tabitha, arise,” ([Acts ix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30.2"></span>.)
and she did not refuse. He Himself shall speak the word at the last day,
and all shall rise, and that so quickly, that “they which are yet alive,
shall in no wise precede them that are fallen asleep,” ([1 Thess. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30.3"></span>.)
and all shall come to pass, all run together “in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye.” ([1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30.4"></span>.)
But in the matter of believing, it is not thus, but how is it? Hearken
then to Him again, how He saith, “How often would I have gathered thy
children together, and ye would not.” ([Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30.5"></span>.)
You perceive that this last is the more difficult. Accordingly, it is
upon this that he builds up the whole argument; because by human
calculations it is far more difficult to influence the choice, than to
work upon nature. And the reason is this, it is because He would thus
have us become good of our own will. Thus with good reason does he
say, <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p32"></span>“The exceeding greatness of His power to
us-ward who believe.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p33"></span>Yes, when Prophets had availed nothing,
nor Angels, nor Archangels, when the whole creation, both visible and
invisible, had failed, (the visible lying before us, and without any
power to guide us, and much also which is invisible,) then He ordered
His own coming, to show us that it was a matter which required Divine
power.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p34"></span>“The riches of the glory,”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p35"></span>That is, the unutterable glory; for what
language shall be adequate to express that glory of which the saints
shall then be partakers? None. But verily there is need of grace in
order that the understanding may perceive it, and admit even so much as
at least one little ray. Some things indeed they knew even before; now
he was desirous that they should learn more, and know it more clearly.
Seest thou how great things He hath wrought? He hath raised up Christ.
Is this a small thing? But look again. He hath set Him at His right
hand. And shall any language then be able to represent this? Him that is
of the earth, more mute than the fishes, and made the sport of devils,
He hath in a moment raised up on high. Truly this is indeed the
“exceeding greatness of His power.” And behold, whither He hath raised
Him.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p36"></span>“In the heavenly places;”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p37"></span>He hath made Him far above all created
nature, far above all rule and authority.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p38"></span>“Far above all rule,” he saith.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p39"></span>Need then indeed is there of the Spirit,
of an understanding wise in the knowledge of Him. Need then is there
indeed of revelation. Reflect, how vast is the distance between the
nature of man and of God. Yet from this vile estate hath He exalted Him
to that high dignity. Nor does He mount by degrees, first one step, then
another, then a third. Amazing! He does not simply say, “above,” but,
“far above;” for God is above those powers which are above. And thither
then hath He raised Him, Him that is one of us, brought Him from the
lowest point to the supremest sovereignty, to that beyond which there is
no other honor. Above “all” principality, he says, not, i.e., over one
and not over another, but over all,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p40"></span>“Rule and authority and power, and
dominion, and every name that is named.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p41"></span>Whatever there be in Heaven, He has
become above all. And this is said of Him that was raised from the dead
which is worthy of our admiration; for of God the Word, it cannot
possibly be, because what insects are in comparison of man, this the
whole creation is in comparison of God. If all mankind are to be counted
as spittle and were counted as the turn of a balance, consider the
invisible powers as insects. But of Him that was one of us, this is
great and surprising indeed. For He raised Him up from the very lowest
parts of the earth. If all the nations are as a drop, how small a
portion then of that drop is a single man! Yet Him hath He made higher
than all things, “not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come.” Therefore powers there are whose names are to us unintelligible,
and unknown.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p42"></span>“And He put all things in subjection
under His feet.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p43"></span>Not simply so set Him above them as to
be honored above them, nor by way of comparison with them, but so that
He should sit over them as His slaves. Amazing! Awful indeed are these
things; every created power hath been made the slave of man by reason of
God the Word dwelling in Him. <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)
For it is possible for a man to be above others, without having others
in subjection, but only as preferred before them. But here it is not so.
No, “He put all things in subjection under His feet.” And not simply put
them in subjection, but in the most abject <span id="page_62">p.
62</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv-Page_62"></span>subjection, that below
which there can be none. Therefore he adds, “under His feet.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p45"></span>“And gave Him to be Head over all things
to the Church.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p46"></span>Amazing again, whither hath He raised
the Church? as though he were lifting it up by some engine, he hath
raised it up to a vast height, and set it on yonder throne; for where
the Head is, there is the body also. There is no interval to separate
between the Head and the body; for were there a separation, then were it
no longer a body, then were it no longer a head. “Over all things,” he
says. What is meant by “over all things?” He hath suffered neither Angel
nor Archangel nor any other being to be above Him. But not only in this
way hath He honored us, in exalting that which is of ourselves, but also
in that He hath prepared the whole race in common to follow Him, to
cling to Him, to accompany His train.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p47"></span>“Which is His body.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p48"></span>In order then that when you hear of the
Head you may not conceive the notion of supremacy only, but also of
consolidation, and that you may behold Him not as supreme Ruler only,
but as Head of a body.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p49"></span>“The fulness of Him that filleth all in
all” he says.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p50"></span>As though this were not sufficient to
show the close connection and relationship, what does he add? “The
fullness of Christ is the Church.” And rightly, for the complement of
the head is the body, and the complement of the body is the head. Mark
what great arrangement Paul observes, how he spares not a single word,
that he may represent the glory of God. “The, complement,” he says,
i.e., the head is, as it were, filled up by the body, because the body
is composed and made up of all its several parts, and he introduces Him
as having need of each single one and not only of all in common and
together; for unless we be many, and one be the hand, and another the
foot, and another some other member, the whole body is not filled up. It
is by all then that His body is filled up. Then is the head filled up,
then is the body rendered perfect, when we are all knit together and
united. Perceivest thou then the “riches of the glory of His
inheritance? the exceeding greatness of His power towards them that
believe? the hope of your calling?”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p51"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.1"></span>Moral</span>. Let us reverence our Head, let
us reflect of what a Head we are the body,—a Head, to whom all things
are put in subjection. According to this representation we ought to be
better, yea, than the very angels, and greater than the Archangels, in
that we have been honored above them all. God “took not hold of Angels,”
as he says in writing to the Hebrews, “but He took hold of the seed of
Abraham.” ([Heb. ii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.2"></span>.) He took hold of neither principality nor
power, nor dominion, nor any other authority, but He took up our nature,
and made it to sit on His right hand. And why do I say, hath made it
sit? He hath made it His garment, <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) and not only so, but hath put all
things in subjection under His feet. How many sorts of death supposest
thou? How many souls? ten thousand? yea, and ten thousand times told,
but nothing equal to it wilt thou mention. Two things He hath done, the
greatest things. He hath both Himself descended to the lowest depth of
humiliation, and hath raised up man to the height of exaltation. He
saved him by His blood. He spoke of the former first, how that He so
greatly humbled Himself. He speaks now of what is stronger than that—a
great thing, the crown of all. Surely, even had we been counted worthy
of nothing, it were enough. Or, had we been counted worthy even of this
honor, it were enough, without the slaying of the Son. But where there
are the two, what power of language must it not transcend and surpass?
The very resurrection is not great, when I reflect on these things. It
is of Him that he says, “The God of our Lord Jesus Christ,” not of God
the Word.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p53"></span>Let us feel awed at the closeness of our
relation, let us dread lest any one should be cut off from this body,
lest any one should fall from it, lest any one should appear unworthy of
it. If any one were to place a diadem about our head, a crown of gold,
should we not do every thing that we might seem worthy of the lifeless
jewels? But now it is not a diadem that is about our head, but, what is
far greater, Christ is made our very Head, and yet we pay no regard to
it. Yet Angels reverence that Head, and Archangels, and all those powers
above. And shall we, which are His body, be awed neither on the one
account nor the other? And what then shall be our hope of salvation?
Conceive to yourself the royal throne, conceive the excess of the honor.
This, at least if we chose, might more avail to startle us, yea, even
than hell itself. For, even though hell were not, that we having been
honored with such an honor, should be found base and unworthy of it,
what punishment, what vengeance must not this carry with it? Think near
whom thy Head is seated, (this single consideration is amply sufficient
for any purpose whatever,) on whose right hand He is placed, far above
all principality, and power, and might. Yet is the body of this Head
trampled on by the very devils. <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_63"></span>Nay, God forbid it should be thus; for
were it thus, such a body could be His body no longer. Thy own head the
more respectable of thy servants reverence, and dost thou subject thy
body to be the sport of them that insult it? How sore punishment then
shalt thou not deserve? If a man should bind the feet of the emperor
with bonds and fetters, will he not be liable to the extremity of
punishment? Dost thou expose the whole body to fierce monsters, and not
shudder?

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p54"></span>However, since our discourse is
concerning the Lord’s body, come, and let us turn our thoughts to it,
even that which was crucified, which was nailed, which is
sacrificed. <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) If thou art the body
of Christ, bear the Cross, for He bore it: bear spitting, bear
buffetings, bear nails. Such was that Body; that Body “did no sin,
neither was guile found in His mouth.” ([1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p55.1"></span>.)
His hands did every thing for the benefit of them that needed, His mouth
uttered not a word of those things which are not convenient. He heard
them say, “Thou hast a devil,” and He answered nothing.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p56"></span>Further, our discourse is concerning
this Body, and as many of us as partake of that Body and taste of that
Blood, are partaking of that which is in no wise different from that
Body, nor separate. Consider that we taste of that Body that sitteth
above, that is adored by Angels, that is next to the Power that is
incorruptible. Alas! how many ways to salvation are open to us! He hath
made us His own body, He hath imparted to us His own body, and yet not
one of these things turns us away from what is evil. Oh the darkness,
the depth of the abyss, the apathy! “Set your mind,” saith he, “on the
things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of
God.” ([Col. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p56.1"></span>.) And after all this, some set their
affections upon money, or licentiousness, others are carried captive by
their passions!

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p57"></span>Do ye not see, that even in our own
body, when any part is superfluous and useless, it is cut off, is cut
away? It is of no use that it has belonged to the body, when it is
mutilated, when it is mortified, when it is decayed, when it is
detrimental to the rest. Let us not then be too confident, because we
have been once made members of this body. If this body of ours, though
but a natural body, nevertheless suffers amputation, what dreadful evil
shall it not undergo, if the moral principle should fail? When the body
partakes not of this natural food, when the pores are stopped up, then
it mortifies; when the ducts are closed, then it is palsied. So is it
with us also, when we stop our ears, our soul becomes palsied; when we
partake not of the spiritual food, when, instead of corrupt bodily
humors, evil dispositions impair us, all these things engender disease,
dangerous disease, disease that wastes. And then there will be need of
that fire, there will be need of that cutting asunder. For Christ cannot
endure that we should enter into the bride-chamber with such a body as
this. If He led away, and cast out the man that was clothed in filthy
garments, what will He not do unto the man who attaches filth to the
body; how will He not dispose of him?

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p58"></span>I observe many partaking of Christ’s
Body lightly and just as it happens, and rather from custom and form,
than consideration and understanding. When, saith a man, the holy season
of Lent sets in, whatever a man may be, he partakes of the mysteries,
or, when the day of the Lord’s Epiphany <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) comes. And yet it is not the Epiphany,
nor is it Lent, that makes a fit time for approaching, but it is
sincerity and purity of soul. With this, approach at all times; without
it, never. “For as often,” ([1 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p59.1"></span>.)
saith he, “as ye do this, ye proclaim the Lord’s death,” i.e., “ye make
a remembrance of the salvation that has been wrought for you, and of the
benefits which I have bestowed.” Consider those who partook of the
sacrifices under the old Covenant, how great abstinence did they
practise? How did they not conduct themselves? What did they not
perform? They were always purifying themselves. And dost thou, when thou
drawest nigh to a sacrifice, at which the very Angels tremble, dost thou
measure the matter by the revolutions of seasons? and how shalt thou
present thyself before the judgment-seat of Christ, thou who presumest
upon His body with polluted hands and lips? Thou wouldest not presume to
kiss a king with an unclean mouth, and the King of heaven dost thou kiss
with an unclean soul? It is an outrage. Tell me, wouldest thou choose to
come to the Sacrifice with unwashen hands? No, I suppose, not. But thou
wouldest rather choose not to come at all, than come with soiled hands.
And then, thus scrupulous as thou art in this little matter, dost thou
come with soiled soul, and thus dare to touch it? And yet the hands hold
it but for a time, whereas into the soul it is dissolved entirely. What,
do ye not see the holy vessels so thoroughly cleansed all over, so
resplendent? Our souls ought to be purer than they, more holy, more
brilliant. And why so? Because those vessels are made so for our sakes.
They partake not of Him that is in them, they perceive Him not. But we
do;—<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_64"></span>yes, verily. Now then, thou wouldest not
choose to make use of a soiled vessel, and dost thou approach with a
soiled soul? Observe the vast inconsistency of the thing. At the other
times ye come not, no, not though often ye are clean; but at Easter,
however flagrant an act ye may have committed, ye come. Oh! the force of
custom and of prejudice! In vain is the daily Sacrifice, <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) in vain do we stand before the Altar;
there is no one to partake. These things I am saying, not to induce you
to partake any how, but that ye should render yourselves worthy to
partake. Art thou not worthy of the Sacrifice, nor of the participation?
If so, then neither art thou of the prayer. Thou hearest the
herald, <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) standing, and saying,
“As many as are in penitence, all pray.” <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) As many as do not partake, are in
penitence. If thou art one of those that are in penitence, thou oughtest
not to partake; for he that partakes not, is one of those that are in
penitence. Why then does he say, “Depart, ye that are not qualified to
pray,” whilst thou hast the effrontery to stand still? But no, thou art
not of that number, thou art of the number of those who are qualified to
partake, and yet art indifferent about it, and regardest the matter as
nothing.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p63"></span>Look, I entreat: a royal table is set
before you, Angels minister at that table, the King Himself is there,
and dost thou stand gaping? <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) Are
thy garments defiled, and yet dost thou make no account of it?—or are
they clean? Then fall down and partake. Every day He cometh in to see
the guests, and converseth with them all. Yes, at this moment is he
speaking to your conscience; “Friends, how stand ye here, not having on
a wedding garment?” He said not, Why didst thou sit down? no, before he
sat down, He declared him to be unworthy, so much as to come in. He
saith not, “Why didst thou sit down to meat,” but, “Why camest thou in?”
And these are the words that He is at this very moment addressing to one
and all of us that stand here with such shameless effrontery. For every
one, that partaketh not of the mysteries, is standing here in shameless
effrontery. It is for this reason, that they which are in sins are first
of all put forth; for just as when a master is present at his table, it
is not right that those servants who have offended him should be
present, but they are sent out of the way: just so also here when the
sacrifice is brought forth, and Christ, the Lord’s sheep, is sacrificed;
when thou hearest the words, “Let us pray together,” when thou beholdest
the curtains drawn up, <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) then
imagine that the Heavens are let down from above, and that the Angels
are descending!

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p66"></span>As then it is not meet that any one of
the uninitiated be present, so neither is it that one of them that are
initiated, and yet at the same time defiled. Tell me, suppose any one
were invited to a feast, and were to wash his hands, and sit down, and
be all ready at the table, and after all refuse to partake; is he not
insulting the man who invited him? were it not better for such an one
never to have come at all? Now it is just in the same way that thou hast
come here. Thou hast sung the Hymn <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) with the rest: thou hast declared
thyself to be of the number of them that are Worthy, by not departing
with them that are unworthy. Why stay, and yet not partake of the table?
I am unworthy, thou wilt say. Then art thou also unworthy of that
communion thou hast had in prayers. For it is not by means of the
offerings only, but also by means of those canticles that the Spirit
descendeth all around. Do we not see our own servants, first scouring
the table with a sponge, and cleaning the house, and then setting out
the entertainment? This is what is done by the prayers, by the cry of
the herald. We scour the Church, as it were, with a sponge, that all
things may be set out in a pure church, that there may be “neither spot
nor wrinkle.” ([Eph. v. 27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p67.1"></span>.) Unworthy, indeed, both our eyes of these
sights, and unworthy are our ears! “And if even a beast,” it is said,
“touch the mountain, it shall be stoned.” ([Ex. xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p67.2"></span>.)
Thus then they were not worthy so much as to set foot on it, and yet
afterwards they both came near, and beheld where God had stood. And thou
mayest, afterwards, come near, and behold: when, however, He is present,
depart. Thou art no more allowed to be here than the Catechumen is. For
it is not at all the same thing never to have reached the mysteries, and
when thou hast reached them, to stumble at them and despise them, and to
make thyself unworthy of this thing. One might enter upon more points,
and those more awful still; not however to burden your understanding,
these will suffice. They who are not brought to their right senses with
these, certainly will not be with more.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p68"></span>That I may not then be the means of
increas<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_65"></span>ing your condemnation, I entreat you, not
to forbear coming, but to render yourselves worthy both of being
present, and of approaching. Tell me, were any king to give command and
to say, “If any man does this, let him partake of my table;” say, would
ye not do all ye could to be admitted? He hath invited us to heaven, to
the table of the great and wonderful King, and do we shrink and
hesitate, instead of hastening and running to it? And what then is our
hope of salvation? We cannot lay the blame on our weakness; we cannot on
our nature. It is indolence and nothing else that renders us unworthy.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p69"></span>So far have I spoken of myself. But may
He that pricketh the heart, He that giveth the Spirit of compunction,
pierce your hearts, and plant the seeds in the depth of them, that so
through His fear ye may conceive, and bring forth the spirit of
salvation, and come near with boldness. For, “thy children,” it is said,
“are like olive plants round about thy table.” ([Ps. cxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p69.1"></span>.)
O, then, let there be nothing old, nothing wild, nothing harsh. For of
such sort are the young plants that are fit for fruit, for the beautiful
fruit, fruit I mean of the olive-tree. And thriving they are, so as all
to be round about the table, and come together here, not in vain or by
chance, but with fear and reverence. For thus shall ye behold with
boldness even Christ Himself in heaven, and shall be counted worthy of
that heavenly kingdom, which may God grant we may all attain, in Jesus
Christ, our Lord with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit,
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and for ages of ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[59:197](1130016.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span> \[[Rom.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009), [1 Cor.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004), [Phil.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#004), [Col.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003), [1 Thess.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_197"></span>[59:198](1130016.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span> \[“On the contrary this ‘wherefore,’ διὰ
τοῦτο, refers to what precedes [Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>,
‘because this is the case that ye too are in Christ and have been sealed
with the Spirit.’ So Theophylact.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_198"></span>[59:199](1130016.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span> \[The word ‘love,’ ἀγάπην, which gets
into the Auth. Ver. from some inferior <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>mss</span>., is omitted by Aleph. A. B. W.
and H. Rev. Vers. cf. [Col. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p9.2"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_199"></span>[60:200](1130016.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14"></span> \[Chrysostom’s hasty and superficial
treatment of this great passage would seem to justify the language of
Dr. Newman in his preface to the Oxford translation of these homilies on
Ephesians. There are “imperfections in their composition which in the
opinion of some critics argued the absence of that comparative leisure
which he enjoyed at Antioch.” Schaff also says: “His life in
Constantinople was too much disturbed to leave him quiet leisure for
preparation.” This, however, in referring to his Homilies on Acts.
*Prolegomena* p. 19.—G.A.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[60:201](1130016.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p19"></span> \[Compare [Matt.
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046), [John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017), [Rev.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_201"></span>[60:202](1130016.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p23"></span> \[“The words, ‘in the knowledge of
Him,’ ἐνέπι γνὡσει αΰτοῦ, are not to be joined with the words ‘having
your heart enlightened,’ as Chrysostom here, which entirely destroys the
paralellism and symmetry of the sentence, but with the words, may give
you a spirit of wisdom, etc., (in the knowledge of Him).”—Meyer and
Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_202"></span>[60:203](1130016.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p28"></span> \[“That ye may know what a great and
glorious hope is given to the man whom God has called to the Kingdom of
the Messiah; and that ye may know what is the object of that hope,
namely, the riches of the glory of the inheritance which He gives; and
that ye may know that by which this hope is to be realized, namely, the
infinite power of God as shown in the resurrection and exaltation of
Jesus Christ.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_203"></span>[61:204](1130016.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p30.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p31"></span> ᾽Εχόντας.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[61:205](1130016.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p44"></span> Διὰ τὸν ἐνοικοῦντα Θεὸν Λόγον. The
‘inhabitation’ of the Word in our flesh, was a favorite form of speech
with the Nestorians, who thereby insinuated that the Word dwelt in ‘a’
man, or denied Christ’s unity of person. Yet the phrase is strictly
orthodox, as being derived from [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p44.1"></span>,
and is especially maintained by Cyril, the antagonist of Nestorius, in
order to denote that God was in human ‘nature,’ vid. Cyril *in Schol*.
25. Theodor. *Eran*. ii. Ephræm. Antioch. apud Phot. 229.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[62:206](1130016.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p52"></span> ῾Ιμάτιον. Thus Cyril Alex. speaks of
Christ as ‘clothed about’ with our nature. *In Success*. 2 p. 142. Vid.
also Epiph. *Ancor*. §. 95. Augustine *in Psalm* 130. 10. This, as well
as other theological terms, was abused by heretical disputants; as if it
implied either that the manhood of Christ might be put off from His
divine nature, or that it was a mere accidental and unsubstantial medium
of manifesting it.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[63:207](1130016.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p55"></span> Θυομένου.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[63:208](1130016.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p59"></span> This was the great festival of the
Greek Church, being in remembrance of our Lord’s Baptism, and, as it
would appear, of His birth inclusively. The festival of Christmas, which
had been in use in the West from an earlier date, was introduced at
Antioch A.D. 376, with much opposition. Chrysostom, A.D. 387, urges its
due celebration in his *Hom. de Beato Philogon*, and *Serm. in Diem
Natal. J. C*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[64:209](1130016.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p60"></span> \[On Chrysostom’s view of the
eucharistic sacrifice, see *Prolegomena*, p. 21, note.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_209"></span>[64:210](1130016.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p61"></span> i.e. the Deacon, Αθανάσιος προστάξας
διακόνῳ κηρύξαι εὐχὴν κ. τ. λ. Socr. *Hist*. ii. 11. id qu.
ἀναγινώσκειν, Athan. *de fug* 24.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[64:211](1130016.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p62"></span> Vid. Bingh. *Antiqu*. xiii. 2. and xiv.
5. \[The text here seems to be corrupt, Field’s text is, “as many as are
in penitence, all pray,” (δεήθητε πάντες) which is evidently
inconsistent with the context. The text should probably be, “As many as
are in penitence, depart; as many as are not in penitence, pray all.” So
Field suggests in a note saying, *Locus corruptus videtur, sic fortasse
redintegrandus*: ὅσοι ἐν μετανοί& 139· ἀπέλθετε, ὅσοιμὴ ἐν μετανόιᾳ
δεήθητε πάντες.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_211"></span>[64:212](1130016.htm#fr_211) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p64"></span> Vid. Bingh. *Antiqu*. xv. 2.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[64:213](1130016.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p65"></span> ἀμφιθυρα, curtains before the choir or
altar, vid. Chrysost. *in Matt. Hom.* 84*. fin*. where, however, it has
not the ecclesiastical sense, Epiphan. *Epist*. 51. 9. *apud Hieron*,
ed. Vallars. where the curtain had a figure of Christ or some Saint, (to
which Epiphanius objects) vid. also Evagr. *Hist*. vi. 21.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[64:214](1130016.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p67"></span> The Angelic Hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy,
vid. Chrysost. *in 2 Cor. Hom*. 18. Cyril. *Hieros*. *Myst*. v. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 2:1-3](1130017)
