[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130030)  [Next](1130032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iii.iv.xix-p2.2"></span>[Eph.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p3"></span>“For this ye know of a surety, that no
fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater,
hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. Let no man
deceive you with empty words: for because of these things cometh the
wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>There</span> were, it is likely, in the time
of our forefathers also, some who “weakened the hands of the people”
([Jer. xxxviii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.2"></span>.), and brought into practice that which is
mentioned by Ezekiel,—or rather who did the works of the false prophets,
who “profaned God among His people for handfuls of barley” ([Ezek. xiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.3"></span>.); a thing, by the way, done methinks by
some even at this day. When, for example, we say that he who calleth his
brother a fool shall depart into hell-fire, others say, “What? Is he
that calls his brother a fool to depart into hell-fire? Impossible,” say
they. And again, when we say that “the covetous man is an idolater,” in
this too again they make abatements, and say the expression is
hyperbolical. And in this manner they underrate and explain away all the
commandments. It was in allusion then to these that the blessed Paul, at
this time when he wrote to the Ephesians, spoke thus, “For this ye
know, <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) that no fornicator, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater, hath any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God”; adding, “let no man <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) deceive you with empty words.” Now
“empty words” are those which for a while are gratifying, but are in
nowise borne out in facts; because the whole case is a deception.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p7"></span>“Because of these things cometh the
wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p8"></span>Because of “fornication,” he means,
because of “covetousness,” because of “uncleanness,” or both because of
these things, and because of the “deceit,” <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) inasmuch as there are deceivers. “Sons
of disobedience”; he thus calls those who are utterly disobedient, those
who disobey Him.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p10"></span>[Eph.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>.
“Be not ye, therefore, partakers with them. For ye were <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) once darkness, but are now light in
the Lord.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p12"></span>Observe how wisely he urges them
forward; first, from the thought of Christ, that ye love one another,
and do injury to no man; then, on the other hand, from the thought of
punishment and hell-fire. “For ye were once darkness,” says he, “but are
now light in the Lord.” Which is what he says also in the Epistle to the
Romans; “What fruit then had ye at that time in the things whereof ye
are now ashamed?” ([Rom. vi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p12.1"></span>.), and reminds them of their former
wickedness. That is to say, thinking what ye once were, and what ye are
now become, do not run back into your former wickedness, nor do “despite
to the grace” ([Heb. x. 29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p12.2"></span>.) of God.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p13"></span>“Ye were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord!”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p14"></span>Not, he says, by your own virtue, but
through <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xix-Page_133"></span>the grace of God has this accrued to
you. That is to say, ye also were sometime worthy of the same
punishments, but now are so no more. “Walk” therefore “as children of
light.” What is meant however by “children of light,” he adds
afterwards.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p15"></span>[Eph.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p15.1"></span>. “For the fruit <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) of the light is in all goodness and
righteousness and truth, proving what is well-pleasing unto the Lord.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p17"></span>“In all goodness,” <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) he says: this is opposed to the angry,
and the bitter: “and righteousness”; this to the covetous: “and truth”;
this to false pleasure: not those former things, he says, which I was
mentioning, but their opposites. “In all”; that is, the fruit of the
Spirit ought to be evinced in everything. “Proving what is well-pleasing
unto the Lord”; so that those things are tokens of a childish and
imperfect mind.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p19"></span>[Eph.
5.11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p19.1"></span>. “And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them. For the
things which are done by them in secret it is a shame even to speak of.
But all things when they are reproved, are made manifest by the light.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p20"></span>He had said, “ye are light.” Now the
light reproves by exposing the things which take place in the darkness.
So that if ye, says he, are virtuous, and conspicuous, the wicked will
be unable to lie hidden. For just as when a candle is set, all are
brought to light, and the thief cannot enter; so if your light shine,
the wicked being discovered shall be caught. So then it is our duty to
expose them. How then does our Lord say, “Judge not, that ye be not
judged”? ([Matt. 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p20.1"></span>.) Paul did not say “judge,” he said
“reprove,” that is, correct. And the words, “Judge not, that ye be not
judged,” He spoke with reference to very small errors. Indeed, He added,
“Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?” But what Paul is
saying is of this sort. As a wound, so long as it is imbedded and
concealed outwardly, and runs beneath the surface, receives no
attention, so also sin, as long as it is concealed, being as it were in
darkness, is daringly committed in full security; but as soon as “it is
made manifest,” becomes “light”; not indeed the sin itself, (for how
could that be?) but the sinner. For when he has been brought out to
light, when he has been admonished, when he has repented, when he has
obtained pardon, hast thou not cleared away all his darkness? Hast thou
not then healed his wound? Hast thou not called his unfruitfulness into
fruit? Either this is his meaning, <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) or else what I said above, that your
life “being manifest, is light.” For no one hides an irreproachable
life; whereas things which are hidden, are hidden by darkness covering
them.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p22"></span>[Eph.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p22.1"></span>. “Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p23"></span>By the “sleeper” and the “dead,” he
means the man that is in sin; for he both exhales noisome odors like the
dead, and is inactive like one that is asleep, and like him he sees
nothing, but is dreaming, and forming fancies and illusions. Some indeed
read, <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) “And thou shalt touch
Christ”; but others, “And Christ shall shine upon thee”; and it is
rather this latter. Depart from sin, and thou shalt be able to behold
Christ. “For every one that doeth ill, hateth the light, and cometh not
to the light.” ([John iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p24.2"></span>.) He therefore that doeth it not, cometh
to the light.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p25"></span>Now he is not saying this with
reference to the unbelievers only, for many of the faithful, no less
than unbelievers, hold fast by wickedness; nay, some far more. Therefore
to these also it is necessary to exclaim, “Awake, <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee.” To these it is fitting to say
this also, “God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.” ([Matt.
xxii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p26.3"></span>.) If then he is not the God of the dead,
let us live.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p27"></span>Now there are some who say that the
words, “the covetous man is an idolater,” are hyperbolical. However, the
statement is not hyperbolical, it is true. How, and in what way? Because
the covetous man apostatizes from God, just as the idolater does. And
lest you should imagine this is a bare assertion, there is a declaration
of Christ which saith, “Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.” ([Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p27.1"></span>.) If then it is not possible to serve God
and Mammon, they who serve Mammon have thrown themselves out of the
service of God; and they who have denied His sovereignty, and serve
lifeless gold, it is plain enough that they are <span id="page_134">p.
134</span> <span id="iii.iv.xix-Page_134"></span>idolaters. “But I never
made an idol,” a man will say, “nor set up an altar, nor sacrificed
sheep, nor poured libations of wine; no, I came into the church, and
lifted up my hands to the Only-begotten Son of God; I partake of the
mysteries, I communicate in prayer, and in everything else which is a
Christian’s duty. How then,” he will say, “am I a worshiper of idols?”
Yes, and this is the very thing which is the most astonishing of all,
that when thou hast had experience, and hast “tasted” the lovingkindness
of God, and “hast seen that the Lord is gracious” ([Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p27.2"></span>.), thou shouldest abandon Him who is
gracious, and take to thyself a cruel tyrant, and shouldest pretend to
be serving Him, whilst in reality thou hast submitted thyself to the
hard and galling yoke of covetousness. Thou hast not yet told me of thy
own duty done, but only of thy Master’s gifts. For tell me, I beseech
thee, whence do we judge of a soldier? Is it when he is on duty guarding
the king, and is fed by him, and called the king’s own, or is it when he
is minding his own affairs and interests? To pretend to be with him, and
to be attentive to his interests, whilst he is advancing the cause of
the enemy, we declare to be worse than if he breaks away from the king’s
service, and joins the enemy. Now then thou art doing despite to God,
just as an idolater does, not with thine own mouth singly, but with the
ten thousands of those whom thou hast wronged. Yet you will say, “an
idolater he is not.” But surely, whenever they say, “Oh! that Christian,
that covetous fellow,” then not only is he himself committing outrage by
his own act, but he frequently forces those also whom he has wronged to
use these words; and if they use them not, this is to be set to the
account of their reverence.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p28"></span>Do we not see that such is the fact?
What else is an idolater? Or does not he too worship passions,
oftentimes not mastering his passions? I mean, for example, when we say
that the pagan idolater worships idols, he will say, “No, but it is
Venus, or it is Mars.” And if we say, Who is this Venus? the more modest
amongst them will say, It is pleasure. Or what is this Mars? It is
wrath. And in the same way dost thou worship Mammon. If we say, Who is
this Mammon? It is covetousness, and this thou art worshiping. “I
worship it not,” thou wilt say. Why not? Because thou dost not bow
thyself down? Nay, but as it is, thou art far more a worshiper in thy
deeds and practices; for this is the higher kind of worship. And that
you may understand this, look in the case of God; who more truly worship
Him, they who merely stand up at the prayers, or they who do His will?
Clearly enough, these latter. The same also is it with the worshipers of
Mammon; they who do his will, they truly are his worshipers. However,
they who worship the passions are oftentimes free from the passions. One
may see a worshiper of Mars oftentimes governing his wrath. But this is
not true of thee; thou makest thyself a slave to thy passion.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p29"></span>Yes, but thou slayest no sheep? No,
thou slayest men, reasonable souls, some by famine, others by
blasphemies. Nothing can be more frenzied than a sacrifice like this.
Who ever beheld souls sacrificed? How accursed is the altar of
covetousness! When thou passest by this idol’s altar here, thou shalt
see it reeking with the blood of bullocks and goats; but when thou shalt
pass by the altar of covetousness, thou shalt see it breathing the
shocking odor of human blood. Stand here before it in this world, and
thou shalt see, not the wings of birds burning, no vapor, no smoke
exhaled, but the bodies of men perishing. For some throw themselves
among precipices, others tie the halter, others thrust the dagger
through their throat. Hast thou seen the cruel and inhuman sacrifices?
Wouldest thou see yet more shocking ones than these? Then I will show
thee no longer the bodies of men, but the souls of men slaughtered in
the other world. Yes, for it is possible for a soul to be slain with the
slaughter peculiar to the soul; for as there is a death of the
body, <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) so is there also of the
soul. “The soul that sinneth,” saith the Prophet, “it shall die.”
([Ezek. xviii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p30.1"></span>.) The death of the soul, however, is not
like the death of the body; it is far more shocking. For this bodily
death, separating the soul and the body the one from the other, releases
the one from many anxieties and toils, and transmits the other into a
manifest abode: then when the body has been in time dissolved and
crumbled away, it is again gathered together in incorruption, and
receives back its own proper soul. Such we see is this bodily death. But
that of the soul is awful and terrific. For this death, when dissolution
takes place, does not let it pass, as the body does, but binds it down
again to an imperishable body, and consigns it to the unquenchable fire.
This then is the death of the soul. And as therefore there is a death of
the soul, so is there also a slaughter of the soul. What is the
slaughter of the body? It is the being turned into a corpse, the being
stripped of the energy derived from the soul. What is the slaughter of
the soul? It is its being made a corpse also. And how is the soul made a
corpse? Because as the body then becomes a corpse when the soul leaves
it destitute of its own vital energy, so also does the soul then be<span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="iii.iv.xix-Page_135"></span>come a
corpse, when the Holy Spirit leaves it destitute of His spiritual
energy.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p31"></span>Such for the most part are the
slaughters made at the altar of covetousness. They are not satisfied,
they do not stop at men’s blood; no, the altar of covetousness is not
glutted, unless it sacrifice the very soul itself also, unless it
receive the souls of both, the sacrificer and the sacrificed. For he who
sacrifices must first be sacrificed, and then he sacrifices; and the
dead sacrifices him who is yet living. For when he utters blasphemies,
when he reviles, when he is irritated, are not these so many incurable
wounds of the soul?

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p32"></span>Thou hast seen that the expression is
no hyperbole. Wouldest thou hear again another argument, to teach you
how covetousness is idolatry, and more shocking than idolatry? Idolaters
worship the creatures of God (“for they worshiped,” it is said, “and
served the creature rather than the Creator”) ([Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p32.1"></span>.); but thou art worshiping a creature of
thine own. For God made not covetousness but thine own insatiable
appetite invented it. <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) And look
at the madness and folly. They that worship idols, honor also the idols
they worship; and if any one speak of them with disrespect or ridicule,
they stand up in their defense; whereas thou, as if in a sort of
intoxication, art worshiping an object, which is so far from being free
from accusation, that it is even full of impiety. So that thou, even
more than they, excellest in wickedness. Thou canst never have it to say
as an excuse, that it is no evil. If even they are in the highest degree
without excuse, yet art thou in a far higher, who art forever censuring
covetousness, and reviling those who devote themselves to it, and who
yet doth serve and obey it.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p34"></span>We will examine, if you please, whence
idolatry took its rise. A certain wise man ([Wisd. xiv.
16](../../../bib/apo/wis014.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p34.1"></span>.) tells us, that a certain rich man
afflicted with untimely mourning for his son, and having no consolation
for his sorrow, consoled his passion in this way: having made a lifeless
image of the dead, and constantly gazing at it, he seemed through the
image to have his departed one still; whilst certain flatterers, “whose
God was their belly” ([Philip. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p34.2"></span>.), treating the image with reverence in
order to do him honor, carried on the custom into idolatry. <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) So then it took its rise from weakness
of soul, from a senseless custom, from extravagance. But not so
covetousness: from weakness of soul indeed it is, only that it is from a
worse weakness. It is not that any one has lost a son, nor that he is
seeking for consolation in sorrow, nor that he is drawn on by
flatterers. But how is it? I will tell you. Cain in covetousness
overreached <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) God; what ought to
have been given to Him, he kept to himself; what he should have kept
himself, this he offered to Him; and thus the evil began even from God.
For if we are God’s, much more are the first-fruits of our possessions.
Again, men’s violent passion for women arose from covetousness. <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) “They saw the daughters of men” ([Gen.
vi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p37.1"></span>.), and they rushed headlong into lust. And
from hence again it went on to money; for the wish to have more than
one’s neighbor of this world’s goods, arises from no other source, than
from “love waxing cold.” The wish to have more than one’s share arises
from no other source than recklessness, misanthropy, and arrogance
toward others. Look at the earth, how wide is its extent? How far
greater than we can use the expanse of the sky and the heaven? It is
that He might put an end to thy covetousness, that God hath thus widely
extended the bounds of the creation. And art thou then still grasping
and even thus? And dost thou hear that covetousness is idolatry, and not
shudder even at this? Dost thou wish to inherit the earth? Then hast
thou no inheritance in heaven. Art thou eager to leave an inheritance to
others, that thou mayest rob thyself of it? Tell me, if any one were to
offer thee power to possess all things, wouldest thou be unwilling? It
is in thy power now, if thou wilt. Some, however, say, that they are
grieved when they transmit the inheritance to others, and would fain
have consumed it themselves, rather than see others become its masters.
Nor do I acquit thee of this weakness; for this too is characteristic of
a weak soul. However, at least let as much as this be done. In thy will
leave Christ thine heir. It were thy duty indeed to do so in thy
lifetime, for this would show a right disposition. Still, at all events,
be a little generous, though it be but by necessity. For Christ indeed
charged us to give to the poor with this object, to make us wise in our
lifetime, to induce us to despise money, to teach us to look down upon
earthly things. It is no contempt of money, as you think, to bestow it
upon this man and upon that man when one dies, and is no longer master
of it. Thou art then no longer giving of thine own, but of absolute
necessity: thanks to death, not to thee. This is no act of affection, it
is thy loss. <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xix-Page_136"></span>However, let it be done even thus; at
least then give up thy passion.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p38"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.iv.xix-p38.1"></span>Moral.</span> Consider how many acts of
plunder, how many acts of covetousness, thou hast committed. Restore all
fourfold. Thus plead thy cause to God. Some, however, there are who are
arrived at such a pitch of madness and blindness, as not even then to
comprehend their duty; but who go on acting in all cases, just as if
they were taking pains to make the judgment of God yet heavier to
themselves. This is the reason why our blessed Apostle writes and says,
“Walk as children of light.” Now the covetous man of all others lives in
darkness, and spreads great darkness over all things around.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p39"></span>“And have no fellowship,” he adds,
“with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them;
for the things which are done by them in secret, it is a shame even to
speak of; but all things when they are reproved are made manifest by the
light.” Hearken, I entreat you, all, as many of you as like not to be
hated for nothing, but to be loved. “What need is there to be hated?”
one says. A man commits a robbery, and dost thou not reprove him, but
art afraid of his hatred? though this, however, is not being hated for
nothing. But dost thou justly convict him, and yet fear the hatred?
Convict thy brother, incur enmity for the love’s sake which thou owest
to Christ, for the love’s sake which thou owest to thy brother. Arrest
him as he is on his road to the pit of destruction. For to admit him to
our table, to treat him with civil speeches, with salutations, and with
entertainments, these are no signal proofs of friendship. No, those I
have mentioned are the boons which we must bestow upon our friends, that
we may rescue their souls from the wrath of God. When we see them lying
prostrate in the furnace of wickedness, let us raise them up. “But,”
they say, “it is of no use, he is incorrigible.” However, do thou thy
duty, and then thou hast excused thyself to God. Hide not thy talent. It
is for this that thou hast speech, it is for this thou hast a mouth and
a tongue, that thou mayest correct thy neighbor. <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) It is dumb and reasonless creatures
only that have no care for their neighbor, and take no account of
others. But dost thou while calling God, “Father,” and thy neighbor,
“brother,” when thou seest him committing unnumbered wickednesses, dost
thou prefer his good-will to his welfare? No, do not so, I entreat you.
There is no evidence of friendship so true as never to overlook the sins
of our brethren. Didst thou see them at enmity? Reconcile them. Didst
thou see them guilty of covetousness? Check them. Didst thou see them
wronged? Stand up in their defense. It is not on them, it is on thyself
thou art conferring the chief benefit. It is for this we are friends,
that we may be of use one to another. A man will listen in a different
spirit to a friend, and to any other chance person. A chance person he
will regard perhaps with suspicion, and so in like manner will he a
teacher, but not so a friend.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p41"></span>“For,” he says, “the things which are
done by them in secret it is a shame even to speak of: but all things
when they are reproved are made manifest by the light.” What is it he
means to say here? He means this. That some sins in this world are done
in secret, and some also openly; but in the other it shall not be so.
Now there is no one who is not conscious to himself of some sin. This is
why he says, “But all the things when they are reproved are made
manifest by the light.” What then? Is this again, it will be said, meant
concerning idolatry? It is not; the argument is about our life and our
sins. “For everything that is made manifest,” says he, “is light.”

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p42"></span>Wherefore, I entreat you, be ye never
backward to reprove, nor displeased at being reproved. <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) For as long indeed as anything is
carried on in the dark, it is carried on with greater security; but when
it has many to witness what is done, it is brought to light. By all
means then let us do all we can to chase away the deadness which is in
our brethren, to scatter the darkness, and to attract to us the “Sun of
righteousness.” For if there be many shining lights, the path of virtue
will be easy to themselves, and they which are in darkness will be more
easily detected, while the light is held forth and puts the darkness to
flight. Whereas if it be the reverse, there is fear lest as the thick
mist of darkness and of sin overpowers the light, and dispels its
transparency, those shining lights themselves should be extinguished.
Let us be then disposed to benefit one another, that one and all, we may
offer up praise and glory to the God of lovingkindness, by the grace and
lovingkindness of the only begotten Son with whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, strength, honor now and forever
and forever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[132:376](1130031.htm#fr_375) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p5"></span> \[“῎Ιστε γινώσκοντες: ‘This you are
aware of from your own knowledge,’ so that I need not first to instruct
you with regard to it, ‘that,’ etc. This is not Hebraism, since
γινώσκοντες is a different verb from ἴστε, but it is like ὁρῶν καὶ
ἀκούων οἶδα, Xen. *Cyr*. iv. 1, 14.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_376"></span>[132:377](1130031.htm#fr_376) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p6"></span> \[“In accordance with the context, this
refers to unbelieving Gentiles who sought to palliate those Gentile
vices, to make them out as matter of indifference, and so to entice
Christians back to the Gentile life.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_377"></span>[132:378](1130031.htm#fr_377) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p9"></span> \[διὰ ταῦτα refers not “to deceiving
with empty words,” but to the “vices” just mentioned. Comp. parallel
passage, [Col. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_378"></span>[132:379](1130031.htm#fr_378) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p11"></span> \[ἦτε γάρ, &c. ἦτε prefixed with
significant emphasis, has the force of a “ground”: For your former state
of darkness (with which those vices were in keeping) is “past.” Comp.
[Rom. vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p11.1"></span>.—Meyer and Ellicott.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_379"></span>[133:380](1130031.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p16"></span> \[“‘Fruit of the light’ (not of the
spirit, as Chrysostom’s text has) denotes figuratively the aggregate of
moral effects which Christian enlightenment produces.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_380"></span>[133:381](1130031.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p18"></span> \[“Chrysostom’s interpretation is too
specific. The words mean ‘good, right, true,’ and embrace the *whole* of
Christian morality.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_381"></span>[133:382](1130031.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p21"></span> \[This difficult passage is thus
translated by Ellicott: It is true these things are done in secret, but
all of them, when reproved, are made manifest by the light (thus shed
upon them); for everything that is made manifest is light (becomes
daylight, is of the nature of light).—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_382"></span>[133:383](1130031.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p24"></span> \[ἐπιψαύσεις (instead of ἐπιφαύσει) is
the reading of D\* and E, and the Latin versions of these <span
class="c16"><span id="iii.iv.xix-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. (*continges
Christum*), but it *never* obtained much acceptance, and hardly appears
in extant codices. See Scrivener’s Introd. 632, and Westcott and Hort,
Appendix, p. 125.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_383"></span>[133:384](1130031.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p26"></span> \[“The words here quoted are not found
exactly in this form in the O.T., but certainly occur in substance in
[Isa. lx. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p26.1"></span>. Instead of resorting to the explanation
of Meyer or De Wette (which are somewhat rationalistic), it is better to
say that Paul, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, is expressing
in a condensed form the spiritual meaning of the passage.”—Ellicott.
Riddle says: “It is [Isa. lx. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.xix-p26.2"></span>, partly paraphrased and partly condensed,
and interpreted in the light of its fulfillment.” “This call of God to
the sons of disobedience to awake, confirms the necessity of the
ἐλέγχειν, and the promise, ‘Christ shall shine upon thee,’ confirms the
salutary influence of the light.”—Meyer.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_384"></span>[134:385](1130031.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p30"></span> \[As in other places, the text of
Field is here incomplete. (ὥσπερ γάρ ἐστι ψυχῆς θάνατος, “Ψυχὴ γὰρ ἡ
ἁμαρτάνουσα,” etc.) It omits the clause, ὥσπερ γάρ ἐστι σώματος θάνατος,
which is so necessary to the sense and which is attested by excellent
manuscript authority, and adopted by Savile.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_385"></span>[135:386](1130031.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p33"></span> \[This seems strained; for it is not
true that they worshiped covetousness, a creature of their own, as
Chrysostom calls it, but they worshiped gold and silver, which *are*
creatures of God.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_386"></span>[135:387](1130031.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p35"></span> \[This is a rather doubtful and
inadequate account of the beginning of idolatry.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_387"></span>[135:388](1130031.htm#fr_387) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p36"></span> ὁΚά& 187·ν τὸν θεὸν ἐπλεονέκτησεν
(Comp. πλεονεξία).

<span id="fn_388"></span>[135:389](1130031.htm#fr_388) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p37"></span> \[This is what the text seems to mean
(πάλιν εἰς γυναῖκας ἀπὸ πλεονεξίας ἡ ὁρμὴ γέγονεν), and he is proposing
to explain the origin of covetousness (which, by the way, most men need
go no further than their own heart to find), and not of lust. Moreover,
the following context makes lust a source of covetousness, which is
true, and not covetousness the source of lust, which is not true.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_389"></span>[136:390](1130031.htm#fr_389) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p40"></span> \[Compare John Wesley’s sermon on the
“Duty of Reproving our Neighbor,” *Works*, Vol. II., p. 88 (New York
ed.), for a thorough and fearless discussion of this difficult
duty.—G.A.\]

<span id="fn_390"></span>[136:391](1130031.htm#fr_390) <span
id="iii.iv.xix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p43"></span> \[“Better is open rebuke

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p44"></span>Than love that is hidden.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p45"></span>Faithful are the wounds of a friend,

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p46"></span>But the kisses of an enemy are
profuse.”—Prov. xxvii. 5, 6.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p47"></span>“He that rebuketh a man shall afterward
find more favor

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p48"></span>Than he that flattereth with the
tongue.”—Prov. xxviii. 23.

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p49"></span>Compare Chrysostom’s I. Homily on
Eutropius, Vol. IX., p. 249, this series.—G.A.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians 5:15,16,17](1130032)
