[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1130086)  [Next](1130088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p2"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.vi.iv-p2.2"></span>[2 Thessalonians ii.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>“And now ye know that which restraineth,
to the end that he may be revealed in his own season. For the mystery of
lawlessness doth already work: only there is one that restraineth now,
until he be taken out of the way. And then shall be revealed the lawless
one, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and
bring to nought by the manifestation of His coming: even he whose coming
is according to the working of Satan.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>One</span> may naturally enquire, what is that
which withholdeth, and after that would know, why Paul expresses it so
obscurely. What then is it that withholdeth, that is, hindereth him from
being revealed? Some indeed say, the grace of the Spirit, but others the
Roman empire, to whom I most of all accede. Wherefore? Because if he
meant to say the Spirit, he would not have spoken obscurely, but
plainly, that even now the grace of the Spirit, that is the gifts,
withhold him. And otherwise he ought now to have come, if he was about
to come when the gifts ceased; for they have long since ceased. But
because he said this of the Roman empire, he naturally glanced at it,
and speaks covertly and darkly. For he did not wish to bring upon
himself superfluous enmities, and useless dangers. For if he had said
that after a little while <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iv-Page_389"></span>the Roman empire would be dissolved, they
would immediately have even overwhelmed him, as a pestilent person, and
all the faithful, as living and warring to this end. And he did not say
that it will be quickly, although he is always saying it—but what? “that
he may be revealed in his own season,” he says,

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p5"></span>“For the mystery of lawlessness doth
already work.” He speaks here of Nero, as if he were the type of
Antichrist. For he too wished to be thought a god. And he has well said,
“the mystery”; that is, it worketh not openly, as the other, nor without
shame. For if there was found a man before that time, he means, who was
not much behind Antichrist in wickedness, what wonder, if there shall
now be one? But he did not also wish to point him out plainly: and this
not from cowardice, but instructing us not to bring upon ourselves
unnecessary enmities, when there is nothing to call for it. So indeed he
also says here. “Only there is one that restraineth now, until he be
taken out of the way,” that is, when the Roman empire is taken out of
the way, then he shall come. And naturally. For as long as the fear of
this empire lasts, no one will willingly exalt himself, but when that is
dissolved, he will attack the anarchy, and endeavor to seize upon the
government both of man and of God. For as the kingdoms before this were
destroyed, for example, that of the Medes by the Babylonians, that of
the Babylonians by the Persians, that of the Persians by the
Macedonians, that of the Macedonians by the Romans: so will this also be
by the Antichrist, and he by Christ, and it will no longer withhold. And
these things Daniel delivered to us with great clearness.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p6"></span>“And then,” he says, “shall be revealed
the lawless one.” And what after this? The consolation is at hand. “Whom
the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and bring to
nought by the manifestation of His coming, even he whose coming is
according to the working of Satan.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p7"></span>For as fire merely coming on even before
its arrival makes torpid and consumes the little animals that are afar
off; so also Christ, by His commandment only, and Coming. It is enough
for Him to be present, and all these things are destroyed. He will put a
stop to the deceit, by only appearing. Then who is this, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, “With all display all power,” but nothing
true, but for deceit. “And lying wonder,” he says, that is, false, or
leading to falsehood.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p8"></span>[2 Thess.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>.
“And with all deceit of unrighteousness for them that are perishing.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9"></span>Why then, you say, did God permit this to
be? and what dispensation is this? And what is the advantage of his
coming, if it takes place for the ruin of our race? Fear not, beloved,
but hear Him saying, “In them that are perishing,” he hath strength,
who, even if he had not come, would not have believed. What then is the
advantage? That these very men who are perishing will be put to silence.
How? Because both if he had come, and if he had not come, they would not
have believed in Christ; He comes therefore to convict them. For that
they may not have occasion to say, that since Christ said that He was
God,—although He nowhere said this openly,—but since those who came
after proclaimed it, we have not believed. Because we have heard that
there is One God from whom are all things, therefore we have not
believed. This their pretext then Antichrist will take away. For when he
comes, and comes commanding nothing good, but all things unlawful, and
is yet believed from false signs alone, he will stop their mouths. For
if thou believest not in Christ, much more oughtest thou not to believe
in Antichrist. For the former said that He was sent from the Father, but
the latter the contrary. For this reason Christ said, “I am come in My
Father’s name, and ye receive Me not: if another shall come in his own
name. him ye will receive.” ([John v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>..md)
But we have seen signs, you say. But many and great signs were also
wrought in the case of Christ; much more therefore ought ye to have
believed in Him. And yet many things were predicted concerning this one,
that he is the lawless one, that he is the son of perdition, that his
coming is after the working of Satan. But the contrary concerning the
other, that He is the Saviour, that He brings with Him unnumbered
blessings.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p10"></span>[2 Thess.
2.10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>. “For because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved; for this cause God will send them a
working of error, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be
judged who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p11"></span>“That they might be judged.” He does not
say, that they might be punished; for even before this they were about
to be punished; but “that they might be condemned,” that is, at the
dreadful Seat of Judgment, in order that they might be without excuse.
“Who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” He
calls Christ, “the Love of the Truth.” “For because,” says he, “they
received not the love of the truth.” For He was both, and came for the
sake of both, both as loving men, and on behalf of things that were
true. <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071.md)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13"></span>“But had pleasure,” he says, “in
unrighteous<span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iv-Page_390"></span>ness.” For he came to the destruction of
men and to injure them. For what will he not then work? He will change
and confound all things, both by his commandments, and by the fear of
him. He will be terrible in every way, from his power, from his cruelty,
from his unlawful commandments.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p14"></span>But fear not. “In those that perish” he
will have his strength. <span id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072.md) For
Elijah too will then come to give confidence to the faithful, and this
Christ says; “Elijah cometh, and shall restore all things.” ([Matt.
xvii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p15.2"></span>.) Therefore it is said, “In the spirit and
power of Elijah.” ([Luke i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p15.3"></span>.) For he neither wrought signs nor wonders,
as Elijah did. For “John,” it is said, “did no miracle, but all things
which John spake of this Man were true.” How then was it “in the spirit
and power of Elijah”? That is, he will take upon him the same ministry.
As the one was the forerunner of His first Coming, so will the other be
of His second and glorious Coming, and for this he is reserved. Let us
not therefore fear. He has calmed the minds of the hearers. He causes
them no longer to think present things dreadful but worthy of
thankfulness. Wherefore he has added,

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p16"></span>[2 Thess.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>.
“But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved
of the Lord, for that God chose you from the beginning unto salvation,
in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p17"></span>How unto salvation? By sanctifying you
through the Spirit. For these are the things that are the efficient
causes <span id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073.md) of our salvation. It
is nowhere of works, nowhere of righteous deeds, but through belief of
the truth. Here again, “in” is used for “through.” “And through
sanctification of the Spirit,” he says,

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p19"></span>[2 Thess.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p19.1"></span>.
“Whereunto He called you through our Gospel to the obtaining of the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p20"></span>This too is no little thing, if Christ
considers our salvation His glory. For it is the glory of the Friend of
man that they that are saved should be many. Great then is our Lord, if
the Holy Spirit so desires our salvation. Why did he not say faith
first? Because even after sanctification we have yet need of much faith,
that we may not be shaken. Seest thou how He shows that nothing is of
themselves, but all of God?

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p21"></span>[2 Thess.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p21.1"></span>.
“So then, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye were
taught, whether by word, or by Epistle of ours.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p22"></span>Hence it is manifest, that they did not
deliver all things by Epistle, but many things also unwritten, and in
like manner both the one and the other are worthy of credit. Therefore
let us think the tradition of the Church also worthy of credit. It is a
tradition, seek no farther. Here he shows that there were many who were
shaken.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p23"></span>[2 Thess.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p23.1"></span>.
“Now our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and God our Father, which loved us,
and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace, comfort your
hearts, and stablish them in every good work and word.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p24"></span>Again a prayer after an admonition. For
this is truly to benefit. “Which loved us,” he says, “and gave us
eternal comfort and good hope through grace.” Where now are those who
lessen the Son, because He is named in the grace of the Laver after the
Father? For, lo, here it is the contrary. “Which loved us,” he says,
“and gave us eternal comfort.” Of what sort then is this? Even the hope
of things future. Seest thou how by the method of prayer he stirs up
their mind, giving them the unspeakable care of God for pledges and
signs. “Comfort your heart,” he says, “in every good work and word,”
that is, through every good work and word. For this is the comfort of
Christians, to do something good and pleasing to God. See how he brings
down their spirit. “Which gave us comfort,” he says, “and good hope
through grace.” At the same time he makes them also full of good hopes
with respect to future things. For if He has given so many things by
grace, much more things future. I indeed, he says, have spoken, but the
whole is of God. “Stablish”; confirm you, that you be not shaken, nor
turned aside. For this is both His work and ours, so that it is in the
way both of doctrines, and of actions. For this is comfort, to be
stablished. For when any one is not turned aside, he bears all things,
whatever may happen to him, with much longsuffering; whereas if his mind
be shaken, he will no longer perform any good or noble action, but like
one whose hands are paralyzed, so also his soul is shaken, when it is
not fully persuaded that it is advancing to some good end.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p25"></span>[2 Thess.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p25.1"></span>.
“Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and
be glorified, even as also it is with you.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p26"></span>He indeed had prayed for them, that they
might be stablished; and now he asks of them, entreating them to pray
for him, not that he may not incur danger, for to this he was appointed,
but that “the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, even as also it
is with you.” And the request is accompanied with commendation. “Even as
also it is with you.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p27"></span>[2 Thess.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p27.1"></span>.
“And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men; for all
have not faith.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p28"></span>This is the manner of one showing also
his dangers as to which especially he besought <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="iv.vi.iv-Page_391"></span>them. “From unreasonable
and evil men,” he says, “for all have not faith.” Thus he is speaking of
those who contradict the Preaching, who oppose and contend against the
doctrines. For this he has intimated by saying, “For all men have not
faith.” And here he seems to me not to glance at dangers, but at the men
who contradicted and hindered his word, as did Alexander the
copper-smith. For he says, “he greatly withstood our words.” ([2 Tim.
iv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p28.1"></span>.) That is, there are some to whom it is
given. As if he were speaking of a paternal inheritance, that “it is not
for all to serve in the Palace.” And at the same time he also excites
them, as already having such ground of confidence as to be able both to
deliver their Teacher from dangers, and to facilitate his preaching.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p29"></span>Therefore we also say the same things.
Let no one condemn us of arrogance, nor from an excessive humility
deprive us of so great an assistance. For neither do we speak from the
same motive from which Paul spoke. For he indeed said these things from
a wish to comfort his disciples; but we to reap some great and good
fruit. And we are very confident, if ye all be willing with one mind to
stretch forth your hands to God in behalf of our littleness, that you
will succeed in all things. Thus let us make war with our enemies with
prayers and supplications. For if thus the ancients made war with men in
arms, much more ought we so to make war with men without arms. So
Hezekiah triumphed over the Assyrian king, so Moses over Amalek, so
Samuel over the men of Ascalon, so Israel <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074.md) over the thirty-two kings. If where
there was need of arms, and of battle array, and of fighting, they,
leaving their arms. had recourse to prayer; here where the matter has to
be accomplished by prayers alone, does it not much more behove us to
pray?

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p31"></span>But there, you say, the rulers entreated
for the people, but you request the people to entreat for the ruler. I
also know it. For those under rule at that time were wretched and mean
persons. Wherefore they were saved by the claims and the virtue of their
commander alone; but now, when the grace of God has prevailed, and we
shall find among those who are ruled many or rather the greater part
excelling their ruler in a great degree; do not deprive us of this
succor, raise up our hands that they may not be faint, open our mouth
for us, that it may not be closed. Entreat God—for this cause entreat
Him. It is in our behalf indeed that it is done, but it is wholly for
your sakes. For we are appointed for your advantage, and for your
interests we are concerned. Entreat every one of you, both privately and
publicly. Mark Paul saying, “That for the gift bestowed upon us by means
of many, thanks may be given by many persons on our behalf” ([2 Cor. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p31.1"></span>..md);
that is, that He may give grace to many. If in the case of men, the
people coming forward ask a pardon for persons condemned and led away to
execution, and the king from regard to the multitude revokes the
sentence, much more will God be influenced by regard to you, not by your
multitude but your virtue.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p32"></span>For violent is the enemy we have. For
each of you indeed anxiously thinks of his own interests, but we the
concerns of all together. We stand in the part of the battle that is
pressed on. The devil is more violently armed against us. For in wars
too, he that is on the opposite side endeavors before all others to
overthrow the general. For this reason all his fellow-combatants hasten
there. For this reason there is much tumult, every one endeavoring to
rescue him; they surround him with their shields, wishing to preserve
his person. Hear what all the people say to David. (I say not this, as
comparing myself to David, I am not so mad, but because I wish to show
the affection of the people for their ruler.) “Thou shalt go no more out
with us to battle,” they say, “that thou quench not the lamp of Israel.”
([2 Sam. xxi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p32.1"></span>.) See how anxious they were to spare the old
man. I am greatly in need of your prayers. Let no one, as I have said,
from an excessive humility deprive me of this alliance and succor. If
our part be well approved, your own also will be more honorable. If our
teaching flow abundantly, the riches will redound to you. Hear the
prophet saying, “Do the shepherds feed themselves?” (From [Ezek. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p32.2"></span>,
Sept.)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p33"></span>Do you observe Paul constantly seeking
these prayers? Do you hear that thus Peter was delivered from prison,
when fervent prayer was made for him? ([Acts xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p33.1"></span>..md) I
verily believe that your prayer will have great effect, offered with so
great unanimity. Do you not think that it is a matter much too great for
my littleness to draw nigh to God, and entreat Him for so numerous a
people? For if I have not confidence to pray for myself, much less for
others. For it belongs to men of high estimation, to beseech God to be
merciful to others; it is for those who have rendered Him favorable to
themselves. But he who is himself an offender, how shall he entreat for
another? But nevertheless, because I embrace you with a father’s heart,
because love dares everything, not only in the Church, but in the house
also, I make my prayer above all other things for your health both in
soul and in body. For there is no other people, before his own. For if
Job rising up <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iv-Page_392"></span>immediately made so many offerings for his
children in the flesh, how much more ought we to do this for our
spiritual children?

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p34"></span>Why do I say these things? Because if we
who are so far removed from the greatness of the work, offer
supplications and prayers for you, much more is it just that you should
do it. For that one should entreat for many, is exceedingly bold, and
requires much confidence: but that many having met together should offer
supplication for one, is nothing burdensome. For every one does this not
trusting to his own virtue, but to the multitude, and to their
unanimity, to which God everywhere has much respect. For He says, “where
two or three are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst
of them.” ([Matt. xx. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p34.1"></span>.) If where two or three are gathered
together, He is in the midst, much more is He among you. For that which
a man praying by himself is not able to receive, that he shall receive
praying with a multitude. Why? Because although his own virtue has not,
yet the common consent has much power.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p35"></span>“Where two or three,” it is said, “are
gathered together.” Why didst thou say, “Two”? For if there be one in
Thy Name, why art Thou not there? Because I wish all to be together, and
not to be separated. Let us therefore close up together; let us bind one
another together in love, let no one separate us. If any one accuses, or
is offended, let him not retain it in his mind, whether against his
neighbor, or against us. This favor I ask of you, to come to us, and
bring the accusation, and receive our defense. “Reprove him,” it says,
“lest haply he hath not said it. Reprove him, lest haply he hath not
done it” ([Sir. 19:14](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p35.1"></span>.); and if he hath done it, that he add not
thereto. For we have either defended ourselves, or being condemned have
asked pardon, and henceforth endeavor not to fall into the same faults.
This is expedient both for you and for us. For you indeed having accused
us perhaps without reason, when you have learned the truth of the
matter, will stand corrected, and we have offended unawares and are
corrected. For you indeed it is not expedient. <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075.md) For punishment is appointed for
those who utter any idle word. But we put off accusations, whether false
or true. The false, by showing that they are false; the true, by not
again doing the same things. For it must needs happen that he who has
the care of so many things should be ignorant, and through ignorance
commit errors. For if every one of you having a house, and presiding
over wife and children, and slaves, one more and another fewer, among
souls that are so easily numbered, is nevertheless compelled to commit
many errors involuntarily, or from ignorance, or when wishing to set
something right; much more must it be so with us who preside over so
many people.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p37"></span>And may God still multiply you and bless
you, the little with the great! For although the care becomes greater
from the increase of numbers, we do not cease praying that this our care
may be increased, and that this number may be added to, and be many
times as great and without limit. For fathers, although often harassed
by the number of their children, nevertheless do not wish to lose any
one. All things are equal between us and you, even the very chief of our
blessings. I do not partake of the holy Table with greater abundance,
and you with less, but both equally participate of the same. And if I
take it first, it is no great privilege, since even among children, the
elder first extends his hand to the feast, but nevertheless no advantage
is gained thereby. But with us all things are equal. The saving life
that sustains our souls is given with equal honor to both. I do not
indeed partake of one Lamb <span id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076.md)
and you of another, but we partake of the same. We both have the same
Baptism. We have been vouchsafed the same Spirit. We are both hastening
to the same kingdom. We are alike brethren of Christ, we have all things
in common.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p39"></span>Where then is my advantage? In cares, in
labors, in anxieties, in grieving for you. But nothing is sweeter than
this grief, since even a mother grieving for her child is delighted with
her grief, she thinks carefully of those whom she has brought forth, she
is delighted at her cares. And yet care in itself is bitter, but when it
is for children, at least it has in it much pleasure. Many of you have I
begotten, but after this are my pangs. For in the case of mothers in the
flesh the pangs are first, and then the birth. But here the pangs last
till the latest breath, lest there should be anywhere some abortion even
after the birth. And I indeed have a further longing; for although
perchance another has begotten you, yet I nevertheless am harassed with
cares. For we do not of ourselves beget you, but it is all of the grace
of God. But if we both through the Spirit beget, he will not err who
calls those begotten by me, his children, and those begotten by him,
mine. All these things then consider, and stretch forth your hand, that
you may be our boast and we yours, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which God grant that we may all see with confidence, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, with whom, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[389:1072](1130087.htm#fr_1071.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p12"></span> Compare [John xviii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[390:1073](1130087.htm#fr_1072.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p15"></span> He seems only to refer to the words of
[2 Thess. 2.10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>, with the general sense of the context.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[390:1074](1130087.htm#fr_1073.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p18"></span> τὰ συνεκτικὰ; lit. “the things that keep
together.”

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[391:1075](1130087.htm#fr_1074.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p30"></span> \[Field reads “Joshua,” after one MS.,
but the correction is too obvious.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[392:1076](1130087.htm#fr_1075.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p36"></span> \[Something must be supplied, most
probably “to accuse without reason,” as suggested by the
foregoing.—J.A.B.\]

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[392:1077](1130087.htm#fr_1076.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p38"></span> προβάτου, sheep in general, but he seems
to have the Passover in mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians 3:3-5](1130088.md)
