[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft04)  [Next](eft06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Old Woman and Her Pig

<span id="img_005"></span> [![](tn/005.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/005.jpg)

AN old woman was sweeping her house, and she found a little crooked
sixpence. 'What,' said she, 'shall I do with this little sixpence? I
will go to market, and buy a little pig.'

As she was coming home, she came to a stile: but the piggy wouldn't go
over the stile.

She went a little further, and she met a dog. So she said to him: 'Dog!
dog! bite pig; piggy won't go over the stile; and I shan't get home
tonight.' But the dog wouldn't.

<span id="img_006"></span> [![](tn/006.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/006.jpg)

She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said: 'Stick!
stick! beat dog! dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and
I shan't get home tonight.' But the stick wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said: 'Fire! fire!
burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get
over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight.' But the fire wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said: 'Water!
water! quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog
won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home
tonight.' But the water wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said: 'Ox! ox!
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home tonight.' But the ox wouldn't.

<span id="img_011"></span> [![](tn/011.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/011.jpg)

She went a little further and she met a butcher. So she said: 'Butcher!
butcher! kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire
won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't
get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight.' But the butcher
wouldn' t.

She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she said: 'Rope! rope!
hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't
quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite
pig; piggy won' t get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight.'
But the rope wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said: 'Rat! rat!
gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher, butcher won't kill ox; ox won't
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home tonight.' But the rat wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said: 'Cat! cat!
kill rat; rat won' t gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't
kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn
stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over
the stile; and I shan't get home tonight.' But the cat said to her, 'If
you will go to yonder cow, and fetch me a saucer of milk, I will kill
the rat.' So away went the old woman to the cow.

But the the cow said to her: 'If you will go to yonder haystack, and
fetch me a handful of hay, I'll give you the milk.' So away went the old
woman to the hay-stack; and she brought the hay to the cow.

As soon as the cow had eaten the hay, she gave the old woman the milk;
and away she went with it in a saucer to the cat.

As soon as the cat had lapped up the milk, the cat began to kill the
rat; the rat began to gnaw the rope; the rope began to hang the butcher;
the butcher began to kill the ox; the ox began to drink the water; the
water began to quench the fire; the fire began to burn the stick; the
stick began to beat the dog; the dog began to bite the pig; the little
pig in a fright jumped over the stile; and so the old woman got home
that night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Jack Went to Seek his Fortune](eft06)
