<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb19)  [Next](jb21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### XVI.

<span class="small">*Precepts*.</span>

AND he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no
thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body, what ye
shall put on.

2 The life is more than meat, and the body *is more* than raiment.

3 Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have
storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better
than the fowls?

4 And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?

5 If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye
thought for the rest?

6 Consider the lilies how they grow; they toil not, they spin not; and
yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these.

7 If then God so clothe the grass, which is today in the field, and
tomorrow is cast into the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

oven; how much more *will he clothe* you, O ye of little faith?

8 And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be
ye of doubtful mind.

9 For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and your
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things.

10 But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be
added unto you.

11 Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom.

12 Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax
not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief
approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.

13 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

14 Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning;

15 And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he
will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may
open unto him immediately.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

16 Blessed *are* those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find
watching; verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make
them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.

17 And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch,
and find *them* so, blessed are those servants.

18 And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour
the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his
house to be broken through.

19 Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour when
ye think not.

20 ¶ Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us,
or even to all?

21 And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom
*his* lord shall make ruler over his household, to give *them their*
portion of meat in due season?

22 Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

23 Of a truth, I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that
he hath.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

24 But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his
coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat
and drink, and to be drunken;

25 The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for
*him*, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder,
and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.

26 And that servant, which knew his lord's will, and prepared not
*himself*, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
*stripes*.

27 But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall
be beaten with few *stripes*. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more.

28 ¶ And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of the
west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is.

29 And when *ye see* the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat;
and it cometh to pass.

30 *Ye* hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth;
but how is it that ye do not discern this time?

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

31 Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?

32 ¶ When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, *as thou
art* in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him;
lest he hale thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.

33 I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the
very last mite.

34 There were present at that season some that told him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

35 And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans
were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?

36 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

37 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them,
think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?

38 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. Parable of the Fig Tree](jb21.md)

</div>
