<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb25)  [Next](jb27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### XXII.

<span class="small">*Precepts*.</span>

AND he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into
the ground;

2 And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring
and grow up, he knoweth not how.

3 For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then
the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.

4 But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the
sickle, because the harvest is come.

5 ¶ And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with
what comparison shall we compare it?

6 *It is* like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the
earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth:

7 But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all
herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may
lodge under the shadow of it.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

8 And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were
able to hear it.

9 But without a parable spake he not unto them; and when they were
alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.

10 ¶ And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain *man*
said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

11 And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air
*have* nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay *his* head.

12 And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father.

13 Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and
preach the kingdom of God.

14 And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go
bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.

15 And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough
and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

16 ¶ And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican named
Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow me.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

17 And he left all, rose up, and followed him.

18 And Levi made him a great feast in his own house; and it came to
pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and
sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were
many, and they followed him.

19 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and
drinketh with publicans and sinners?

20 When Jesus heard *it*, he saith unto them, They that are whole have
no need of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Parable of New Wine in Old Bottles](jb27)

</div>
