<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb28)  [Next](jb30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXV.

<span class="small">*Mission Instructions, Return of Apostles*.</span>

BUT when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them,
because they fainted and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no
shepherd.

2 ¶ And he called *unto him* the twelve, and began to send them forth by
two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits;

3 These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into *any* city of the Samaritans enter ye
not:

4 But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

5 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

6 Nor scrip for *your* journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor
yet staves: for the workman is worthy of his meat.

7 And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is
worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.

8 And when you come into an house, salute it.

9 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be
not worthy, let your peace return to you.

10 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

11 Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.

12 ¶ Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

13 But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues;

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

14 And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gentiles.

15 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for
verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel,
till the Son of man be come.

16 Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

17 What I tell you in darkness, *that* speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.

18 And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell.

19 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your Father.

20 But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

21 Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

22 And they went out, and preached that men should repent.

23 ¶ And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told
him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. Precepts](jb30.md)

</div>
