<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb32)  [Next](jb34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIX.

<span class="small">*The Feast of the Tabernacles*.</span>

NOW the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand.

2 His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea,
that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.

3 For *there is* no man *that* doeth any thing in secret and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the
world.

4 For neither did his brethren believe in him.

5 Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time is
alway ready.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

6 The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it,
that the works thereof are evil.

7 Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time
is not yet full come.

8 When he had said these words unto them, he abode *still* in Galilee.

9 ¶ But when his brethren were gone up, then, went he also up unto the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.

10 Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he?

11 And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for
some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the
people.

12 Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.

13 ¶ Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and
taught.

14 And the Jews marveled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having
never learned?

15 Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

16 Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law?
Why go ye about to kill me?

17 The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to
kill thee?

18 Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all
marvel.

19 Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man.

20 If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of
Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a
man every whit whole on the sabbath day?

21 Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

22 Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek
to kill?

23 But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the
rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ?

24 ¶ The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning
him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

25 So there was a division among the people because of him.

26 And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.

27 ¶ Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they
said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?

28 The officers answered, Never man spake like this man.

29 Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?

30 Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?

31 But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.

32 Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one
of them,)

33 Doth our law judge *any* man, before it hear him, and know what he
doeth?

34 They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search,
and look: for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.

35 And every man went unto his own house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. The Woman Taken in Adultery](jb34)

</div>
