<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb46)  [Next](jb48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLIII.

<span class="small">*Precepts*.</span>

NOW it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain
village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.

2 And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and
heard his word.

3 But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said,
Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid
her therefore that she help me.

4 And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful
and troubled about many things:

5 But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which
shall not be taken away from her.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

6 And it came to pass, *that* when Jesus had finished these sayings, he
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan;

7 And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.

8 The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him,
Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

9 And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which
made them at the beginning made *them* male and female,

10 And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

11 Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God
hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

12 They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away?

13 He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts
suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not
so.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

14 And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except *it be*
for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso
marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.

15 His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with *his*
wife, it is not good to marry.

16 But he said unto them, All *men* cannot receive this saying, save
*they* to whom it is given.

17 For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from *their* mother's
womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men; and
there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven's sake. He that is able to receive *it*, let him receive *it*.

18 Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put
*his* hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.

19 But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come
unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

20 And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

21 And, behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing
shall I do, that I may have eternal life?

22 And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? *there is* none good
but one, *that is*, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the
commandments.

23 He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou
shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear
false witness,

24 Honour thy father and *thy* mother: and, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself.

25 The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my
youth up: what lack I yet?

26 Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go *and* sell that thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come *and* follow me.

27 But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for
he had great possessions.

28 Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a
rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

29 And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

30 When his disciples heard *it*, they were exceedingly amazed, saying,
Who then can be saved?

31 But Jesus beheld *them*, and said unto them, With men this is
impossible; but with God all things are possible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV. Parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard](jb48)

</div>
