<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb48)  [Next](jb50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLV.

<span class="small">*Zacchaeus, and the Parable of the Talents*.</span>

AND *Jesus* entered and passed through Jericho.

2\. And, behold, *there was* a man named Zacchaeus, which was the chief
among the publicans, and he was rich.

3 And he sought to see Jesus who he was; and could not for the press,
because he was little of stature.

4 And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him: for
he was to pass that *way*.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

5 And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said
unto him, Zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for today I must abide
at thy house.

6 And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.

7 And when they saw *it*, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to
be guest with a man that is a sinner.

8 And Zacchaeus stood, and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken anything from any man
by false accusation, I restore *him* fourfold.

9 And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house,
forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.

10 For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

11 ¶ And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable,
because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the
kingdom of God should immediately appear.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

12 He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to
receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.

13 And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and
said unto them, Occupy till I come.

14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We
will not have this *man* to reign over us.

15 And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the
kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom
he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained
by trading.

16 Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds.

17 And he said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because thou hast been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.

18 And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.

19 And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

20 And another came, saying, Lord, behold, *here is* thy pound, which I
have kept laid up in a napkin:

21 For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up
that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow.

22 And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee,
*thou* wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up
that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow:

23 Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my
coming I might have required mine own with usury?

24 And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and
give *it* to him that hath ten pounds.

25 (And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.)

26 For I say unto you, That unto every one which hath shall be given;
and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from
him.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

27 But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay *them* before me.

28 And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to
Jerusalem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVI. Goes to Jerusalem and Bethany](jb50.md)

</div>
