<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jb56)  [Next](jb58.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141790576X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO5UC/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (the Jefferson Bible)*, by
Thomas Jefferson, \[1902\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### LIII.

<span class="small">*Precepts, Pride, Hypocrisy, Swearing*.</span>

THEN spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,

2 Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat:

3 All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, *that* observe and do;
but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.

4 For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay *them*
on men's shoulders; but they *themselves* will not move them with one of
their fingers.

5 But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad
their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,

6 And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the
synagogues,

7 And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

8 But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, *even* Christ; and
all ye are brethren.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

9 And call no *man* your father upon the earth; for one is your Father,
which is in heaven.

10 Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, *even* Christ.

11 But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.

12 And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall
humble himself shall be exalted.

13 ¶ But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up
the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in *yourselves*,
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

14 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour
widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.

15 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea
and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the child of hell than yourselves.

16 Woe unto you, *ye* blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by
the temple, it is nothing;

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!

17 *Ye* fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple
that sanctifieth the gold?

18 And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever
sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.

19 *Ye* fools and blind: for whether *is* greater, the gift, or the
altar that sanctifieth the gift?

20 Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all
things thereon.

21 And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that
dwelleth therein.

22 And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and
by him that sitteth thereon.

23 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of
mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier *matters* of
the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and
not to leave the other undone.

24 *Ye* blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

25 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean
the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess.

26 *Thou* blind Pharisee, cleanse first that *which is* within the cup
and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

27 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto
whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead *men's* bones, and of all uncleanness.

28 Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye
are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

29 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the
tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,

30 And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

31 Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children
of them which killed the prophets.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

32 Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

33 *Ye* serpents, *ye* generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIV. The Widow's Mite](jb58.md)

</div>
