[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index) [Index](gppt0) [Previous](gppt3) [Next](gppt5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# 'THE PENITENT THIEF'

### (MAJJHIMA NIKÂYA, SUTTA 86)

##### (GOSPEL PARALLELS FROM PÂLI TEXTS, FOURTH SERIES)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XIV

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1900

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April-May, 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

## THE PENITENT THIEF:

EXHIBITING BUDDHA'S DOCTRINE OF THE NEW BIRTH AND THE FORGIVENESS OF
SINS.

<span class="small">Now first translated from the Pâli by ALBERT J.
EDMUNDS.<span id="page_628_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_628_note_1)</span>

>    Middling Collection, Dialogue No. 86.
>
>    [Luke xxiii. 39-43](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#23:39).--And one of the
> malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, Art not thou the
> Christ? save thyself and us. But the other answered, and rebuking him
> said, Dost thou not even fear God, seeing thou art in the same
> condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of
> our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he said, Jesus,
> remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom. And he said unto him,
> Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
>
>    [John iii. 5](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#3:5).--Jesus answered, Verily,
> verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and the Spirit,
> he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
>
>    [Mark ii. 5](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#2:5).--And Jesus seeing their
> faith saith unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins are forgiven.
>
>    Cf. also Eusebius H. E. iii. 23 (the story of the Apostle John
> pursuing and converting the robber).

   Thus have I heard. At one season the Blessed One was staying at
Sâvatthi, in the Conqueror's Grove, the cloister-garden of the Feeder of
the Poor. And at that season there was a robber named Finger-garland
(Angulimâlo) in the realm of Pasenadi, the <span id="page_629">p.
629</span> King of Kosalâ; and he was barbarous, red-handed, devoted to
killing and slaughter, unmerciful to all who live. By him towns,
villages, and districts were made as though they had never been. He slew
men all the time, and wore a garland of their fingers.

   Now the Blessed One, having dressed betimes, took his bowl in his
robe, and went to Sâvatthi for alms. When he had gone round it, and had
returned from the quest of alms in the afternoon, he rolled up his mat,
took his bowl in his robe, and entered upon the high road where
Finger-garland the robber was. Then the herdsmen, cattle-tenders, and
farmers, who were working, saw the Blessed One going thither, and called
to him: "O philosopher! Go not upon that road; for a robber named
Finger-garland is thereon, who is barbarous, red-handed, devoted to
killing and slaughter, unmerciful to all who live. By him towns,
villages, and districts are made as though they had never been. He slays
men all the time and wears a garland of their fingers. O philosopher,
men go upon this road only in companies of ten, twenty, thirty, or
forty; and they go armed for fear of Finger-garland the robber."

   When they had said this, the Blessed One went on his way in silence.
And a second and a third time they said so, but still the Blessed one
went on his way in silence.

   Now Finger-garland the robber saw the Blessed One coming from afar,
and seeing him he thought to himself: "This is wonderful, this is
marvellous: men go upon this road only in companies of ten, twenty,
thirty, or forty, and they go armed for fear of me; but this
philosopher, it seems, is alone, without any one, open to attack. What
if I now take the life of this philosopher?" Then Finger-garland the
robber took his sword and shield, got bow and quiver ready, and walked
behind the Blessed One. But the Blessed One put forth such an effort of
psychical power that Finger-garland the robber, going with all his
might, could not overtake the Blessed One going by his inner force
(*pakati*). So the robber thought to himself: "This is wonderful, this
is marvellous: hitherto I have chased and caught an elephant running, a
horse, a chariot, or a deer; but now, going with all my might, I cannot
overtake this philosopher going by his inner force." He stood and said
to the Blessed One: "Philosopher, stand! Philosopher, stand!"

   "I am standing, O Finger-garland; stand thou also!"

   Then Finger-garland the robber thought to himself: "These Sâkya
philosophers tell the truth and keep their promises. And yet this
philosopher, even while he is going, says, 'I am standing, O
Finger-garland; stand thou also!' What if I now ask him \[what <span
id="page_630">p. 630</span> he means\]?" Then the robber addressed the
Blessed One with a stanza:

   "Philosopher, thou sayest, 'I am standing,' while thou art going, and
thou callest me standing when thou art not so;

   "I ask thee, philosopher, this question: How art thou standing when I
am not standing?"

   "I am standing, O Finger-garland, always among all beings, having
laid aside the staff;

   "But thou art unrestrained among living things: therefore I am
standing, and thou art not."

   "Long has the great Seer (*Isi*),<span
id="page_630_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_630_note_1) this philosopher
debating in the great Wood, been revered by me;

   "I myself will renounce evil for long, having heard thy stanza that
is linked with religion.

   "Even thus does a robber resemble<span
id="page_630_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_630_note_2) a sword or a weapon at
the pit and precipice of hell."

   The robber bowed at the feet of the Auspicious One, and begged of him
ordination on the spot.

   Then Buddha, the compassionate Seer, he who is master of the world
with its angels,

   Said to him: "Come, O monk;" and this was all there was to make him a
monk.

\*  
\*                     \*

   Now the Blessed One, with Finger-garland for an attendant
philosopher, went on his journey towards Sâvatthi and in due time
arrived there; and there the Blessed One stayed at Sâvatthi, in the
Conqueror's Grove, the cloister-garden of the Feeder of the Poor. Now at
that season a great crowd collected at the palace-gate of Pasenadi, the
King of Kosalâ, and there went up a hue and cry: "Your Majesty, there is
a robber in your realm named Finger-garland, who is barbarous,
red-handed, devoted to killing and slaughter, unmerciful to all who
live. By him towns, villages, and districts are made as though they had
never been. He slays men all the time, and wears a garland of their
fingers. Let your Majesty arrest him."

   Now Pasenadi, the King of Kosalâ, departed that day from Sâvatthi
with some five hundred horses and proceeded to the cloister-garden. He
went by chariot as far as the ground was passable for chariots, and then
alighted, and went on foot to where the Blessed One was. Going up to the
Blessed One, he saluted him and sat <span id="page_631">p. 631</span>
respectfully on one side. While he so sat, the Blessed One said to him:
"O great King, is Seniyo Bimbisâro, the King of Magadhâ, provoked at
you, or the Licchavi \[clan\] of Vesâli, or other rival Kings?"

   "Nay, Lord: none of these Kings are provoked at me. But, Lord, there
is in my realm a robber named Finger-garland, who is barbarous,
red-handed, devoted to killing and slaughter, unmerciful to all who
live. By him towns, villages, and districts are made as though they had
never been. He slays men all the time and wears a garland of their
fingers. Lord, I fear I shall not arrest him."

   "But, great King, if you saw Finger-garland with his hair and beard
cut off, having put on the yellow robes and gone forth from domestic
life into the homeless one; abstaining from taking life, from theft, and
from lying; eating one meal a day, chaste, moral, with a glorious
religion,--what would you do to him?"

   "Lord, we should salute him respectfully, or rise in his presence, or
offer him a seat, or present him with robe and alms-bowl, lodging-place,
the requisites for sickness, medicine and conveniences; and we should
appoint for him the protection, toleration, and defence that are due to
religion.<span id="page_631_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_631_note_1) But, Lord, how could
there be such moral restraint in an immoral, wicked man like him?"

   Now at that time the venerable Finger-garland was sitting not far
from the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One, stretching out his right
arm, said to Pasenadi, the King of Kosalâ: "This, great King, is
Finger-garland!"

   Then the King was seized with fear, consternation, and horror, and
the Blessed One, seeing him afraid and agitated with horror, said to
him: "Fear not, great King, fear not; there is nothing for you to fear
any more." So the King, who had been terrified, became calm again, and
went up to Finger-garland, saying to him: "Surely your Reverence is not
Finger-garland?"

   "Yes, great King."

   "What is the clan of your Reverence's father, and what is the clan of
your mother?"

   "Great King, my father is a Gaggo, and my mother a Mantânî."

   "May it please your Reverence Gaggo-Mantânî-son, I shall supply you
with robe and alms-bowl, with a mat to sit and sleep <span
id="page_632">p. 632</span> on, and with the requisites for sickness,
medicine and conveniences."

   But at that season the venerable Finger-garland was a forest-dweller,
with an alms-bowl, and wearing three robes taken from dust-heaps. So he
said to the King: "Enough, great King: three robes are my full outfit."

   Then Pasenadi, the King of Kosalâ, approached the Blessed One,
saluted him respectfully, and sat on one side. And so sitting, the King
said to the Blessed One: "Wonderful, O Lord! Marvellous, O Lord! is it
even until now, O Lord Blessed One: men are tamed among the untamed,
pacified among the unpacified, and among those who have not attained,
they are brought to Nirvâna (literally, extinguished among the
non-extinct). He, Lord, whom we could not tame by staff or sword, is
tamed by the Blessed One without staff and without sword. But now, Lord,
we must go: we have much to do, much business on hand."

   "Just as you think fit, great King."

   So Pasenadi, the King of Kosalâ, rose from his seat, saluted the
Blessed One respectfully, and keeping him on his right hand, departed.

   Then the venerable Finger-garland, having dressed betimes, took bowl
in robe and went into Sâvatthi for alms. And going through Sâvatthi from
house to house for alms, he saw a woman in the agonies of travail, and
thereupon thought to himself: "Alas, how beings suffer; alas, how beings
suffer!"

   Now the venerable Finger-garland, having gone to Sâvatthi for alms
and returned in the afternoon, approached the Blessed One, saluted him,
and sat as usual, and said: "Lord, to-day on my begging rounds in
Sâvatthi, while I went from house to house, I saw a woman in the agonies
of travail; whereupon I thought to myself: 'Alas, how beings suffer;
alas, how beings suffer!'"

   "Well now, Finger-garland, go to Sâvatthi, go up to that woman and
say this: 'Since I was born, sister, I do not remember that I ever
purposely took the life of anything that breathes. By this truth be
there safety to thee and safety to thy womb.'"

   "But, Lord, that would surely be for me a deliberate lie: by me,
Lord, have many breathing things been reft of life."

   "Well, then, Finger-garland, go to Sâvatthi, approach that woman and
say: 'Sister, since I was <span class="small">BORN OF THE NOBLE
BIRTH</span>' I do not remember that I ever purposely took the life of
aught that breathes. By this truth be there safety to thee and safety to
thy womb."

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

   "Even so, Lord," said the venerable Finger-garland, in assent unto
the Blessed One; and going into Sâvatthi, he approached that woman and
said: 'Sister, since I was <span class="small">BORN OF THE NOBLE
BIRTH</span> I do not remember that I ever purposely took the life of
aught that breathes. By this truth be there safety unto thee and safety
to thy womb."

   Whereupon there was safety unto that woman, and safety to her womb.
And forthwith the venerable Finger-garland, dwelling alone, retired,
earnest, ardent, and strenuous, for a little time, realised by his own
supernal Knowledge, and even in this world, that incomparable goal of
the religious life, for the sake whereof do veritable gentlemen go forth
from the domestic life into the homeless one: he perceived that birth
was destroyed, the religious life was lived, and duty done, and for this
existence there was naught beyond. And so the venerable Finger-garland
became one of the Arahats.

   Now the venerable Finger-garland, having dressed betimes, took bowl
in robe, and went to Sâvatthi for alms; and on one occasion a clod of
earth was thrown and hit his person; upon another occasion a stick, and
yet again a stone. Then the venerable Finger-garland, with his head
broken and the blood flowing, his bowl broken and his robe rent,
approached the Blessed One. And the Blessed One saw him coming from
afar, and said to him: "Bear up, O Brâhman, bear up! *You are feeling in
this world the effect of some deed for which you would have been
tormented in hell for many years, for many hundreds and thousands of
years.*"

   Then the venerable Finger-garland, when secluded and solitary, felt
the bliss of deliverance, and on that occasion gave vent to the
following Udâna:

   \[The Dialogue ends with a page of verse. The words italicised are
important. This is the doctrine of the forgiveness of sins. To the
Arahat all the past is wiped away, and he only suffers such physical
effects of evil as those described; but no retribution can follow him
beyond the grave.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gppt5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_628">p. 628</span>

<span id="page_628_note_1"></span>[1](#page_628_fr_1). There is a
corrupt version of this story in Spence Hardy, translated from mediæval
Ceylon sources, but the present is its first translation from the Pâli.
Its antiquity is attested by the Pâli Great Chronicle, which tells us
that it was sculptured, together with other leading stories from
Buddha's life, upon the great Tope at the capital of Ceylon, in the
second century B.C. The sculptures of similar scenes at Bharhut and
Sânci forbid our rejecting the Chronicle's list of Ceylon sculptures as
fiction. \[Owing to lack of time, the proofs of the present article have
not been read by the author.-*Ed*.\]

<span id="footnotes_page_630">p. 630</span>

<span id="page_630_note_1"></span>[1](#page_630_fr_1). Sanskrit,
*Rishi*.

<span id="page_630_note_2"></span>[2](#page_630_fr_2). *Anvakârî*.

<span id="footnotes_page_631">p. 631</span>

<span id="page_631_note_1"></span>[1](#page_631_fr_1). Rhys Davids
translates the same phrase in the *Long Collection* thus: "watch and
ward and guard, according to the law." The "or" in our present
translation of this paragraph arises from a difference in the text.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
