[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index) [Index](gppt0) [Previous](gppt1) [Next](gppt3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# GOSPEL PARALLELS FROM PÂLI TEXTS

##### (second series)

### by Albert J. Edmunds

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XIV

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1900

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April-May, 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

## GOSPEL PARALLELS FROM PÂLI TEXTS.

<span class="small">Translated from the Originals by ALBERT J.
EDMUNDS.</span>

<span class="small">(Second Series).</span>

 

<span id="pp_1"></span>{1} THE MASTER REMEMBERS A PRE-EXISTENT STATE.

<span class="small">Itivuttaka 22. [John xvii.
5](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#17:5). (Not before translated).</span>

THIS was spoken by the Blessed One, spoken by the Arahat and heard by
me.

   O monks, be not afraid of good works: such is the name for happiness,
for what is wished, desired, dear, and delightful, namely good works.
And for a long time have I known, monks, the wished-for, desired, dear,
delightful and severally enjoyed results of good works done for a long
time. Having practised benevolence for seven years, I did not return to
this world during the revolution and evolution of an æon. Yea, monks,
for the revolution of an æon I was an Angel of Splendour, and during the
evolution I rose again in the empty palace of the Brahmâs. Yea, then, O
monks, I was a Brahmâ, the great Brahmâ, conquering, unconquered,
all-seeing, controlling. And thirty-six times, O monks, was I Sakko, the
lord of the angels; many hundreds of times I was a king, a righteous
emperor, a king of righteousness,<span
id="page_246_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_246_note_1) victorious in the four
quarters, securely established in my country, and possessed of the seven
treasures. Now what was the doctrine of that region and kingdom? This is
what I thought of it, O monks: What deed of mine, is this the fruit of?
Of what deed is this the result, whereby now I am thus magical and
mighty? This is what I thought of it, O, monks: This is the fruit of
three deeds of mine, the result of three deeds, whereby now I am thus
magical and mighty, to wit: alms, control, and abstinence.

   \[The substance of this Sutta is then put into two stanzas\].

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

   Exactly this is the meaning of what the Blessed One said, and it was
heard by me.

 

<span id="pp_2"></span>{2} FAITH TO REMOVE MOUNTAINS.

<span class="small">Numerical Collection VI. 24. [Matthew xvii. 20,
21](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#17:20). (Not before translated.)</span>

   <span class="small">(Repeated in Matt. xxi, which is parallel with
Mark xi. But the added verse which appears in some MSS., Matt. xvii. 21,
is analogous to Gotamo's exclamation about ignorance).</span>

   Monks, a monk endowed with six qualities can cleave the Himâlaya, the
monarch of mountains. But what a doctrine for vile ignorance! Which are
the six?

   Monks, suppose a monk is expert in the attainment of Trance (or
Concentration), in the maintenance thereof and the rising therefrom;
expert in the obscure intimations of trance, in its range, and in
earnest aspiration thereunto. A monk endowed with these six qualities, O
monks, can cleave the Himâlaya, the monarch of mountains. But what a
doctrine for vile ignorance!

 

<span id="pp_3"></span>{3} THE BELOVED DISCIPLE REACHES HEAVEN HERE.

<span class="small">Numerical Collection III. 80. [John xxi.
22](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#21:22). Cf. [Mark ix.
1](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#9:1). (Not before translated).</span>

   Udâyi, if Ânando should die with passion unsubdued, yet by his
believing heart he would seven times obtain an angelic kingdom among the
angels; and even in this India he would obtain a great kingdom seven
times. But, O Udâyi, even in this life, will Ânando enter Nirvâ.na.

 

<span id="pp_4"></span>{4} THE MASTER KNOWS GOD AND HIS KINGDOM.

<span class="small">Long Collection, Dialogue 13. (Translated In [S. B.
E. XI](../../bud/sbe11/sbe1105). and in [*Sacred Books of the
Buddhists*, Vol. 2](../../bud/dob/dob-13tx), each time by Rhys Davids:
1881 and 1899).  
[John vi. 46](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#6:46); [vii.
29](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#7:29); [viii. 42](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#8:42),
[55](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#8:55).</span>

   That man, O Vâse.t.tha, born and brought up at Manasâkata, might
hesitate or falter when asked the way thereto. But not so does the
Tathâgato hesitate or falter when asked of the kingdom of God (world of
Brahmâ) or the path that goeth thereto. For I, O Vâse.t.tha, know both
God and the Kingdom of God and the path that goeth thereto; I know it
even as<span id="page_247_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_247_note_1) one who hath entered the
Kingdom of God and been born there.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span id="pp_5"></span>{5} THE MISSIONARY CHARGE.

<span class="small">[Mark vi. 7-13](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#6:7); [Matthew
xxviii. 19, 20](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#28:19); [Luke x.
1](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#10:1).  
Mahâvaggo I, 10, 11. (Translated in S. B. E. XIII. p. 112).</span>

   At that time there were sixty-one<span
id="page_248_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_248_note_1) Arahats in the world.

   And the Blessed One said unto the monks: "I am delivered, O monks,
from all fetters, human and divine. Ye, O monks, are also delivered
therefrom. Go forth, O monks, on your journey for the weal and the
welfare of much people, out of compassion for the world, and for the
wealth and the weal and the welfare of angels and mortals. Go no two of
you the same way. Preach, monks, the Doctrine which is glorious in its
origin, glorious at the climax, glorious at the end, in the spirit and
the letter. Proclaim a religious life wholly perfect and thoroughly
pure. There are beings whose mental eyes are darkened by hardly any
dust, but unless they hear the Doctrine they will perish. They will
understand it.

 

<span id="pp_6"></span>{6} AN ETERNAL SIN.

<span class="small">[Mark iii. 29](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#3:29). (R. V.
1881.) Cullavaggo VII. 3. (Translated in S. B. E. XX. p. 254)</span>

   "Is it true, Devadatto, as they say, that thou goest about to stir up
schism in the Order and schism in our society?"--"It is true, O Blessed
One."--"Enough, Devadatto. Let not schism in the Order be pleasing unto
thee: serious, O Devadatto, is a schism in the Order. Whosoever,
Devadatto, divides the Order when it is at peace gives birth to *an
æon-lasting fault*, and for an æon he is tormented in hell. But
whosoever, Devadatto, makes peace in the Order when it has been divided
gives birth to the highest merit (literally, Brahmâ-merit), and for an
æon he is happy in Paradise."

   \[The words {Greek: *aiwnion amarthma*} in Mark iii. 29, are the
exact verbal equivalent of the Pâli *kappa*.t.t*hikam kibbisam*, or, as
the Siam edition has it, *kappa*.t.t*hitikam*. Schism is the deadly sin
of Buddhism, the other four of its deadly sins being rare deeds of
violence--matricide, parricide, saint-murder and wounding a Buddha. The
deadly sin of the New Testament is resistance to the Divine operation,
while that of the Mazdeans is self-defilement. (S. B. E. IV., p. 101.)
The Christian and Buddhist ones are of long retribution, but terminable,
for everlasting hell was unknown to the Jews at the time of Christ, and
therefore unknown to the Master's terms. Only the Mazdean uses the
language of absolute despair; but if the <span id="page_249">p.
249</span> universalism of the Bundahish be a true tradition from the
lost Dâmdâd Nosk, then even this sin is finally forgiven.\]

 

<span id="pp_7"></span>{7} TRANSFIGURATION.

<span class="small">[Mark ix. 2-8](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#9:2). Book of
the Great Decease. p. 46 of the Pâli. (Translated in [S. B. E.
XI](../../bud/sbe11/sbe1103).)</span>

   Now not long after Pukkuso the Mallian had gone, the venrable Ânando
placed upon the person of the Blessed One that pair of gold-cloth robes,
burnished and ready for wear. And when so placed upon the person of the
Blessed One it appeared bereft of its brightness.

   And the venerable Ânando said unto the Blessed One: "Wonerful, O
Lord! Marvellous, O Lord! that the color of the Tathâgato's skin should
be so pure and purified. For when I placed upon the person of the
Blessed One this pair of gold-cloth robes, burnished and ready for wear,
it appeared bereft of its brightness."

   Ânando, it is even so. There are two occasions, Ânando, when the
color of a Tathâgato's skin becomes pure and exceeding purified. What
are the two?--On the night, Ânando, wherein a Tathâgato is supernally
enlightened with incomparable and perfect Enlightenent, and on the night
when he enters Nirvâ.na with that kind<span
id="page_249_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_249_note_1) of Nirvâ.na which leaves
no substrata behind: on these two occasions the color of a Tathagato's
skin becomes pure and exceeding purified. And now, Ânando, this day, in
the third watch of the night, in the garden ground of Kusinârâ, in the
sâl-grove of the Mallians, between the twin sâl-trees, will take place
the Tathâgato's passage into Nirvâ.na. Come, Ânando, let us go on unto
the river Kakutthâ." "Even so, Lord," said the venerable Ânando, in
assent unto the Blessed One.

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   The pair of burnished gold-cloth robes were brought by Pukkuso:<br />
   The Master, when begirt therewith, in golden color shone.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   \[The stanza proclaims the antiquity of the legend.\]

 

<span id="pp_8"></span>{8} THE NATIVITY.

   See *The Open Court* for [August, 1898](cabgb), with critical notes
in November, 1898, and June, 1899. The same story from another and
fuller version in the Canon has been translated by me in separate form.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

   (*The Marvellous Birth of the Buddhas*: Philadelphia, McVey 1899.
Price, 25 cents). The oldest Canonical Nativity legend is that of the
*Sutta Nipâto* (translated in S. B. E., Vol. X.) I hope in the future to
publish a new translation.

 

<span id="pp_9"></span>{9} POWER OVER EVIL SPIRITS AND ASSOCIATION WITH
ANGELS.

<span class="small">[Mark iii. 11](../../bib/kjv/mar.htm#3:11); [Matthew
xxvi. 53](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#26:53); [John i.
51](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#1:51). Udâna I. 7.</span>

   Thus have I heard. At one season the Blessed One was staying at
Pâ.talî, at the Goat-herd Shrine, in the haunt of the Goblin Goat-herd.
Now at that season the Blessed One was sitting throughout the thick
darkness of the night in the open air, and one by one an angel would
touch him. Then the Goblin Goat-herd, being seized with fear and
bristling terror, approached the Blessed One and when near him uttered
thrice his cry of "Blighted! Affrighted!" and said in his fright: "This
demon is thine, O Prophet!"<span id="page_250_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_250_note_1)

   Then the Blessed One, when he had understood the fact, gave vent,
upon that occasion, to the following Udâna:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   "When the Brâhman bath passed beyond his own idea (<em>dhammâ</em>),<br />
   Then doth he overcome this demon and monster."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gppt3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_246">p. 246</span>

<span id="page_246_note_1"></span>[1](#page_246_fr_1). Or King by right,
the Epic title of a Hindû suzerain.

<span id="footnotes_page_247">p. 247</span>

<span id="page_247_note_1"></span>[1](#page_247_fr_1). The Siam text has
*even as Brahmâ* (i.e., God or archangel). Though the Buddhists held
that the supreme Godhead was an office, not a person, and that Buddha
himself had held that office in a past eternity (see above), yet they
ascribed to the chief Brahmâ all the Christian titles of the Deity.
(*Long Collection*, Dialogues I and XI.)

<span id="footnotes_page_248">p. 248</span>

<span id="page_248_note_1"></span>[1](#page_248_fr_1). Rendel Harris
suggests a parallel, if not a connexion, with Luke's Seventy who went to
the Gentiles.

<span id="footnotes_page_249">p. 249</span>

<span id="page_249_note_1"></span>[1](#page_249_fr_1). See *Itivuttaka*
44, for the two kinds of Nirvâ.na. I do not fear to translate thus in
view of this remarkable passage, so obviously referred to in our text.
One line of the primitive Itivuttaka is worth whole pages of the
developed Dialogues.

<span id="footnotes_page_250">p. 250</span>

<span id="page_250_note_1"></span>[1](#page_250_fr_1). The Pâli
*Samano*, in contradistinction to *Brâhmano*, is precisely the Old
Testament prophet as against the priest. Buddha, however, persistently
idealised the word "Brâhman," as in our present stanzas, to mean an
Arahat. But in the familiar phrase, *samana-brâhmanâ*, the word is used
in its usual sense, and I should translate: "prophets and priests," or
"philosophers and brahmins." The *samanas* were the freethinking
ascetics of the caste of the nobles, like Gotamo himself, who did not
believe in priestly orthodoxy. They united the qualities of the Hebrew
prophet and the Greek philosopher, having the fervour of the one and the
dialectic of the other.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
