[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Zoroastrian
Articles](../../zor/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# GOD AND HIS IMMORTALS

### BY LAWRENCE HEYWORTH MILLS

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XXI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1907

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, July 2002. Circumflexes represent macrons in this file.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

## GOD AND HIS IMMORTALS.

<span class="small">BY LAWRENCE HEYWORTH MILLS.</span>

 

AHURA.

   AHURA, the life-Spirit-Lord, existed as a word in its form of Asura
from immemorial ages in the common primeval home of Veda and Avesta; and
no name could be nobler for a holy God. It is better than Deus,—Zeus,
which referred to the shining sky; better than "God," far *better* in
its origin at least; for, curiously enough, it expressed the same
supervening ideas that we have in the Hebrew Yahveh which was later
thought to mean "the being One," the "I am that I am."<span
id="page_33_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_33_note_1) This is the very same
concept which lives essentially and etymologically in Ahura; for He is
the source and interior of being, *Ahu-ra*; and, so far as I can
remember, this is the deepest epithet that has ever been prominently
applied to Deity. With this we have the other name Mazda, "the Great
Creater," or with tradition the "Great Wise One." No words could be more
impressive nor more interpenetrating.<span
id="page_33_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_33_note_2)

 

THE AMESHA SPENTA.

   While the six characteristics—virtues would not be the proper
word—are absolutely the main laws of a righteous universe, clear and
pure. Simple indeed they are, as all things universal must be;—common
too, as the breath-air that we breathe, for life is common; they are the
most interior and elevating forces in all that we really know, or so to
us they should be. Here they are in a sense collected; and in them all
that is fittest for expression speaks to us. Not of themselves only do
they thus impel us, once merely uttered, and then left wandering,
scattered as it were amidst an innumerable host of other similarly
treasured spiritual things. Gems of imperishable cost they would be, or
they are, even then as so dispersed. <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> and
so existing to us, though almost irretrievably hidden amidst the throngs
of other beauty from our most eager sight. And so indeed they actually
once lay strewn like jewels of first water all dull and unpolished and
rarely recognized in the bed-rock of their unwrought mines or buried in
their native clay;—vague surmises were they ever even then of the
eternal way in which the beneficial powers sometimes work for us for
good. But here, as seen, they are gathered up for us; not like the
glittering objects in a diadem,—that would be *indeed* too low an
image,—not like the flowers upon a full-flushed tree, but like the solar
systems around their central orb. Like this these all-pervading
order-forces revolve around the throne of their Great Sovereign;—nay
more, they actuate the very Person of the God Omnipotent,—in honor—they
are not His decorations; far from it,—God forbid. They are His very
Nature. He is the self-dividing, all enclosing Prism of them all,—the
One of glorious hues that fold and unfold themselves in everlasting
light. They are in a word God's character, than which no further thought
is thinkable. And as the eternal ideals of all truth and order, they are
those essential conditions of well-being, toward which all sentient
subjects spiritually gravitate and should forever yearn;—and they are
here enthroned,—made dominant,—set over everything in a way pre-eminent,
though they have indeed evolved themselves through long preceding ages,
nay rather, though they have gathered crystal-like in their clusters
through previous cycling æons.

 

ASHA.

   Asha, the very first law of all our better consciousness, here even
seriously gains in its application, marvelous as such a thing may seem
to some of us to be.

   It, Asha, is indeed itself and in itself, Heaven's and nature's first
moral guide, here declared also to be the first principle of God's
eternal being. It is lifted up by all that there is in the conception of
the divine personality,—brought into operation,—becoming at once when
established among the Six a mighty challenging idea flinging its
defiance at that one gigantic, but malign element, its opposite, the
Lie, a spirit demon which withers us on every side. It proclaimed the
Truth in the post-ultimate meaning of the word, asserting that there was
indeed such a thing as a law actual,—and this not as a pointless
sentiment, feebly fluttering, but as the very first instinct of God's
character. From eternity past it has been the same, so in the vital
present, and to all coming futurity will it abide unchangeable.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

   If we, who struggle to maintain honor, believe God to be indeed a
person, here is a support immeasurable for us. The great crucified but
risen Christ of faith cheers all our efforts on, for it has an almighty
mind to harbor it and to guard it, to assist it, and proclaim it in the
very ultimate essence of its worth;—for of such a mind is it indeed an
all-controlling, dominant, though merely regulative part.

   What a consolation indeed for those who think Truth possible and who
believe in God in any sense of Him;—to think that there is at least one
person who is True,—and *such a Person!* And we see how beautifully such
a creed applies itself. Here we have a God omnipotent to protect us, and
to further us, and to bless us;—but He consists, in part at least, of
fidelity; and we have no connection with Him save as we are faithful.
Abandon honor and He vanishes. There is no God but the *true God, the
Asha-God*.

   But like all things of its nature the growth of this great but simple
principle, in its recognition of course I mean, was, as I say, but
gradual.

   It developed at first slowly enough indeed, as we may both most
readily conjecture and concede, with languid signs of life as its first
glimmer shone among the vague dreams of sentient beings, glowing feebly
into fuller light. And elsewhere and aside from either, it seems to have
been in fact the very last and most remote of all the ideas to be
recognized as concentered and so elevated in the forms of ancient
creeds, as at all in any way a particular trait of any one of all the
beings called "divine," not even of the chief of them, so luxuriantly
depicted as they are in the wreaths of our immortal song.

   Even in the pre-Gâthic age it, Asha of the Holy Truth, was of course
surmised dimly as a universal regulative power;—but only by degrees did
it unfold itself into clear consciousness as it grew, as all things like
it must. That is to say, the very first idea of it as a concept
developed but tardily as our race rose from its animal
predecessors.—Some sort of consecutive sequence may indeed have even
revealed itself to the instincts of the higher animals; the next beneath
us; but it is better to confine ourselves to man.

   The observed regularity in the sequence of natural phenomena first
riveted attention as we grew human;—especially the heavenly bodies
seemed to follow some rule, chief of all and naturally the God-like sun,
which was often seen quite unclouded for long periods in lands called
Iran. Its august reappearances followed Law even in its supervening
changes in situation and intensity, with occasional <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> eclipse. It never failed, and on its fidelity
the balance of all existing necessary objects seemed to hang. Without
one phase of it planting would be impossible, without another harvest,
without a third the source of tonic health.

   Soon the moon, its brother luminary, for the moon is masculine both
in Veda and Avesta, took up the tale with his five changes, and with
these the reverting atmospheric modifications seemed to harmonize.

   The main features of the advancing year-time seemed ever calculable.
The great wind-storms of the Marutis, with their driven clouds flying on
before them, seemed to arrive at certain intervals in many regions
including India, with the return of ice and snow elsewhere and mostly
hated,—the periodic rains torrential or soft and fertilizing, the dews
and the flowering earth itself:—these all followed one another at
seeming regulated intervals;—it was Asha, order. Endeared among all else
was the inextinguishable fire not only blazing in the ever
self-consuming God of day, but in the very bowels of the earth, known
too in the caloric of plants, flaming also in forked lightning in the
heavens, snake-like in figure;—again it was the friend of man on hearth
and altar. Asha became its very synonym, and so from this its
sacredness, from regularity; it was indeed "God's son."<span
id="page_36_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_36_note_3) Then too the great ocean
tides, to recall again the waters, with their ever measurable ebb and
flood, could not have been altogether unknown to them, our early
forebears, through hearsay, though living inland:—so too the spring
freshets with swollen streams were ever to be looked for in their times.
All was the unvarying circling forms of recurring certainty;—it was
Asha, *rita*, "rhythm." It reigned supreme in the {hor}rific {?} as in
the genial.

   What wonder then that they began to think that the thoughts of God
were similar, supposing always that they had at that time any distinct
idea whatsoever of a God,—that His law in some of its interior elements
would harmonize with this rhythm "as to thought, as to word, and as to
deed";—that is to say, that it should be "perfect, converting the soul."

   All was symmetric in its movements; that is, all was Asha. It was
"nature" always and everywhere, *natura* "to be born," and to be born
again, *natura*, not *futura* merely, but *natura*, to be rhythmically
born in a reappearance never unreasoned in its process,—seed, stem,
leaves, fruit, to seed, stem, leaves and fruit again,—stream, mist,
cloud, rain, to stream, mist, cloud, rain again,—spring freshness,
summer bloom, autumn harvest, winter frost with cheer <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> or misery—to spring, bloom, harvest, frost
again. It was law forever fulfilling itself,—Asha, Rita, Rhythm.

   So in the old Veda in those early days, when man had however somewhat
begun to form himself; Rita was so distinctly recognized that the very
ceremonial service to the Heavenly Spirits followed its course in
imitation. "Rite" appeared as Rita; that is to say, regularity in
disciplined religious action in a form spectacular, presented
ceaselessly and seldom varying, never abruptly, strictly and strenuously
carried out by priests with closest care, consecrated for the ceremonial
in sacrifice and praise.

   But it was only in the stern Gâtha, rough and sparse but glorious,
that the Rita, Asha, became so exalted as the passionate honor of an
Holy God in a sense supreme, a deity whose creature, the very foremost
of all the other divine beings it was declared to be.<span
id="page_37_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_37_note_4) What an exaltation, let
me again assert it, for simple but awful justice, the first pure
principle of all sane consciousness at least in man, and as we see, the
first spiritual force in God. He is not an "infinite person," which
could only be the language of inadvertence, for a "person cannot be
infinite,"<span id="page_37_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_37_note_5) but He is a *universal
person* in whom we live and move; the Great Omnipotent, Omniscient,
All-holy;—and He is *ashavan*, no liar.

 

VOHU MANAH.

   Then Vohu Manah, the "Good Mind," was again a thing enthroned, and
for that alone, if for nothing else, made eminent. This was again too a
curious thought in a savage age in far off Persia to be placed in such
position—for then it was that the gods of Greece wrangled like vulgar
households and even our Jewish Yahveh was a "consuming fire."

   Vohu Manah;—it was a deep yearning in the universe toward all the
good, making what was best in their sentient longings real. It was more
than a tame negation, a lifeless acquiescence; it was a warm breath of
active sympathy, a passion pervading conscious nature everywhere like a
befriending instinct, a slender thread of sweetness in all the
intricacies of interior feeling that gives us hope through the maniac
jars of this thing which we call life. Vohu Manah;—it was all that is
holiest in emotions, fervor in pure breasts and brains; the quiet force
in the love of man for his brother; the power in the noble love of man
for woman so deep and so transforming, <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>
fierce too also at times, past holding;—Vohu Manah—it is the father's
solemn all-giving watchfulness which makes the name of "son" our deepest
word.

   Above all else it is the mother-love, that nerve of all controlling
tenderness planted in every female soul over a little thing endowed for
that very reason with a charm unspeakable,—to win and keep. And this
Vohu Manah is again not left,—according to the Gâtha,—a blind, unguided
force, though beatitic, in the world of sentient being;—it is an
attribute and emotion of a Supreme Person (morally supreme)—Vohu
Manah,—it meant the deep love of Almighty God for all the righteous
living under His holy eye;—His creatures all the good were, and so was,
in a still nearer sense, each one of them His child.

 

KHSHATHRA.

   With Khshathra we come upon the deeply fundamental element of *Rule*.

   Not men, nor angels can persist without it. Some forceful form of
right is needed to control and maintain the Law and Love, shaping their
every application.

   Khshathra, government, administration!—without it chaos would ensue.
With anarchy all property would turn worthless; no man could earn his
bread; progress would be imperilled. Khshathra is command, severe indeed
at times. Strength must emerge from commonplace while commonplace
resists it. Conspiracy is unveiled by government—law put in force,
Khshathra as "strength" meant discipline, combination with
organization;—without it rallying points would be difficult, and the
dush-Khshathra would sweep the isolated hordes away. Fields could not be
cultivated safe from Aeshma, "Raid fury of the bloody spear." And
Khshathra rules in fact in every sentient being from the mammoths to the
ant-tribes, while man is paramount because of it. And what a
satisfaction have we here again, who believe the Gâtha. Khshathra is not
alone a universal law—though marvelous indeed as such he would be, or he
is—part of the moving crystallization of the ever re-forming universe;
the forceful way in which things come and hold together, while like the
flying blood they circulate. It is more: it is the *rule of our
Sovereign God over us*. Where would be, indeed, the Truth—instinct of
sincerity though it is? where the Love, to lead us on, if there be no
actual accordant *Power*. In Gâtha it is *the authority of God*, as
universal Monarch, exercising His might throughout His all-world and at
every pulse.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

   We at times indeed lose courage, recalling our human
administrations;—but if we believe that *God is King*, our hopes revive.
According to the divine doctrine, and in the full implications, every
needed office in every government, as well as every official, was and is
in the very fact energized and vivified by Khshathra as the controlling
force in the Life-spirit-Lord. He stands through Khshathra in every
court of justice seeing that the wronged are protected. With His
Khshathra He controls the voice of evidence, the judge's faith. He is
present in the arm of execution, bars the prison gates, and strikes the
oppressor dead. In the wide conflicts of politics He is above all things
dominant, as Khshathra. In war He orders the compact mass through
it;—straightens the flagging lines. It is His Khshathra that brings on
*verethraghna*, victory, saving an imperiled land;—and in the result His
authority supports the well-won, or the long established, throne. God is
everywhere supreme according to the doctrine, always as implied<span
id="page_39_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_39_note_6)—through this authority;
without His firm grasp all rules would be reversed.

 

ARAMAITI.

   And then there was the Aramaiti, the Toil-Mind, the *ara*-thought of
God; vivification of the holy, sacred forces just depicted, the
self-movement throughout all better things; motion perpetual,—the
eternal nerve indeed of holiness never for an instant left relaxed.

   The Ara-mind of the Truth and Love and Power,—first stirring the
ploughshare in the mould,—to *ar* in *aratrum*,<span
id="page_39_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_39_note_7)—making fair life
possible, displacing murder, theft and arson.

   It was in fact in the first keen idea of it, *holy work*,—and above
all that of husbandry, first deed of virtue; the very earth itself from
this took on the name in both Veda and Avesta. With it she also is
Aramaiti, and as such sacred. Aramaiti should be to us the point of
everything, the practical application of the other noble three. It was
the central open secret of all the Gâthic existence; and it was vital.
It was the life, virile thought of effort as against lazy theft. It
found the tribes swept by the murderous raids of ferocious neighbors
drunk with greed, their homes destroyed, their crops devastated, and
their holy herds driven off, by Aeshma. Retaliation threatened to turn
them too to murder; but the Gâthic voice arose, as ever fresh, calling
for civilization with honest toil. The <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
armed saint of the Gâthic battle was the *fshushyant* par eminence as
against the *afshushyant*,—this distinctly.

   He was "the cattle-breeding husbandman" toiling in the field with
*ara*—thought, as against Aeshma. Where was the use of the Law, the
Love, the Authority with hordes of starving families on land abandoned,
derelict,—with savage bands rushing often headlong in, filling their
barns with the plundered crops and raided flocks of murdered husbandmen?

   How could the Law prevail without something in which the Law could
have its exercise,—a nation. Aramaiti in one keen sense of it, and at
its first idea was "industry," as I insist—without it no householder
could accumulate the very means of civil life; for it is the persistent,
wise, practical and so accumulating citizen, who builds up his country,
as we know. Blustering disturbers, even when half well-meaning, waste
the bread. The first duty of a human creature is to earn its living; if
it does not do that, it eats some other being's food, makes others
poorer, is the cause of famine.

   Enough has been said to make my idea clear. It was energetic
occupation and first of all for the one thing needful, bread, honest
bread for the hungry, tilling the Holy Earth, herself the sacred
Aramaiti.<span id="page_40_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_40_note_8) This was the idea's
origin, as I think; and it was a worthy and noble one, becoming soon
exalted even in that far-off day till it took its place upon the very
brow of Deity among the Creator's attributes. Here too it gave the
keynote to the rest.

   As it was the sacred instinct of mind-directed labor settling the
destiny of man toward manhood, stopping his tendency to remain a beast
of prey; so it became zeal, the "zeal of the Lord of hosts" in other
cycles of idea—spontaneous instigation, instinctive planned activity. It
was the main-spring of the never erring mechanism, driving on the
mother-love with ever-living thrills of tenderness, moving on forever
keen and fresh the father's active thoughtfulness. It impelled the fire
of mind in the expressed emotions of the singer and composer;—filled out
the organizer's schemes, kept up the ardor of the scholar keen and rapid
and maintained it discovering, advancing. It was the quickness of the
soldier, combining movements at a glance,—the genius of invention,
building out the world's capacities. It was the *ara-maiti*,
self-toiling thought, stirring the hand and ear of creative passion
everywhere. It was, in a word, our Inspiration.

   In God, the divine instinct of activity, the essential force in
spirit-motion; in man inspired obedience, in woman, piety, mild <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> indeed, half unconscious, but still strenuous
through all. No wonder that in pleasing memory God called it "daughter."
It is the burning soul of the other three, the friend of Truth, the
sister of Mercy, the handmaid of Command.

 

HAURVATAT.

   Haurvatat was the completeness of it all, again made here
magnificent. She was the realization of the ideal, the wealth of health,
and the health of wealth, in fact that very vision of perfection that
should float as an ideal on the surface, or above every optimistic
scheme to help it on and to make it actual. It was, in a word,
*Fruition*. Who has not tasted somewhat of it at fleeting moments? It
meant that justice should be more than a delusive subterfuge, hiding the
sinister approach of theft forever creeping towards us. It meant that
Love's longing should sometime touch their dearest goal, that just power
should really reach dominion, that all nature's good instincts should
succeed. It was with another's word, "to be satisfied." The name itself
means All-ness, Haurvatat, the Vedic *sarvatat*, the great wall of full
attainment enclosing the other Four. And goal and aim of all we hope
for, we have again the satisfaction of it. *This Allness is again of
God*: and if He be the Haurva, sarva, All, surely there is some
expectation left to us that we may one day gain what our better
instincts wish.

 

AMERETATAT.

   While Immortality, as ever lifted up in Attribute, should be the
permanence. God has no beginning, and so we all shrink with Him from an
ending. Death is to some of us, delusively, woe's ultimate. One can
scarce refrain from citing the schooldays' rhymes so beautiful, though
sad, of Halleck:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">"Come to the bridal chamber, Death!<br />
   Come to the mother's, when she feels<br />
For the first time her first-born's breath!<br />
   Come when the blessed seals<br />
That close the pestilence are broke,<br />
And crowded cities wail its stroke!<br />
Come in consumption's ghastly form,<br />
The earthquake shock, the ocean storm!<br />
Come when the heart beats high and warm,<br />
   With banquet song, and dance, and wine!<br />
And thou art terrible!—the tear,<br />
The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier,<br />
And all we know or dream or fear<br />
   Of agony are thine."<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

   But the holy faith held out its banishment. The glory of the Truth,
the deep satisfaction of the Love, the sense of safety from the Power,
the Inspiration and the Fruition should not end in inanition. The cup
was not to be put to the lip only to excite desire, and to be dashed
from it. There was to be an Ameretatat—death-absence. Like the Aditi of
the Veda, Ahura was without beginning of days, and so consequently
without end of years:—Eternity, Oh Eternity!—this, in another sense. As
there was no beginning in God, so there was never a beginning to His
works. He had put them forth from past eternity, and He will continue to
do the like on to endless futurity, the same;—and so the life of the
holy man should be deathless to a degree even here; but it should be
also supernaturally immortal;—and this, when pointed, awoke everywhere
the deepest hope, "bringing life and immortality to light." Strange as
it may seem to us, the other life came largely from Arya, from Iran from
India. Veda with Avesta first pointed its significance. The Semites
could at first see little reason in it. The great doctrine however is
the vital force of Christianity, and the habitable world, so far as it
is Christian, has lived on it for nineteen hundred years. Such are the
immortals of the Gâtha in their ideas expanded, well-called the
"august," as they are. This only, be it noticed, is their meaning in the
first keen conception of them in the first department of the Gâtha;—and
they are as I need hardly linger to re-asseverate, the sublimest
conceptions of their particular kind that the world had till then ever
seen,<span id="page_42_fr_9"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">9</span></sup>](#page_42_note_9) for here they were
signally assembled for us,—and doubly re-consecrated, as the essence of
all holiness in a pure God personified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Zoroastrian Articles](../../zor/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="page_33_note_1"></span>[1](#page_33_fr_1) An unquestionably
later interpolation of Exilic origin.

<span id="page_33_note_2"></span>[2](#page_33_fr_2) Nor have any more
impressively effective appeared in history.

<span id="footnotes_page_36">p. 36</span>

<span id="page_36_note_3"></span>[3](#page_36_fr_3) A frequent
expression as applied to it in the late Avesta.

<span id="footnotes_page_37">p. 37</span>

<span id="page_37_note_4"></span>[4](#page_37_fr_4) Mithra, a noble God
indeed like the most exalted of our Archangels, whose cult rivaled
Christianity for a long time.

<span id="page_37_note_5"></span>[5](#page_37_fr_5) Definition implies
limit; see below.

<span id="footnotes_page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="page_39_note_6"></span>[6](#page_39_fr_6) Here I treat once
for an the mental forces implied everywhere;—seldom are these things
actually expressed in Avesta as to their preciser point;—but everywhere
*implied* in every line.

<span id="page_39_note_7"></span>[7](#page_39_fr_7) This is my
suggestion.

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_8"></span>[8](#page_40_fr_8) So too in Veda.

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_9"></span>[9](#page_42_fr_9) In such remarks I
refer, as I always try to make it plain, to well certified written
lores.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
