[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Judaica
Articles](../../jud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE MESSIANIC HOPE OF THE SAMARITANS

### BY JACOB, SON OF AARON, HIGH PRIEST OF THE SAMARITANS

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XXI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1907

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, July 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

## THE MESSIANIC HOPE OF THE SAMARITANS.<span id="page_272_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_272_note_1.md)

<span class="small">BY JACOB, SON OF AARON, HIGH PRIEST OF THE
SAMARITANS.</span>

 

INTRODUCTION.

   I COUNT it no small honor that I am permitted to introduce to
American and English readers the author of the following little
treatise, Jacob, Son of Aaron, High Priest of the Samaritans. Through
him the hope of ages utters its voice in expectation of a Messiah still
to come. So far as I know the messianic hope of this ancient and almost
forgotten sect has never before been set forth with authority and
completeness in a modern tongue.

   The High Priest lives at Nablous, the modern Shechem, at the foot of
his sacred mouritain, Gerizim. Jerusalem has been destroyed again and
again, and its name almost forgotten; but this little sect still clings
to its holy mountain, and speaks its unheeded message in a strange
language and to a world that has almost forgotten the existence of this
ancient and now diminutive congregation.

   A few years ago it was my privilege to visit the Samaritan colony at
Shechem, and to establish an acquaintance with the High Priest out of
which has grown an interesting correspondence.

   In January, 1906, I learned from Mr. E. K. Warren, who had visited
Jerusalem as chairman of the World's Sunday School Convention in 1904,
that some correspondents of his had discovered what they believed was an
independent source of information concerning the life of our Lord. The
letter which he showed me read in part as follows:

   "It seems to me we have made a discovery which will greatly interest
you. The Samaritans have a genealogy of their high priests, which I have
never heard has been translated. Each high priest notes what during his
priestly office occurs of note. One of these high priests speaks of
'Jesus the Son of Mary' being born, and <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> another of his being crucified during his term. I have
secured an Arabic hand-written transcript of this record and their
history, which, with the translation of those passages into English, we
are sending under separate cover to you."

   I at once wrote to the High Priest, who wrote me under date of
February 28, 1906:

   "I have received your letter, and the explanation which you <span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> require about the genealogy of the priests,
and the information about Jesus Christ and his crucifixion. It is found
with us. We gathered the information from various historians and papers
which were with us of very ancient date. These were written by priests
long before our time. The ancient papers were sold to a learned Jew
about 35 years ago. The name of the Jew was Abraham of the Museum of the
Russians. He bought all the papers which were with us, and we have not
one of those papers now. But before those papers were sold I gathered
the history from those papers of ancient date. The history as now
written includes the history of our congregation and all that happened
to us from the day we entered the Holy Land to the present time. If you
wish one of those histories, I will send it. It will be useful to you."

   Meantime Mr. Warren received a copy of the book from his
correspondents in Jerusalem. It was a manuscript volume of 494 pages in
Arabic, with a tabular supplement of 13 pages. Later word <span
id="page_275">p. 275</span> was received that the High Priest's cousin
Isaac had a copy of a part of the chronicle, one leaf of which was sent
to him for examination, and by him forwarded to me. It was on very old
parchment, 8 × 12 inches. The book contained 15 such leaves, and one
other, the first one, in paper; the original first leaf having been worn
out. For this chronicle he wanted 200 pounds sterling.

   Prof. Abdullah Ben Kori of Pacific University examined the book, and
reported its contents. It proved to be the Samaritan Chronicle of
Abulfath, compiled about 1355 A.D. (756 of the Hegira), and brought down
to date. The work of Abulfath was edited by Edward Vilmar and published
in Gotha in Arabic, in 1865. The narrative ends with the reign of
Haroun-al-Raschid. This Chronicle the High Priest had taken, and from
the records and traditions of his ancestors, the priests of the
Samaritans, had brought the chronicle down to date.

   Before I had determined the precise character of the book, I had
secured a translation of those portions relating to Jesus, and had
discovered that they were, in their present form, not earlier than the
period of the Crusades. Their references to Jesus are here given:

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

 

*About the Birth of Jesus, the Son of Joseph the Carpenter.*

   "In the days of the high-priesthood of Yahokeem, who was high priest
for about thirty-two years, occurred the birth of Jesus, son of Joseph
the carpenter, of the sect of the Jews: hence the date from our ancestor
Adam (to whom be peace) to the appearance of the son of Mary, 4290
years, and from the commencement of Fansota to the birth of the said
Jesus, the son of Mary, 1236. And his birth took place in Bethlehem, and
his resort was to Nazareth, and many of the sect of the Jews were
gathered to him, until his chief men were from among them. And the Jews
hated him with bitter hatred, and sought in every way to slay him,
because they claimed that his works were contrary to the law of their
religion, and opposed to the traditions of their elders in every matter.
And when he had gathered apostles, he delegated them to various
countries. Among these, Peter was sent to Rome and Andrew to the Soudan,
Matthew accompanying him. This Matthew wrote a Gospel; (this word is
Greek<span id="page_276_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_276_note_2.md) and signifies "good
news"). This Matthew wrote his Gospel <span id="page_277">p. 277</span>
in the year 41 after the death of Jesus, and it is said that he wrote it
in Judea. Thomas was sent to Babylon, and Philip to Kerwan, and Africa,
and Paul to Eliya, and its neighborhood. This Paul wrote a number of
epistles which the Christians have. And he at first was called Saul, and
it is said that he was born in Tarsus, capital of Cilicia. It is said he
belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, but more truly he belongs to the
tribe of Judah. He wrote fourteen epistles. Before he wrote these he
sent an epistle to Salonica in the year 52 after the slaying of Jesus,
the son of Mary: the last was the second epistle to the people of
Timothy in the fifty-sixth year after the slaying of Jesus. And Simon
was sent to the country of Barbary. And the said Jesus had other
disciples than these, among whom was Mark, who also wrote a gospel, and
of whom it was said that he was a disciple of Peter. It is said that he
wrote his Gospel at the dictation of Peter to the people of Rome. It is
said that he wrote his Gospel forty-eight years after the death of his
master Peter. Among the others there was Luke, who was from the city of
Antioch and Sabius, practicing medicine; and it was said that <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> he was originally a heathen. After he became
a Christian it is said that he became a disciple of Paul. It was said
that he wrote his Gospel in Boeotia, which is a state in Greece, and its
king was Tabis Cade. Among the others was John, who was from Bethsaida,
a town of Galilee. He was the son of Zebedee and Salome. He was in his
youth a fisherman, and Jesus ordained him as an apostle. He also wrote a
Gospel in the year 101 after the death of Jesus, but more correctly in
the year 97 after the slaying of Jesus. Because he reached the age of
115. And it is said that he wrote a part of his Gospel in the island of
Patmos, and part after his return from there, in Ephesus: and he
continued at the writing of his Gospel from the year 64 to the year 97
after the slaying of Jesus. . . . . . . . .

   "To return to the subject of Jesus, the son of Mary, whom the sect of
the Jews, his relatives, accounted an illegitimate son of Joseph the
carpenter; Herod the king sought to slay him, and he fled from his hands
and was a fugitive in hiding from him and from his relatives the Jews.
At this time the High Priest Yahokeem<span
id="page_278_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_278_note_3.md) died, in the mercy of
God, and was succeeded by the High Priest Jonathan, who held the office
twenty-seven years. In his day Jesus, the <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> son of Mary, was crucified by the Emperor Tiberius. With him
were crucified two sinners, who, according to the law of the Jews, were
worthy of death. One of them was crucified on his right, and the other
on his left, and this was in the Jebusite city of Aelia,<span
id="page_279_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_279_note_4.md) through the
instrumentality of Pilateh who ruled over the sect of the Jews.

   "This Jesus never molested the Samaritans, all the days of his life;
neither were the Samaritans concerned with him or molested <span
id="page_280">p. 280</span> him. But he was a plague to his relatives
and his co-religionists, from whom he sprang. These are the sect of the
Jews who hated him with a bitter hatred.

   "The Jews were also the cause of the death of John, a disciple of the
same Jesus; and they deceived Herod through the means of a young maiden,
whom they presented to him for his pleasure. And when she found out that
said King Herod was dead in love with her and her beauty, and was
inclined to her, it was not difficult for her; and he beheaded said
John. Said Herod was at Sabaste at that time. The reason for naming him
John the Baptist was that originally the Jews believed in his being
righteous, and believed on him, and were also baptized of him; but
stopped doing so when they saw that he was a lover of Jesus, son of
Mary. Because they asked John not to baptize Jesus; but he took him to
Jericho and baptized him there; for the Jews believed that any one who
was baptized in those waters was freed from all their uncleanliness and
sins. Since that time baptism was changed, and taken up by the
Christians and refused by the Jews; and the Jews instituted in its place
to pass through the waters of the Jordan, believing whoever did so would
be cleansed from their sins. But when the Christian kings came into
power, they forbade them from doing that."

   While this evidently possessed no value as a source of information
concerning the events of our Lord's life, it seemed to me to have
interest as an interpretation. And it caused me to question the High
Priest farther as to his view of the person of Christ, and his hope of a
Christ to come. He wrote me in answer:

   "Concerning your question about the Christ who has come and the
Christ who is to come, I have sent you a long epistle. I trust in God it
will reach you and that you will be pleased with it."

   The document is a manuscript booklet of 21 pages written in Arabic,
with Scripture quotations in Samaritan Hebrew and in red ink. Prof. Ben
Kori has translated it very faithfully, bringing to the work a very
accurate knowledge of the Arabic. I preface it with this further word
about its author taken from near the end of the chronicle above referred
to, when it begins with the death of his uncle and predecessor, and his
own induction to the priesthood:

   "In the year 1292 (i.e., 1874 A.D.) in the beginning of the year, in
the days of the High Priest Omran, on the night of Friday of the month
of Moharem, the days of his priesthood came to an end, and he died, to
the mercy of God. And he left Isaac and Salaam his sons: and he left
also His Excellency, his nephew Jacob, the son of his brother, who
succeeded him in the priesthood and commandery. <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> And Jacob, the aforesaid High Priest, who can trace his
generation to antiquity, acquired great respect from the Mohammedan
government, and from the children of his own people; may God multiply
their like. And he became perfect in his personality, and through the
good counsels by which he became the highest of his people. And there is
none who would oppose him in the significant title of his priesthood.
May God lengthen his honorable existence. His is great ability in
writing Hebrew and Arabic; and he is very zealous for the children of
his people. May God confirm him in victory upon the enemies of his
religion. Amen. To him belong several Hebrew compositions, and also a
book containing ten chapters concerning the origin of the Samaritan
people and their customs and their religion. And he is the man who
gathered the various portions of this history; for he is the foremost of
his age and time. And may God be exalted, and lengthen the days of his
honorable existence. Amen."

   It is evident that this little treatise raises as many questions as
it answers. We cannot help wondering whether the Messiah of the
Samaritans is to be a prophet and only a prophet. The High Priest speaks
throughout of a Second Kingdom, but gives no hint as to whether the
Messiah is to be a king. Apparently his office is to be prophetic and
spiritual; and the political offices of the kingdom may be discharged by
others. Of this we may not be to sure; and fortunately we shall be able
to secure the information at first hand, and will await further
information from the High Priest himself.

   Also we wonder whether the Messiah is to be a priest; and whether the
sacrifices are considered prophetic of his coming, and are to be
discontinued at his appearing. And we should be glad to know what is to
become of other nations and religions. We will inquire of the High
Priest; but meantime here is the little treatise as he sent it. An
interesting piece of rabbinical logic it is; and on which cannot fail to
be suggestive to American and English readers.

W<span class="small">ILLIAM</span> E. B<span
class="small">ARTON</span>.      

   O<span class="small">AK</span> P<span class="small">ARK,</span>
I<span class="small">LLINOIS</span>.  
      <span class="small">First Congregational Church.</span>

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

 

THE CHRIST WHOM THE SAMARITANS EXPECT.

<span class="small">IN THE NAME OF THE MOST MERCIFUL GOD</span>!

   Praise be to the powerful King, the Omniscient, the Conqueror, the
One who chose Israel and conferred honor upon it through his revelation,
the One who revealed the truth to all creation through his apostle
Moses, son of Amran, upon him and his righteous fathers, each and all,
the best of peace!

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

   As the minds of the majority of this our generation are not able to
undertake a detailed research after most of the truths that are in the
Torah, on account of hindrances and other life relations, one whose
requests are binding on me and whom I would respect by obliging him to
the utmost of my power, requested me to write down for him some
statements in proof of the Second Kingdom <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> To this request I gave an affirmative answer and composed,
accordingly, this essay; in order that men's minds may become prepared
for the triumph of truth and the vanquishing of evil and adversity. I
pray God, in the meanwhile, for success; verily He hears and answers.
Amen.

   The reference concerning the establishment of the Second Kingdom,
affirming the appearance of "THBH" or a Prophet at the end time of whose
appearance we have a promise, is found in Ex. xx, in the last verses,
which are not found in the Torah of the Jews. It reads, "They said well.
Let their consciences uphold my fear, and the keeping of my
commandments, all the time: so that it may be done well unto them and
their children. I shall set up for them a prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee, and I shall put my words into his mouth and he
shall speak to them all that I command him. And it shall be that the man
who harkens not to the words which he speaks, I shall make him thereto
responsible." These words concern the prophet in whose coming we
believe. <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> Again, "The prophet who dares
to address words in my name and speaks what I have not commanded him,
and he that speaks in the name of foreign gods shall be killed." The
same is stated again in Deuteronomy, as also one may find in the Torah
of the Jews, Deut. xviii. 15.

   Now, proofs concerning the Prophet and his coming amount to ten in
the holy Torah, and they are given in the way of symbols.

   A part of the first proof is denoted in the meaning of the sleep that
fell upon Abraham in Gen. xv. 17, beginning with "*Wa iehi hashemesh*,"
i.e., "and the sun was." The second part consists in the fact that when
our lord Abraham was assured of God's promise to him, given in the
chapter beginning with "*Achar haddebarim haelleh*," i.e., "After these
things," as follows: "Look up toward heaven and count the stars, if thou
be able to count them; and He added: thus shall thy seed be." I say when
this assurance was given him, he wanted to know whether or not their
kingdom and the fulfilment of the covenant rested on conditions. He
desired to find out the order of events; and hence his question given in
the same chapter, verse 8: "Whereby shall I know that I shall inherit
it?" God (who is exalted) knowing Abraham's purpose and the aim of his
question, informed him that the kingdom and the fulfilment of the
covenant rested on certain conditions; therefore He said to him (in the
same chapter, verse 9) "Take me a heifer of three years old, a she-goat
of three years old, a ram of three years old, etc." He also informed him
of the manner of offering them. Concerning the beasts it is said: "He
divided through," just as it has been revealed unto Moses (upon him be
peace) in the first chapter and twelfth verse of the book of Leviticus,
as follows: "And he shall cut it according to its pieces." Referring to
the birds, Gen. xv. 11 says: "He divided not," just as one reads in Lev.
l. 17: "And he shall rend it between its wings but not clear through."
Herein indications are given as to what is fit for sacrificial
offerings. In the word *meshulleshet*, we understand that peace
offerings are to be divided into three parts: (a) God's part or portion,
as it is indicated; (b) The high priest's portion, consisting of the
heave thigh and wave breast; (c) Israel's portion, consisting of the
remainder. Now, allusion is made to the first kingdom, in the section
beginning with "*Haiah hashemesh*." First in verse 12: "And they will
enslave them and oppress them for four hundred years," down to and
including verse 14, "And after that they shall go out with much wealth."
Here he was informed that their servitude during these years and what
would transpire for and against them <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
will not come about in his days; for we read in the same chapter, verse
15: "But thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and thou shalt be buried
in a good old age." When He was through these informations concerning
the first kingdom, as to how it would begin and how He would hide his
pleasure and how the truth would be falsified—Compare "And the sun had
disappeared," meaning of course, His pleasure, and "Darkness came," that
is erring away—He included those concerning the reappearance of his
pleasure and the beginning of the second kingdom. God assured that to
him with a firm covenant, saying (xv. 18): "In that day God made a
covenant with Abraham, saying, To thy seed will I give this land, from
the river of Egypt as far as the great river, the Euphrates river." By
this He was referring to the second kingdom, for the Jews did not
possess that territory during the first kingdom. Concerning the passage,
"And behold a smoking furnace and a sheet of fire," we <span
id="page_288">p. 288</span> shall give a later explanation, in its
proper place, Now, the scattered mention of "Seven nations" refers to
those whom God had destroyed before Israel, and whose lands He caused
Israel to possess. But we have here a mention of eleven nations. They
are those whose lands Israel shall possess in the second kingdom, from
the river of Egypt as far as the great river, the river Euphrates, and
as far as the far sea. Here ends the first proof.

   The second proof consists in that to which Jacob called the attention
of his sons, in Chapter IX. Jacob (may peace be his lot) had, indeed,
included in his sayings some subtle meanings. He said: "Gather
yourselves," referring to the first kingdom and Israel's gathering and
coming out of Egypt. He referred, also, to its wandering away and the
evil consequences resulting therefrom; for in the same chapter and
verse, he says: "And I will inform you as to what shall befall you in
the latter days." Even our lord Moses, the apostle (may peace be upon
him), said in Deut. iii. 29: "And evil shall befall you in the latter
days." Such days are the days of error. But these will disappear and be
displaced by those of his pleasure and the return of the kingdom, in
reference to the words, "Gather yourselves." Such is affirmed by God
(who is exalted) in the holy book, in Deut. xxx. 4: "From thence will
IHVH, thy God, gather thee and from thence will he fetch thee." But this
will take place only when perfect obedience is assured and conditions of
repentance are fulfilled. We pray the Lord (who is exalted) for success
in our affairs. May He mend our doings and bring us to the days of his
pleasure, when the Shekinah will appear. Verily He is able to dispose of
everything He will.

   The third proof is found in connection with the hand of the apostle
Moses (upon him be peace), and with its change to whiteness and return
to its first state. The meaning is that He (who is exalted) indicated
thereby to the apostle that the truth will appear at his hand, and then
it will disappear. His hand was, therefore, designated as "leprous," and
"as white as snow," referring to purity. The word *Mesoraat* reminds us
of the days of error. *Kashaleg* would indicate that though error is
prevailing and God's pleasure is taken away, there would remain a
portion that would cling to the law, believe in its truthfulness,
obtaining thus care from God for the purpose of preserving his covenant,
according as we find the word of God in Lev. xxvi, 42: "I shall remember
my covenant with Jacob and I shall remember my covenant also with Isaac
and my covenant with Abraham." Also the passage in the same chapter
beginning with verse 44: "But still, though they are <span
id="page_289">p. 289</span> in the land of their enemies," etc. That
these conditions are to disappear and the return of God's pleasure is to
follow, is illustrated by the fact that the apostle's hand assumed its
former state; for in the book of Exodus iv. 7 we read: "Behold it became
again like his flesh." This agrees fully with the promise: "But I will
remember, in their favor, the covenant of their ancestors." What would
prove, moreover, the days of error, is the passage in the same chapter,
verse 43: "And the land shall be deserted by them," i.e., it shall be
empty of them. Their return and the restoration of their kingdom is
affirmed thus: "I will remember the covenants of their ancestors, in
their favor." That the kingdom shall be lasting is indicated by the
passage: "That I may be their God, I am the Lord;" for God (who is
exalted) is eternal with no change (may His highness be extolled!).

   The fourth argument consists of a part of the parable of Balaam in
Numbers xxiv. 17: "A star shall come out of Jacob and a rod shall rise
out of Israel," to "the sons of tumult." Herein certain characteristics
of the first kingdom are mentioned. We are informed, also, that such a
kingdom was removed from Israel to Esau (see verse 18): "And Edom shall
be a possession;" then it <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> shall be
handed to Esau, then to Ishmael by way of inheritance, in accordance
with the verse: "And Esau shall be an inheritance to his enemies." Thus
by the end of the kingdom of "Ishmael," "Ieshrael" shall reign. Thus we
read later: "And Israel shall act valiently," referring to its victory,
as we read in verse 19: "And the one, who is from Jacob, shall have
dominion," i.e., shall have the rulership. All such is firmly proved,
and God knows best all matters.

   The fifth proof is found in the section beginning with: "If ye shall
bring forth children." This section is divided in three stages. The
first refers to the days of rebellion and the loss of the kingdom and
the disappearance of the Shekinah, (compare Deut. iv. 25): "And ye shall
corrupt yourselves," etc. The second concerns the necessity of
repentance and God's satisfaction that its conditions have been
fulfilled, (compare verse 29 of the same chapter): "Then if thou shalt
seek," etc. The third deals with God's return to them with his pleasure,
with rulership and kind doings. Compare verse 31: "For the Lord thy God
is a merciful God," etc.

   The sixth proof is derived from the disasters that would befall the
enemy. Says Deut. xxix. 22, "And the last generation shall say," down to
"They shall see the plagues of that land," including "And no grass shall
grow therein." The references to the places which are the object of
God's displeasure, are sufficient to convict of error those of Israel
who have strayed from the truth. Deut xxix. 24 says: "All nations shall
say, why hath God done thus unto this land?" and they shall confess
their error and their forsaking the truth and their continued lethargy
in falsehood, and it shall be answered as in verse 25: "Because they
forsook the covenant of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which He
made with them, when He brought them out of the land of Egypt." Also
verse 27: "Therefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against that
land." Those who will say these words are the faithful to the law of
truth, and this will take place when the truth shall appear. Its
appearance will have its signs, just as the appearance of falsehood has
its own signs; and all will be recorded in its own place.

   The seventh proof is discerned in the noted section beginning with,
"And when all these things are come upon thee," designating thereby
that, at the end of the days of falsehood, minds will be rectified,
religions purified, good doings practiced and impurities washed away.
With all these things, perfection is, however, to be obtained from God
(whose is might and glory). Compare Deut. xxx. 6: "And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, that thou mayest
love the Lord thy God," etc. <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> Then they
shall come up and rule the land and truth shall triumph. Compare verse
3: "And the Lord thy God will return, 'with' thy *repentance*,<span
id="page_291_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_291_note_2.md) and pity thee and will
gather thee again from among nations." Also as far as "More than thy
fathers."

   The eighth proof is found in the section beginning with, "Give ear,"
Deut. xxxiii. 22 says: "A fire is kindled in my anger and it burns to
the lowest pit." This is given after the extreme rebellion of Israel has
been related, compare verse 24: "They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is no God; "they have provoked me with their vanities." Next
to these words we read: "But I will move them to jealousy with those
that are not a people; with a foolish nation will I provoke them." After
that, the holy of holies of the enemy will be disgraced and truth will
be triumphant; that is *Beth-iahweh, har-Gerizim, Beth-el*. Israel will
have the kingdom: "I became kindled in the fire of my anger," etc., as
far as "It is the fire that will burn," *Migdash Zerutah*. Compare verse
22: "It will eat up the land and its produces." It is the fire
concerning which <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> we read xxix. 23:
"All its land is burning; it shall not be sown nor shall it bear," etc.

   What would also prove the second kingdom is Gen. xv. 17: "And behold
a smoking furnace and a fire torch." This would show that the triumph of
truth will proceed from God (who is exalted and honored) in having the
form of these two symbols. The fire of the one will descend upon *Al
migdash-Zerutah*, the other will descend upon *Al har-Gerisim* in order
to purify it of the defilements of those who accept another sanctuary
instead of it. Then will truth triumph and the kingdom be restored.
Compare Deut. xxxii. 22: "It shall lick the foundations of the
mountains." It is the fire that will descend upon mount Gerizim. Do you
not see that when *Migdash Zerutah* were mentioned, the word *Tokel* was
used, meaning annihilation; while with the mention of *Gerizim*, the
word is *Telahet*? This distinctly means, "It will lick," that is, it
will purify but not annihilate. The latter is used in the same meaning
as *Tahiru baesh*, ye shall pass in fire, referring to purification. We
have, indeed, two consecutive expressions that have nearly the same
meaning; but God knows best! The use of *Gerizim* in plural is out of
respect to it, and it should be, therefore, elliptically understood in
the expression: "It will lick the traces of the mountains."

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

   The ninth proof is found in the section beginning with "*Zoth
habberaka*," i.e., "This is the blessing," in Deut. xxxiii. 4, which is:
"They are sitting at thy feet and receiving thy words," etc. The
reference is about the seed of our lord Abraham, namely, the children of
Esau and of Ishmael, whom God invited, in the day of gathering, to enter
into his service, to keep his law. Compare verse 2 of the same chapter:
"And shone from Seir unto them," referring to the children of Esau, in
harmony with Gen. xxxvi. 8: "And Esau dwelt in Mount Seir." Compare also
Deut. xxxiii. 2: "And he glimmered from the mountain of Paran," meaning
the children of Ishmael, in harmony with Gen. xxi. 21: "And he (Ishmael)
dwelt in the wilderness of Paran." Thus, from these plain references one
can not doubt that truth will appear in favor of Israel, through the
fact that these nations shall return to its religion, though they had
already refused, as it is without doubt, to enter its religion and to
submit to its laws. But God (who is exalted) has informed us that they
will submit themselves to the Law; for we read in Deut. xxxiii. 4: "They
are sitting at thy feet and receiving thy words." This, however, will
take place when God's pleasure shall be restored; when the clouds shall
alight upon the Shekinah, in the house of God, on mount Gerizim. This is
in fulfilment of Ex. xv. 17: "Thou, O God, hast made a sanctuary: O Lord
build it up with thy might by the ever presence of the Shekinah and of
offerings."<span id="page_293_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_293_note_3.md) The ever presence of the
Shekinah is linked with God's eternity, as the next verse indicates:
"The Lord will reign for ever and ever." They will say, "*Torah asher
sy-wah lanu Mosheh*," i.e., "The law which Moses commanded us," thereby
confessing the veracity of the prophecy of our lord Moses (upon him be
peace); that he was sent for the sake of truth to the whole world. They
will also concede that God (may He be exalted) brought down the Law upon
Israel, and thereby honored Israel above all nations and made him the
prince of the whole world; for it is said in Deut. xxxiii. 4: "a
possession of the people of Jacob." May God, who is exalted, bring the
time near by His might and will. A<span class="small">MEN,</span> L<span
class="small">ORD,</span> A<span class="small">MEN</span>!

   The tenth proof is contained in chapter 34 of Deuteronomy, beginning
with: "And Moses went up from Arabat Moab." Here we have one of the
miracles which were performed by God, as He said in Exodus xxxiv. 10: "I
will perform miracles with thee," etc. It is: "And the Lord showed him
all the land" down to "As far as the great sea," and "To thy seed will I
give," referring to the children of Moses (upon him be peace). This was
not exclusive: The <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> mention of the
fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (upon them be peace) has already
preceded. They were the people of the covenant, oath and promise for
giving the land to their seed, and it is the twelve tribes that came out
of the loins of Jacob. Therefore in saying to the apostle Moses (upon
him be peace): "This is the land I swore to thy fathers to give to their
seed," He meant that to each of them He made an oath. For example, He
said to Abraham in Gen. xii. 7: "To thy seed will I give this land." To
Isaac He said in xxvi. 3 of the same book: "To thee and thy seed will I
give those lands." And to Jacob He said in the same book (xxxv. 12):
"And the land that I gave to Abraham and Isaac, to thee I give; to thy
seed give I the land."

   We have now proved the establishment of the kingdom, its restoration
and the reappearance of the Shekinah and its duration; but the things
that are hidden belong to the Lord, our God, and those that are revealed
are for ourselves and children.

   As to the appearance and coming of the lord Christ, recorded in our
chronicles, we regard its validity not from the viewpoint af our law,
but as a matter of history. As to the Messiah, with whose coming we are
promised, there are proofs and demonstrations in regard to his coming.
As our learned men have explained in their voluminous commentaries, he
will rise and perform miracles and demonstrations; he will uphold
religion and justice. Among other proofs he will produce the following
three:

   1. The production of the ark of testimony, which is the greatest
attestation for Israel. For Deut. xxix. 29 says: "It shall be there
<span class="small">FOR THEE</span> as a witness." This upholds strongly
the veracity af our Torah; it has only twenty-two letters, in harmony
with the numerical value of "B" and "K,"<span
id="page_294_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_294_note_4.md) with no addition or
detraction, and not as the Jews pretend, for their version possesses
twenty-eight letters.

   2. He will produce, at his hand, the staff which was given by the
Creator (who is exalted) to our lord Moses (upon him be peace), about
whose attribute a reference is made as follows: "And this shall be to
thee as a sign," in order that miracles be performed thereby.

   3. He must produce the omer of manna which our fathers ate, while in
the wilderness, for forty years. This is the greatest proof, because,
after all this period, it will be found to have undergone not the
slightest change. When our ancestors, in the days when manna used to
fall, would keep some of it till the morrow, it would become rotten and
wormy. Therefore, it would be a proof none could deny <span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> if it should appear sound after this long
interval, and remain in its sound state. Thus the people of the second
kingdom might see it, and confess reverently and increase in exalting
and glorifying the Creator (who is exalted), for the power of producing
such a marvel.

   These three proofs must be verified by the Prophet; and without them
his claim wourd be considered illegal. No matter could ever be sustained
unless with two or three testimonies, in accordance with the saying of
the holy Law: "Upon the testimony of two or three witnesses a matter is
sustained." Without such proof he has no standing.

   But how many have appeared and claimed the prophecy through signs and
dreams, against whom the Law has warned us? Read: "If there arise in thy
midst a prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and if he give thee a sign or
miracle, and if the sign or miracle whereof he spoke unto thee take
place, and then say unto thee, Come let us follow other unknown gods and
worship them: listen not to the words of that prophet or dreamer of that
dream." The foregoing is found in Deuteronomy xiii. 1. Verse 6 of the
same chapter says: "If thy brother, the son of thy father or the son of
thy mother, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend,
who is as thyself, would entice thee, saying: Come, let us worship other
gods, that are unknown to thee and to thy fathers, from the nations that
are around thee, whether near or far away from thee, thou shalt not
listen," etc. Testimonies similar to the foregoing are many in the Torah
of the law, that is, the Old Testament, and so much is enough concerning
this question.

   *This is all that my frail mind could suggest for this essay; and God
knows best!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Judaica Articles](../../jud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_272">p. 272</span>

<span id="page_272_note_1"></span>[1](#page_272_fr_1.md) Translated by
Abdullah Ben Kori, Professor in Pacific University, Forest Grove,
Oregon. Edited with an introduction, by William E. Barton. D. D.

<span id="footnotes_page_276">p. 276</span>

<span id="page_276_note_2"></span>[2](#page_276_fr_2.md) The high priest's
definition of the meaning of "Gospel" is better than his knowledge of
the language from which it has been derived It is good <span
id="footnotes_page_277">p. 277</span> Old English and means "God-story."
The Greek εὐαγγέλιον means "good news."

<span id="footnotes_page_278">p. 278</span>

<span id="page_278_note_3"></span>[3](#page_278_fr_3.md) In a translation
made in Jerusalem this name is spelled Ay Yam; and in another made in
Nablous it is Yahonata; but the Samaritan reads Yhkeem.

<span id="footnotes_page_279">p. 279</span>

<span id="page_279_note_4"></span>[4](#page_279_fr_4.md) The high priest
and his predecessors avoid the name Jerusalem when convenient to do so:
and use the name Aelia, or Jebish.

<span id="footnotes_page_291">p. 291</span>

<span id="page_291_note_2"></span>[2](#page_291_fr_2.md) The High Priest
renders *Shebooth ka* as "repentance."

<span id="footnotes_page_293">p. 293</span>

<span id="page_293_note_3"></span>[3](#page_293_fr_3.md) The High Priest's
rendering of the quotation is very loose.—A. Ben Kori.

<span id="footnotes_page_294">p. 294</span>

<span id="page_294_note_4"></span>[4](#page_294_fr_4.md) The components of
"in thee" or "for thee." B = 2, and K = 20: total, 22.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
