[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Judaica
Articles](../../jud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE SAMARITAN MESSIAH.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE OPEN COURT

 

<span class="small">A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.

 

 

#### Volume XXI

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1907

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, August 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

## THE SAMARITAN MESSIAH.

FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE SAMARITAN HIGH PRIEST.

<span class="small">BY WILLIAM E. BARTON D.D.</span>

   THE treatise of the Samaritan High Priest on "The Messianic Hope of
the Samaritans"<span id="page_528_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_528_note_1) was submitted to the
author, and I reached him at the time of the Passover on the top of Mt.
Gerizim. It was read to him and he heard it with approval, but in
comment on [the footnote at the bottom of page
279](mhs.htm#page_279_note_4), he explained that the <span
id="page_529">p. 529</span> name Aelia, given to Jerusalem after its
destruction, is not used by the Samaritans for the city itself, but
denotes a village near the present site of Jerusalem, the spot where Eli
set up his tabernacle. He adds that the place now called Shiloh, near
Sinjil, which Christians suppose to have been the Shiloh of Eli and
Samuel, was not the real Shiloh. The High Priest then proceeds to answer
the questions asked him concerning the Messiah.

   In the little treatise the Messiah was depicted as a prophet. But the
Christian Messiah is spoken of as "Prophet, Priest and King." It seemed
an interesting question whether the Messiah of the Samaritans were to be
more than a prophet. The High Priest answers this inquiry:

   "There is nothing in prophecy to say whether he will be of the
priestly line or not. Some of our learned men say he will come from the
children of Aaron, and be a priest. Others say that he will be of the
children of Joseph, and 'like unto his brethren.' My own private opinion
is that he will be of the children of Joseph."

   Of course the Samaritan hope is not colored by any of the Jewish
memories of the throne of David, and the treatise gave no <span
id="page_530">p. 530</span> hint as to any kingly rule. Asked concerning
this, the High Priest answers:

   "The Messiah will be a prophet, and will be acknowledged as a
prophet. That will be his title, as the prophecies give it. But he will
also be a king."

   The High Priest was asked concerning two or three Old Testament
passages frequently quoted as Messianic. He replies:

   "The promise that the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's
head, in [Genesis iii. 15](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#3:15), has no Messianic
significance whatever. It has a very long interpretation, but the
substance is this:

   "The serpent has intruded upon man, and the man who seeks revenge
upon the serpent does so with much advantage yet with peril. He will
have his heel bruised, but ultimately will overcome the serpent and kill
it.

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

   "Of course the serpent is only a serpent.

   "While there is some difference of opinion about [Gen. xlix.
55](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#44:55), which tells at what time the scepter
shall depart from Judah, there is light to be found in the form of the
name Shiloh. The Jews make it two words, but in the Samaritan Torah it
is but one word, and that is the name Solomon. The characteristics which
Jacob attributes to Shiloh belong very well to the character of Solomon.
For he it was who set up idolatry in Jerusalem that he might please his
heathen wives; and further built there the temple for the pretended ark,
as I have told in another place. Then it was that the scepter departed
from Judah, and under his son Rehoboam, though he came back to the true
capital, Shechem, to be anointed king, the true Israel revolted, and set
up the kingdom in Shechem where it belonged, and the scepter departed
from Judah."

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

   To Christians it will be interesting to know whether the Samaritan
Messiah is expected to be in any sense divine. The High Priest answers:

   "The Messiah will not be in any sense a Son of God. He will be a
prophet like Moses and like his brethren, as it is told in [Deut. xviii.
15](../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#18:15)-22:

   "'The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst
of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;
according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the
day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord
my God, neither let me see this great fire anymore, that I die not. And
the Lord said unto me, They have well said that which they have spoken.
I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto
thee; and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him. But the prophet, which shall speak a word
presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or
that shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die.
And <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> thou say in thine heart, How shall
we know the word which the Lord hath spoken? When a prophet speaketh in
the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is
the thing which the Lord hath not spoken: the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously, thou shalt not be afraid of him.'

   "This is the passage of the Torah which tells us what the Messiah
will be, and I hope you will read it with a clear eye, as you always
read everything."

   Another thing was asked of the High Priest, namely, what would be the
attitude of the Messiah toward Christians and other nations. He answers:

   "The Messiah will be a prophet, as I have told you, and will no doubt
work signs to prove his mission. There will be unusual signs and
wonders, which I described in the little book. But he is to be a king,
and rule the earth from Shechem, the ancient seat of power, and from his
holy mountain, Gerizim. He will call all the world to acknowledge him,
and they will do so. He will bring blessings to all nations that
acknowledge him."

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

   Still one thing more was asked the High Priest as he sat in his tent
while the fires were heating the ovens for the sacrifice of the lambs
for the Passover, Will the Passover continue after the Messiah comes?

   He answered:

   "The Passover will continue after the Messiah comes. It is a
perpetual feast. It has no reference whatever to the Messiah."

   I am sure that these answers will be interesting to very many readers
of the little treatise already printed.

   The priest wishes also that a word might be inserted cautioning
Arnericans and Englishmen who buy manuscripts in the Samaritan tongue
that it is not safe to buy them except at the Samaritan synagogue; as
the demand for them has led unauthorized persons to make incorrect
copies, some of which have come to him to be authenticated; and he finds
them imperfect, and some of them fraudulent. The synagogue is very glad
to sell copies of the Pentateuch and of their other books. The copies
which they have for sale are of course modern copies made by the priests
and authenticated. It is to be hoped that the oldest manuscript will not
pass from the possession of the Samaritan community. This, their
greatest treasure, <span id="page_535">p. 535</span> held in most holy
veneration, should not depart from its historic home in the bare little
synagogue at the base of Mourit Gerizim so long as the Samaritan
community exists.

   The oldest of the Samaritan manuscripts, and that from which the
others are derived, is believed by many scholars to be as old as the
Christian era, and is generally conceded to be the oldest manuscript of
the Bible in the world. Strange as it may seem, our Old Testament
manuscripts are much less ancient than those of the New. There are three
New Testament manuscripts which date from 300 to 450 A.D.,—the
Alexandrian, known as Codex A, in the British Museum; the Vatican, known
as Codex B, which is in the Vatican at Rome; and the Sinaitic known as
Codex Aleph, which is treasured at St. Petersburg. One of these is in
possession of the Greek Church, another of the Roman, and the other of
the Protestants, which illustrates the dependence of all sects in
Christendom on the same things and on each other. But of Old Testament
manuscripts we have none in Hebrew going back of the tenth century. The
Samaritans have one nearly a millennium older!

   Five years ago I saw this oldest manuscript. The High Priest stood
guard over it, and one of his sons exihibited the next oldest roll which
on all ordinary occasions is shown in place of the oldest one. The
ancient one is supposed to be shown to the Samaritans once a year only,
on the day of Atonement, and never to outsiders. Most travelers who
suppose themselves to have seen it have seen only the substitute. The
original is written on a yellow parchment, not brown or white, without
ruled lines, and the writing is smaller and less regular than in the
substitute. The ordinary ink of the Samaritans is dense black and
glossy, but this is purple. It has been re-inked in many places. At
least a third of it has cracked away, for it is very brittle, the back
is reinforced by other parchment, and the missing portions have been
supplied. It is many years since it has been unrolled, and the High
Priest writes that to unroll it would be to injure if not destroy it. He
is willing to consider the question of photographing such pages as can
be exposed without endangering the parchment, but not the entire work.
The old book is kept under lock and key, and covered with rich green
cloth.

   I have what may possibly be a fragment of that old codex. I obtained
it from a son of the High priest as a premium with a larger purchase. No
Samaritan, I hope, has yet reached a depth of depravity which would lead
him to mutilate that book for money, but in many places bits have been
worn out of it, and this is such <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> a
scrap, five and one half by three and one half inches from the lowest
margin of the manuscript, and containing Genesis xxvi. 20-22. The
letters are small and irregular; it has been re-inked at least twice in
places; the lines are not ruled; the parchment is yellow <span
id="page_537">p. 537</span> and brittle and wrinkled; and above all, the
ink, which is so faded and over-written that it would be difficult to
tell from the front of the leather what was the original color, has
stained the back of the parchment a distinct purple. If it is true as
Deutsch affirms, that "the ink is black in all cases except the scroll
at Nablous," then I may not be counted over-credulous in thinking the
relic I obtained from the young priest Abalhassan as being of distinct
interest among literary treasures.

   Pictures of the Samaritan Pentateuch are not rare, though in almost
every case it is the substitute roll that has been photographed. <span
id="page_538">p. 538</span> They give a good general idea of the
appearance of the Holy Scroll. The case is of silver, as large as a
stove-pipe, cut lengthwise into three sections, and with two sets of
hinges at the back, so that it will open and show a column of text, or
close and protect all from the light. At the top are three large knobs,
the middle one a dummy and the two end ones rollers by which the
parchment is rolled forward or back. The case inside is about eighteen
inches high; but the knobs above and the legs below make the entire
height about thirty inches. The five books of Moses, which are all the
Bible which the Samaritans receive, are written on the hair side of
skins of lambs offered in sacrifice. The entire roll is probable sixty
or more feet in length. I presume no one knows how long it is, though
Condor was told that it contains twenty-four skins. As a Hebrew
Pentateuch which I bought in Jerusalem has fifty-two skins, and another
on exhibition at the St. Louis Fair (which I also bought) has more, I
think Condor's estimate too low.

   The Samaritan colony now is very small and poor. There were 152 of
them in 1901, 97 males and only 55 females. While this is a greater
number than that of the passengers of the Mayflower, and their
descendants now are legion, there is little prospect that the Samaritans
will leave such a posterity. They expect to be brought practically to
extinction, but to be restored when their Messiah comes.

   So far as the treatise indicates, the Samaritans do not look for any
vicarious sacrifice on the part of their Messiah. His career, when he
comes, would appear to be one of victory and tranquil rule, primarily
religious, but with some political significance. The sacrifices are
declared not to be prophetic of his mission. The passages quoted by
Christians from the Pentateuch as Messianic are held not to refer to
him. Practically the whole content of Samaritan Messianic prophecy
appears to be derived from [Deut. xviii.
15](../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#18:15)-22, in which the Messiah is a prophet
like unto Moses, raised up from among the people, and one of their own
brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Judaica Articles](../../jud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_528">p. 528</span>

<span id="page_528_note_1"></span>[1](#page_528_fr_1) [Published in the
May number of *The Open Court*](mhs).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
