[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnj01)  [Next](tnj03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine*, by Emanuel Swedenborg,
\[1758\], tr. by John Whitehead \[1892\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The New Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

Of sciences and knowledges, by which the internal spiritual man is
opened. Those things are called scientifics, which are in the external
or natural man, and its memory, but not those which are in the internal
or spiritual man (n. 3019, 3020, 3293, 3309, 4967, 9918, 9922).
Scientifics, as belonging to the external or natural man, are
respectively instruments of service, inasmuch as the external or natural
man is made to serve the internal or spiritual man, just as the world is
made to serve heaven (n. 5077, 5125, 5128, 5786, 5947, 10272, 10471).
The external man is respectively the world, because the laws of Divine
order existing in the world are inscribed therein; and the internal man
is respectively heaven, because the laws of Divine order existing in
heaven are inscribed therein (n. 4523, 4524, 5368, 6013, 6057, 9278,
9279, 9283, 9709, 10156, 10472); and in the work on Heaven and Hell (n.
51-58). There are scientifics which concern natural things, scientifics
which relate to the civil state and life, scientifics which relate to
the moral state and life, and scientifics which relate to the spiritual
state and life (n. 5774, 5934). But for distinction's sake, those which
relate to the spiritual state and life are called knowledges, consisting
principally of doctrinals (n. 9945). Man ought to be imbued with
sciences and knowledges, since by these he learns to think, then to
understand what is true and good, and finally to be wise, that is to
live according to them <span id="fr_0"></span>[51-1](#fn_0.md) (n. 129,
1450, 1451, 1453, 1548, 1802). Scientifics and knowledges are the first
things, on which is built and founded the civil, moral, and spiritual
life of man; but they are to be learned for the sake of the use of life
as their end (n. 1489, 3310). Knowledges open the way to the internal
man, and then conjoin it with the external according to uses (n. 1563,
1616). The rational is born by sciences and knowledges (n. 1895, 1900,
3086). Yet not by sciences and knowledges themselves, but by the
affection of uses from them, and according to such affection (n. 1895).
The internal man is opened and successively perfected by sciences and
knowledges, provided man has some good use for an end, particularly a
use that regards eternal life (n. 3086). Then the scientifics and
knowledges which are in the natural man meet the spiritual things from
the celestial and spiritual man and adopt those which agree (n. 1495).
Uses of heavenly life are then extracted, refined, and elevated by the
Lord, through the internal man, from the scientifics and knowledges
which are in the natural man (n. 1895, 1896, 1900-1902, 5871, 5874,
5901). And the scientifics which are incongruous and adverse are
rejected to the sides and exterminated (n. 5871, 5886, 5889). The sight
of the internal man calls nothing forth from the scientifics and
knowledges of the external man, but such as are of its love (n. 9394).
Scientifics and knowledges are disposed in bundles, and conjoined
according to the loves which introduced them (n. 5881). Then in the
sight of the internal man, those which are of the love are in the middle
and in clearness, but those which are not of the love are at the sides
and in obscurity (n. 6068, 6084). Scientifics and knowledges with man
are successively implanted in his loves, and dwell in them (n. 6325).
Man would be born into every science, and thereby into intelligence, if
he were born into love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor; but
because he is born into the love of self and the world, he is born in
total ignorance (n. 6323, 6325). Science, intelligence, and wisdom are
the sons of love to the Lord and of love towards the neighbor (n. 1226,
2049, 2116). Scientifics and knowledges, because they are of the
external or natural man, are in the light of the world; but truths,
which are become truths of love and faith, and have thus obtained life,
are in the light of heaven (n. 5212). Nevertheless the truths, which
have thus obtained life, are comprehended by man through natural ideas
(n. 5510). Spiritual influx is through the internal man into the
scientifics and knowledges which are in the external (n. 1940, 8005).
Scientifics and knowledges are the receptacles and as it were the
vessels of the truth and good of the internal man (n. 1469, 1496, 3068,
5489, 6004, 6023, 6052, 6071, 6077, 7770, 9922). Therefore by "vessels"
in the Word, in the spiritual sense, are signified scientifics and
knowledges (n. 3068, 3069, 3079, 9394, 9544, 9723, 9724). Scientifics
are as it were mirrors, in which the truths and goods of the internal
man appear, and are perceived as in an image (n. 5201). And there they
are together as in their ultimate (n. 5373, 5874, 5886, 5901, 6004,
6023, 6052, 6071, 6077). Scientifics, because they are in the light of
the world, are involved and obscure respectively to those things which
are in the light of heaven; thus the things which are in the external
man respectively to those in the internal (n. 2831). For which reason
also by "involved" in the Word is signified what is scientific (n.
2831). So also by "the obscurity of a cloud" (n. 8443, 10551). Every
principle is to be drawn from the truths of doctrine from the Word,
which are first to be acknowledged, and then it is allowable to consult
scientifics in order to confirm those truths, and thus they are
corroborated (n. 6047). Thus it is allowable for those who are in the
affirmative concerning the truths of faith, intellectually to confirm
them by scientifics; but not for those who are in the negative, because
a preceding affirmative draws all to favor its side, and a preceding
negative draws all to its side (n. 2568, 2588, 3913, 4760, 6047). There
is a doubting affirmative, and a doubting negative, the former with some
who are good, and the latter with the evil (n. 2568). To enter from the
truths of faith into scientifics is according to order; but on the other
hand, to enter from scientifics into the truths of faith is contrary to
order (n.10236). In as much as influx is spiritual, and not physical or
natural, thus from the truths of faith, because these are spiritual,
into scientifics, because these are natural (n. 3219, 5119, 5259, 5427,
5428, 5478, 6322, 9109, 9110). Whoever is in a doubting negative state,
which in itself is a negative, and says that he will not believe until
he is persuaded by scientifics, will never believe (n. 2094, 2832). They
who do so, become insane as to those things which are of the church and
heaven (n. 128-130). They fall into the falsities of evil (n. 232, 233,
6047). And in the other life, when they think about spiritual things,
they are as it were drunken (n. 1072). A further description of them (n.
196). Examples to illustrate that spiritual things cannot be
comprehended, if the order of entering into them be inverted (n. 233,
2094, 2196, 2203, 2209). Many of the learned are more insane in
spiritual things, than the simple, because they are in the negative, and
have abundance of scientifics, by which they confirm the negative (n.
4760). An example of a learned man, who could understand nothing
concerning spiritual life (n. 8629). They who reason from scientifics
against the truths of faith, reason sharply, inasmuch as they do it from
the fallacies of the senses, which captivate and persuade, for it is
with difficulty these can be shaken off (n. 5700). They who understand
nothing of truth, and they also who are in evil, can reason concerning
the truths and goods of faith, and yet be in no enlightenment (n. 4214).
Only to confirm a dogma, is not the part of an intelligent man, because
falsity can be as easily confirmed as the truth (n. 1017, 2482, 2490,
4741, 5033, 6865, 7012, 7680, 7950, 8521, 8780). They who reason
concerning the truths of the church, whether a thing be so or not, are
evidently in obscurity respecting truths, and not yet in spiritual light
(n. 215, 1385, 3033, 3428). There are scientifics which admit Divine
truths, and others which do not (n. 5213). Vain scientifics ought to be
destroyed (n. 1489, 1492, 1499, 1500). Those are vain scientifics which
regard for their end and confirm the loves of self and the world, and
which withdraw from love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor
because such scientifics shut up the internal man, so that he is not
then capable of receiving anything from heaven (n. 1563, 1600).
Scientifics are the means of becoming wise, and the means of becoming
insane; and by them the internal man is either opened or shut; and thus
the rational is either cultivated or destroyed (n. 4156, 8628, 9922).
Sciences after death are of no account, but only those things which man
has imbibed in his understanding and life by means of sciences (n.
2480). Nevertheless all scientifics remain after death, but they are
quiescent (n. 2476-2479, 2481-2486). The same scientifics which with the
evil are falsities because applied to evils, with the good are truths,
because applied to goods (n. 6917). Scientific truths with the evil are
not truths, however they may appear as truths when spoken, because
within them there is evil, and consequently they are falsified; and the
science of those men by no means deserves to be called science, inasmuch
as it is destitute of life (n. 10331). It is one thing to be wise,
another to understand, another to know, and another to do; but still,
with those who are in spiritual life, they follow in order, and
correspond, and are together in doing or in deeds (n. 10331). It is also
one thing to know, another to acknowledge, and another to have faith (n.
896). What is the quality of the desire of knowing, which spirits have
is shown by an example (n. 1973). Angels have an immense desire of
knowing and of becoming wise, inasmuch is science, intelligence and
wisdom, are spiritual food (n. 3114, 4459, 4792, 4976, 5147, 5293, 5340,
5342, 5410, 5426, 5576, 5582, 5588, 5655, 6277, 8562, 9003). The chief
science with the ancients was the science of correspondences, but at
this day it is lost (n. 3021, 3419, 4280, 4844, 4964, 4966, 6004, 7729,
10252). The science of correspondences flourished with the orientals,
and in Egypt (n. 5702, 6692, 7097, 7779, 9391, 10407). Thence came their
hieroglyphics (n. 6692, 7097). The ancients by the science of
correspondences introduced themselves into the knowledges of spiritual
things (n. 4749, 4844, 4966). The Word is written by mere
correspondences, whence its internal or spiritual sense, the existence
of which cannot be known without the science of correspondences, nor can
the quality of the Word (n. 3131, 3472-3485, 8615, 10687). How much the
science of correspondences excels other sciences (n. 4280).

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

Of the natural memory, which is of the external man, and of the
spiritual memory, which is of the internal man. Man has two memories, an
exterior and an interior memory, or a natural and a spiritual memory (n.
2469-2494). Man does not know that he has an interior memory (n. 2470,
2471). How much the interior memory excels the exterior memory (n.
2473). The things in the exterior memory are in natural light, but the
things in the interior memory, in spiritual light (n. 5212). It is from
the interior memory that man is able to think and speak intellectually
and rationally (n. 9394). All and every particular which man has
thought, spoken, and done, and all that he has heard and seen, are
inscribed on his interior memory (n. 2474, 7398). That memory is man's
book of life (n. 2474, 9386, 9841, 10505). In the interior memory are
the truths which are become of faith, and the goods which are become of
love (n. 5212, 8067). The things which are rendered habitual, and have
become of the life, are in the interior memory (n. 9394, 9723, 9841).
Scientifics and knowledges are of the exterior memory (n. 5212, 9922).
They are very obscure and involved, respectively to those things which
are of the interior memory (n. 2831). The languages which man speaks in
the world are from the exterior memory (n. 2472, 2476). Spirits and
angels speak from the interior memory, and consequently their language
is universal, being such that all can converse together, of whatever
land they may be (n. 2472, 2476, 2490, 2493); concerning which language,
see the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 234-245); and concerning the wonders
of the interior memory; which remains with man after death (see n. 463
of the same work).

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

Of the fallacies of the senses, in which merely natural and sensual men
are, mentioned above in this doctrine (n. 45). Merely natural and
sensual men think and reason from the fallacies of the senses (n. 5084,
5700, 6948, 6949, 7693). Of what quality the fallacies of the senses are
(n. 5084, 5094, 6400, 6948). To which the following particulars shall be
added. There are fallacies of the senses in things natural, civil,
moral, and spiritual, and many in each of them; but here I design to
recite some of the fallacies in spiritual things. He who thinks from the
fallacies of the senses, cannot understand: (1.) That man after death
can appear as a man; nor that he can enjoy his senses as before; nor
consequently that angels have such a capacity. (2.) They think that the
soul is only a vital something, purely etherial, of which no idea can be
formed. (3.) That it is the body alone which feels, sees, and hears.
(4.) That man is like a beast, with this difference only, that he can
speak from thought. (5.) That nature is all, and the first source from
which all things proceed. (6.) That man imbues and learns to think by an
influx of interior nature and its order. (7.) That there is no
spiritual, and if it is, that it is a purer natural. (8.) That man
cannot enjoy any blessedness, if deprived of the delights of the love of
glory, honor, or gain. (9.) That conscience is only a disease of the
mind, proceeding from the infirmity of the body and from not having
success. (10.) That the Divine love of the Lord is the love of glory.
(11.) That there is no providence, but that all things come to pass from
one's own prudence and intelligence. (12.) That honors and riches are
real blessings which are given by God. Not to mention many other things
of a similar nature. Such are the fallacies of the senses in spiritual
things. Hence it may appear, that heavenly things cannot be comprehended
by those who are merely natural and sensual. Those are merely natural
and sensual whose internal spiritual man is shut, and whose natural only
is open.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

IV\. LOVE IN GENERAL. The very life of man is his love, and such as the
love is, such is the life, yea, such is the whole man. But it is the
governing or ruling love which constitutes the man. That love has many
loves subordinate to it, which are derivations. These appear under
another form, but still they are all in the ruling love, and constitute,
with it, one kingdom. The ruling love is as their king and head; it
directs them, and, through them, as mediate ends, it regards and intends
its own end, which is the primary and ultimate end of them all; and this
it does both directly and indirectly. That which is of the ruling love
is what is loved above all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

That which man loves above all things is continually present in his
thought, and also in his will, and constitutes his most essential life.
As for example, he who loves riches above all things, whether money or
possessions, continually revolves in his mind how he may obtain them. He
inmostly rejoices when he acquires them, he grieves inmostly when he
loses them; his heart is in them. He who loves himself above all things
regards himself in each thing: he thinks of himself, he speaks of
himself, he acts for the sake of himself, for his life is the life of
self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

Man has for an end that which he loves above all things; he regards it
in each and all things. It is in his will like the latent current of a
river, which draws and bears him away, even when he is doing something
else; for it is this which animates him. It is such that one man
explores and also sees it in another, and either leads him according to
it, or acts with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

Man is altogether of such a quality as the ruling principle of his life
is; by this he is distinguished from others; according to this is his
heaven if he be good, and his hell if he be evil. It is his will itself,
his proprium, and his nature, for it is the very esse of his life: this
cannot be changed after death, because it is the man himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

All the delight, pleasure, and happiness which anyone has, are derived
from his ruling love, and are according to it; for that which man loves,
he calls delightful, because he feels it to be so: he may, indeed, also
call that delightful which he thinks but does not love; but this is not
the delight of his life. The delight of love is what he esteems good;
and that which is undelightful is to him evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

There are two loves, from which, as from their very fountains, all goods
and truths exist; and there are two loves, from which all evils and
falsities exist. The two loves, from which are all goods and truths, are
love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor; and the two loves from
which are all evils and falsities, are the love of self and the love of
the world. The two latter loves are in direct opposition to the two
former loves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

The two loves from which are all goods and truths, and which, as has
just been stated, are love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor,
constitute heaven with man, and therefore they reign in heaven; and
since they constitute heaven with man, they also constitute the church
with him. The two loves, whence are all evils and falsities, and which,
as has just been said, are the love of self and the love of the world,
constitute hell with man; wherefore also they reign in hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

The two loves whence are all goods and truths, and which, as already
observed, are the loves of heaven, open and form the internal spiritual
man, because they reside there. But the two loves whence are all evils
and falsities, when they rule, shut and destroy the internal spiritual
man, and render man natural and sensual, in proportion to the extent and
quality of their dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

FROM THE ARCANA COELESTIA Love is the esse of man's life (n. 5002). Man,
spirit, and angel, are altogether as their love is (n. 6872, 10177,
10284). Man has for an end what he loves (n. 3796). What man loves and
has for an end reigns universally with him, that is, in each and all
things (n. 3796, 5130, 5949). Love is spiritual heat, and the very vital
principle of man (n. 1589, 2146, 3338, 4906, 7081-7086, 9954, 10740).
All the interiors with man, which are of his understanding and will, are
disposed in a form according to his ruling love (n. 2023, 3189, 6690).
Love is spiritual conjunction (n. 1594, 2057, 3939, 4018, 5807, 6195,
6196, 7081-7086, 7501, 10130). Hence all in the spiritual world are
consociated according to their loves (ibid.). Affection is continuation
of love (n. 3938). All delight, pleasure, happiness, and joy of heart,
are of love; and their quality is according to the quality of the love
(n. 994, 995, 2204). There are as many genera and species of delights
and pleasures as there are of the affections which are of the love (n.
994, 995, 2204). The delight of the love is more vile in proportion as
it is more external (n. 996). Man after death has such a life as is the
quality of his love (n. 2363).

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

Further particulars respecting love and its essence and quality, may be
known from what has been said and shown above, concerning good and
truth; also from what has been said and quoted concerning the will and
the understanding; and also from what has been said and quoted
concerning the internal and the external man; because all things which
are of the love refer themselves either to goods or to evils; and so
also all things which are of the will: and since the two loves of heaven
open and form the internal spiritual man; but the two loves of hell
close and destroy it. Hence applications may be made and conclusions
drawn respecting the quality of love in general and particular.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

Love is also treated of in the work on Heaven and Hell; namely, that the
Divine of the Lord in the heavens is love to Him and love towards the
neighbor (n. 13-19). All who are in the hells are in evils, and thence
in falsities from the loves of self and of the world (n. 551-565). The
delights of every love in the other life are turned into corresponding
things (n. 485-490). Spiritual heat in its essence is love (n. 133-140).

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

V. THE LOVES OF SELF AND OF THE WORLD. The love of self consists in
willing well to ourselves alone, and not to others except for the sake
of ourselves, not even to the church, to our country, to any human
society, or to a fellow-citizen; and also in doing good to them only for
the sake of our own fame, honor, and glory; for unless it sees these in
the goods which it does to others, it says in its heart, What matters
it? why should I do this? and what advantage will it be to me? and so
omits them. Whence it is plain that he who is in the love of self does
not love the church, nor his country, nor society, nor his
fellow-citizens, nor anything good, but himself alone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

Man is in the love of self, when, in those things which he thinks and
does, he has no regard for the neighbor, nor for the public, much less
for the Lord, but only for himself and his own; consequently when
everything which he does is for the sake of himself and his own, and
when, if he does anything for the public and his neighbor it is only for
the sake of appearance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

It is said for the sake of himself and his own, because he who loves
himself also loves his own, who are, in particular, his children and
relations, and in general, all who make one with him, and whom he calls
his own. To love these is also to love himself, for he regards them as
it were in himself, and himself in them. Among those whom he calls his
own, are also all they who praise, honor, and pay their court to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

That man is in the love of self, who despises the neighbor in comparison
with himself, who esteems him his enemy if he does not favor him, and if
he does not respect and pay his court to him: he is still more in the
love of self who for such reasons hates the neighbor and persecutes him;
and he is still more so who for such reasons burns with revenge against
him, and desires his destruction: such persons at length delight in
cruelty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

What the nature of the love of self is, may be evident from a comparison
with heavenly love. Heavenly love is to love uses for the sake of uses,
or goods for the sake of goods, which the man performs to the church, to
his country, to human society, and to a fellow-citizen. But he who loves
them for the sake of himself, does not love them otherwise than as his
servants, because they are of service to him. It follows from this that
he who is in the love of self wills that the church, his country, human
societies, and his fellow-citizens serve him, and not he them. He puts
himself above them, and them below him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

Moreover, as far as anyone is in heavenly love, which is to love uses
and goods, and to be affected with delight of heart when he performs
them, so far he is led by the Lord, because that love is what He is in,
and what is from Him. But as far as anyone is in the love of self, so
far he is led by himself; and as far as he is led by himself, he is so
far led by his proprium; and man's proprium is nothing but evil; for
evil is his heredity, which is to love himself above God, and the world
above heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

The love of self is also such, that as far as the reins are relaxed,
that is, as far as external bonds are removed, which are the fear of the
law and its penalties, and the fear of the loss of reputation, honor,
gain, office, and life, so far he rushes on, until he not only wishes to
bear sway over the whole world, but even over heaven, and over the
Divine itself. To him there is no bound or end. This lies hidden in
everyone who is in the love of self, though it is not manifest before
the world, where such reins and bonds hold him back; and every such man
where met by impossibility, waits there until it becomes possible. From
these things, the man who is in such love does not know that such insane
and unbounded desire lies hidden within him. That it is nevertheless so,
everyone can see in potentates and kings, for whom there are not such
checks, bonds, and impossibilities, and who rush on and subjugate
provinces and kingdoms as far as success attends them, and aspire to
power and glory without limit; and still more in those who extend their
dominion into heaven, and transfer all the Divine power of the Lord to
themselves, and continually desire more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

There are two kinds of dominion, one that of love toward the neighbor,
the other that of the love of self. These two kinds of dominion are in
their essence altogether opposite to each other. He who rules from love
toward the neighbor, wills good to all, and loves nothing more than to
perform uses, thus to be of service to others. To serve others is to do
good to them from good will, and to perform uses. This is his love, and
this is the delight of his heart. He too, as far as he is elevated to
dignities, is likewise glad; not, however, for the sake of the
dignities, but for the sake of the uses which he is then able to perform
in more abundance and in a greater degree. Such is the dominion in the
heavens. But he who rules from the love of self wishes good to no one,
but only to himself and his own. The uses which he performs are for the
sake of his own honor and glory, which to him are the only uses. Serving
others is to him for the end that he may be served, honored, and that he
may rule. He seeks dignities, not for the sake of the goods he may
perform, but to be in eminence and glory, and thence in the delight of
his heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

The love of dominion also remains with everyone after his life in the
world, but to those who have ruled from love toward the neighbor, rule
is also entrusted in the heavens. But then they do not rule, but the
uses and the goods which they love; and when uses and goods rule, the
Lord rules. They, on the other hand, who in the world have ruled from
the love of self, after their life in the world are in hell, and are in
vile slavery there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

From these things it is now known who are in the love of self. But it
matters not how they appear in outward form, whether elated or humble;
for such things are in the interior man; and by most the interior man is
concealed, and the exterior is instructed to feign the things which
belong to love for the public and the neighbor, thus the opposite. And
this is also done for the sake of self: for they know that the love of
the public and the neighbor interiorly affect all, and that so far they
will be loved and esteemed. The reason why that love affects all, is
because heaven flows into it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

The evils which belong to those who are in the love of self, are, in
general, contempt of others, envy, enmity against those who do not favor
them, hostility on that account, hatreds of various kinds, revenge,
cunning, deceit, unmercifulness, and cruelty; and where such evils
exist, there is also contempt of the Divine, and of Divine things, which
are the truths and goods of the church. If they honor these, it is only
with the mouth, and not with the heart. And because such evils are
thence, so there are similar falsities, for falsities are from evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

But the love of the world consists in wishing to draw the wealth of
others to ourselves by any artifice, in placing the heart in riches, and
in suffering the world to draw us back, and lead us away from spiritual
love, which is love towards the neighbor, consequently, from heaven.
They are in the love of the world who desire to draw the goods of others
to themselves by various artifices, especially they who do so by means
of cunning and deceit, making no account of the good of the neighbor.
They who are in that love covet the goods of others, and so far as they
do not fear the laws and the loss of reputation for the sake of gain,
they deprive others of their goods, yea commit depredations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

But the love of the world is not opposite to heavenly love in the same
degree that the love of self is, inasmuch as such great evils are not
concealed in it. This love is manifold: there is the love of riches as
the means of obtaining honors; there is the love of honors and dignities
as the means of obtaining riches; there is the love of riches for the
sake of various uses with which they are delighted in the world; there
is the love of riches for the sake of riches alone, which is avarice,
and so on. The end for the sake of which riches are desired, is called
their use, and it is the end or use from which the love derives its
quality; for the quality of the love is the same as that at the end
which it has in view, to which other things serve as means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

In a word, the love of self and the love of the world are altogether
opposite to love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor; wherefore
the love of self and the love of the world are infernal loves, for they
also reign in hell, and also constitute hell with man; but love to the
Lord and love towards the neighbor are heavenly loves. They also reign
in heaven, and also constitute heaven with man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

From what has now been said, it may be seen that all evils are in and
from those two loves; for the evils which were enumerated (n. 75) are
common; the others, which were not enumerated, because they are
specific, are derived and flow from them. Hence it may appear, that man,
because he is born into these two loves, is born into evils of every
kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

In order that man may know evils, he ought to know their origins, and
unless he knows evils, he cannot know goods, thus he cannot know of what
quality he himself is: this is the reason that these two origins of
evils are treated of here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

FROM THE ARCANA COELESTIA. The loves of self and of the world. As love
to the Lord and love towards the neighbor, or charity, constitute
heaven, so the love of self and the love of the world, where they reign
constitute hell; and therefore these loves are opposites (n. 2041, 3610,
4225, 4776, 6210, 7366, 7369, 7489, 7490, 8232, 8678, 10455,
10741-10743, 10745). All evils proceed from the loves of self and of the
world (n. 1307, 1308, 1321, 1594, 1691, 3413, 7255, 7376, 7488, 7489,
8318, 9335, 9348, 10038, 10742). From the loves of self and of the world
proceed contempt of others, enmity, hatred, revenge, cruelty, and
deceit, consequently all evil and all wickedness (n. 6667, 7372-7374,
9348, 10038, 10742). These loves rush on in proportion as the reins are
given them, and the love of self aspires to the throne of God (n. 7375,
8678). The love of self and the love of the world are destructive of
human society and of heavenly order (n. 2045, 2057). The human race on
account of those loves has formed governments, and has subjected itself
to their rule for the sake of protection (n. 7364, 10160, 10814). Where
those loves reign, the good of love and the good of faith are either
rejected, suffocated, or perverted (n. 2041, 7491, 7492, 7643, 8487,
10455, 10743). In these loves there is not life, but spiritual death (n.
7494, 10731, 10741). The quality of these loves described (n. 1505,
2219, 2363, 2364, 2444, 4221, 4227, 4948, 4949, 5721, 7366-7377, 8678).
All cupidity and lust proceed from the loves of self and of the world
(n. 1668, 8910). The loves of self and of the world may serve as means,
but not at all for an end (n. 7377, 7819, 7820). When man is reformed,
those loves are inverted, and serve as means, and not as ends, thus that
they are as the soles of the feet, and not as the head (n. 8995, 9210).
With those who are in the loves of self and of the world, there is no
internal, but an external without an internal; because the internal is
shut towards heaven, but the external is open towards the world (n.
10396, 10400, 10409, 10411, 10422, 10429). They who are in the loves of
self and of the world do not know what charity, conscience, and the life
of heaven are (n. 7490). So far as a man is in the loves of self and of
the world, so far he does not receive the good and truth of faith which
continually flows in with man from the Lord (n. 7491). They who are in
the loves of self and the world are not bound by internal, but by
external restraints; and on the removal thereof they rush into every
wickedness (n. 10744-10746). All in the spiritual world turn themselves
according to their loves; they who are in love to the Lord and in love
towards the neighbor, to the Lord; but those who are in the love of self
and in the love of the world, turn their backs on the Lord (n. 10130,
10189, 10420, 10742). The quality of the worship in which the love of
self prevails (n. 1304, 1306-1308, 1321, 1322). The Lord rules the world
by means of the evil, in leading them by their own loves, which have
relation to the loves of self and the world (n. 6481, 6495). The evil as
well as the good can discharge the duties of offices, and perform uses
and goods, because they regard honors and gain as their rewards, for the
sake of which they act in an external form like the good (n. 6481,
6495). All who are in the hells are in evils and thence in falsities,
and are in the loves of self and the world, see the work on Heaven and
Hell (n. 551-565).

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

Of the proprium of man, spoken of above (n. 70), that it is the love of
self and of the world. The proprium of man is nothing but dense evil (n.
210, 215, 731, 874-876, 987, 1047, 2307, 2308, 3518, 3701, 3812, 8480,
8550, 10283, 10284, 10286, 10731). The proprium of man is his will (n.
4328). The proprium of man consists in loving himself more than God, and
the world more than heaven, and in making his neighbor of no account
respectively to himself, thus it is the love of self and of the world
(n. 694, 731, 4317, 5660). Not only every evil, but also every falsity,
springs from the proprium of man, and this falsity is the falsity of
evil (n. 1047, 10283, 10284, 10286). The proprium of man is hell with
him (n. 694, 8480). Therefore he who is led by his proprium cannot be
saved (n. 10731). The good which man does from the proprium is not good,
but in itself is evil, because done for the sake of self and the world
(n. 8478). The proprium of man must be separated, in order that the Lord
may be present with him (n. 1023, 1044). And it is actually separated
when man is reformed (n. 9334-9336, 9452-9454, 9938). This is done by
the Lord alone (n. 9445). Man by regeneration receives a heavenly
proprium (n. 1937, 1947, 2881, 2883, 2891). This appears to man as his
own proprium, but it is not his, but the Lord's with him (n. 8497). They
who are in this proprium are in liberty itself, because liberty consists
in being led by the Lord, and by His proprium (n. 892, 905, 2872, 2886,
2890-2892, 4096, 9586, 9587, 9589-9591). All liberty is from the
proprium, and its quality according thereto (n. 2880). What is the
quality of the heavenly proprium (n. 164, 5660, 8480). How the heavenly
proprium is implanted (n. 1712, 1937, 1947).

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

Of the heredity of man, spoken of above (n. 70-79), it is the love of
self and of the world. All men are born into evils of every kind,
insomuch that their proprium is nothing but evil (n. 210, 215, 731,
874-876, 987, 1047, 2307, 2308, 3701, 3812, 8480, 8550, 10283, 10284,
10286, 10731). Therefore man is to be born again, that is, regenerated,
in order that he may receive a new life from the Lord (n. 3701).
Hereditary evils are derived, increased, and accumulated from parents
and ancestors in a long backward series, and not as is believed, from
the first man's eating of the tree of knowledge (n. 313, 494, 2910,
3469, 3701, 4317, 8550). Therefore hereditary evils are at this day more
malignant than formerly (n. 2122). Infants who die such, and are
educated in heaven, are from heredity nothing but evils (n. 2307, 2308,
4563). Hence they are of various dispositions and inclinations (n.
2300). Every man's interior evils are from the father, and the exterior
from the mother (n. 1815, 3701). Man superadds of himself new evils to
such as are hereditary, which are called actual evils (n. 8551). No one
suffers punishment in the other life for hereditary evils, but for
actual evils, which return (n. 966, 2308). The more malignant hells are
kept separate lest they should operate on the hereditary evils with men
and spirits (n. 1667, 8806). Hereditary evils are those of the loves of
self and the world, which consist in man's loving himself more than God,
and the world more than heaven, and in making his neighbor of no account
(n. 694, 4317, 5660). And because these evils are contrary to the goods
of heaven and to Divine order, man cannot but be born in mere ignorance
(n. 1050, 1902, 1992, 3175). Natural good is connate with some, but
nevertheless it is not good, because prone to all evils and falsities;
and that good is not accepted in heaven unless it be made spiritual good
(n. 2463, 2464, 2468, 3304, 3408, 3469, 3470, 3508, 3519, 7761).

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

VI\. LOVE TOWARDS THE NEIGHBOR, OR CHARITY It shall first be shown what
the neighbor is, for it is the neighbor who is to be loved, and towards
whom charity is to be exercised. For unless it be known what the
neighbor is, charity may be exercised in a similar manner, without
distinction, towards the evil as well as towards the good, whence
charity ceases to be charity: for the evil, from benefactions, do evil
to the neighbor, but the good do good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

It is a common opinion at this day, that every man is equally the
neighbor, and that benefits are to be conferred on everyone who needs
assistance; but it is in the interest of Christian prudence to examine
well the quality of a man's life, and to exercise charity to him
accordingly. The man of the internal church exercises his charity with
discrimination, consequently with intelligence; but the man of the
external church, because he is not able thus to discern things, does it
indiscriminately.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

The distinctions of neighbor, which the man of the church ought
altogether to know, are according to the good which is with everyone;
and because all good proceeds from the Lord, therefore the Lord is the
neighbor in the highest sense and in a supereminent degree, and the
origin is from Him. Hence it follows that so far as anyone has the Lord
with himself, so far he is the neighbor; and because no one receives the
Lord, that is, good from Him, in the same manner as another, therefore
no one is the neighbor in the same manner as another. For all who are in
the heavens, and all the good who are on the earths, differ in good; no
two ever received a good that is altogether one and the same; it must be
various, that each may subsist by itself. But all these varieties, thus
all the distinctions of the neighbor, which are according to the
reception of the Lord, that is, according to the reception of good from
Him, can never be known by any man, nor indeed by any angel, except in
general, thus their genera and species: neither does the Lord require
any more of the man of the church, than to live according to what he
knows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

Because good varies with everyone, it therefore follows, that the
quality of good determines in what degree and in what proportion anyone
is the neighbor. That this is the case is plain from the Lord's parable
concerning him that fell among robbers, whom, when half dead, the priest
passed by, and also the Levite; but the Samaritan, after he had bound up
his wounds, and poured in oil and wine, took him up on his own beast,
and led him to an inn, and ordered that care should be taken of him:
because he exercised the good of charity, he is called the neighbor
(Luke 10:29-37). Hence it may be known that they are the neighbor who
are in good: "the oil and wine," which the Samaritan poured into the
wounds, also signify good and its truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

It is plain from what has now been said, that in the universal sense,
good is the neighbor, because man is the neighbor according to the
quality of the good that is with him from the Lord. And because good is
the neighbor, so is love, for all good is of love; thus every man is the
neighbor according to the quality of the love which he receives from the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

That love is what causes anyone to be the neighbor, and that everyone is
the neighbor according to the quality of his love, appears manifestly
from those who are in the love of self. These acknowledge for their
neighbor those who love them most, that is, so far as they belong to
themselves; these they embrace, they kiss them, they confer benefits on
them and call them brothers; yea, because they are evil, they say, that
these are the neighbor more than others: they esteem others as the
neighbor in proportion as they love them, thus according to the quality
and quantity of their love. Such persons derive the origin of neighbor
from self, by reason that love constitutes and determines it. But they
who do not love themselves more than others, as is the case with all who
belong to the kingdom of the Lord, will derive the origin of neighbor
from Him whom they ought to love above all things, consequently, from
the Lord; and they will esteem everyone as the neighbor according to the
quality of his love to Him and from Him. From these things it appears
from whence the origin of neighbor is to be drawn by the man of the
church; and that everyone is the neighbor according to the good which he
possesses from the Lord, thus good itself is the neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

That this is the case, the Lord also teaches in Matthew: For He said to
those who were in good that they had given Him to eat, that they had
given Him to drink, that they had gathered Him, had clothed Him, had
visited Him, and had come to Him in prison; and afterwards that, so far
as they had done it to one of the least of their brethren, they had done
it unto Him (25:34-40). In these six kinds of good, understood in the
spiritual sense, are comprehended all the genera of the neighbor. Hence,
likewise, it is evident, that when good is loved the Lord is loved, for
it is the Lord from whom good is, who is in good, and who is good
itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

But the neighbor is not only man singly, but also man collectively, as a
less or greater society, our country, the church, the Lord's kingdom,
and, above all, the Lord Himself; these are the neighbor to whom good is
to be done from love. These are also the ascending degrees of neighbor,
for a society of many is neighbor in a higher degree than a single man
is; in a still higher degree is our country; in a still higher degree is
the church; and in a still higher degree is the Lord's kingdom; but in
the highest degree is the Lord. These ascending degrees are like the
steps of a ladder, at the top of which is the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

A society is the neighbor more than a single man, because it consists of
many. Charity is to be exercised towards it in a like manner as towards
a man singly, namely, according to the quality of the good that is with
it; thus in a manner totally different towards a society of the upright,
than towards a society of those not upright. The society is loved when
its good is regarded from the love of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

Our country is the neighbor more than a society, because it is like a
parent; for a man is born therein, and it nourishes and protects him
from injuries. Good is to be done to our country from love according to
its necessities, which principally regard its sustenance, and the civil
and spiritual life of those therein. He who loves his country, and does
good to it from good will, in the other life loves the Lord's kingdom,
for there the Lord's kingdom is his country, and he who loves the Lord's
kingdom loves the Lord, because the Lord is the all in all things of His
kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

The church is the neighbor more than our country, for he who has regard
for the church, has regard for the souls and eternal life of the men who
are in his country; wherefore he who provides for the church from love,
loves the neighbor in a higher degree, for he wishes and wills heaven
and happiness of life to eternity to others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

The Lord's kingdom is the neighbor in a still higher degree, for the
Lord's kingdom consists of all who are in good, both those on the
earths, and those in the heavens; thus the Lord's kingdom is good with
all its quality in the complex: when this is loved, the individuals are
loved who are in good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

These are the degrees of neighbor, and love ascends, with those who are
in love towards their neighbor, according to these degrees. But these
degrees are degrees in successive order, in which what is prior or
superior is to be preferred to what is posterior or inferior; and
because the Lord is in the highest degree, and He is to be regarded in
each degree as the end to which it tends, consequently He is to be loved
above all persons and things. From these things it may now appear, how
love to the Lord conjoins itself with love towards the neighbor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

It is a common saying, that everyone is his own neighbor; that is, that
everyone should first consider himself; but the doctrine of charity
teaches how this is to be understood. Everyone should provide for
himself the necessaries of life, such as food, raiment, habitation, and
many other things which the state of civil life, in which he is,
necessarily requires, and this not only for himself, but also for his
own, and not only for the present time, but also for the future; for
unless a man procures for himself the necessaries of life, he cannot be
in a state to exercise charity, for he is in want of all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

But how every one ought to be his own neighbor may appear from this
comparison. Everyone ought to provide food and raiment for his body;
this must be the first object, but it should be done to the end that he
may have a sound mind in a sound body. And everyone ought to provide
food for his mind, namely, such things as are of intelligence and
wisdom; to the end that it may thence be in a state to serve his
fellow-citizens, human society, his country, and the church, thus the
Lord. He who does this provides for his own good to eternity. Hence it
is evident that the first is where the end is on account of which we
should act, for all other things look to this. The case is like that of
a man who builds a house: he first lays the foundation; but the
foundation is for the house, and the house is for habitation. He who
believes that he is his own neighbor in the first place, is like him who
regards the foundation as the end, not the house and habitation; when
yet the habitation is the very first and ultimate end, and the house
with the foundation is only a means to the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

The end declares how everyone should be his own neighbor, and provide
for himself first. If the end be to grow richer than others only for the
sake of riches, or for the sake of pleasure, or for the sake of
eminence, and the like, it is an evil end, and that man does not love
the neighbor, but himself; but if the end be to procure himself riches,
that he may be in a state of providing for his fellow-citizens, human
society, his country, and the church, in like manner if he procures for
himself offices for the same end, he loves the neighbor. The end itself,
for the sake of which he acts, constitutes the man; for the end is his
love, for everyone has for a first and ultimate end, that which he loves
above all things. What has hitherto been said is concerning the
neighbor. Love towards him, or Charity, shall now be treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

It is believed by many, that love towards the neighbor consists in
giving to the poor, in assisting the indigent, and in doing good to
everyone; but charity consists in acting prudently, and to the end that
good may result. He who assists a poor or indigent evil doer does evil
to the neighbor through him, for through the assistance which he
renders, he confirms him in evil, and supplies him with the means of
doing evil to others. It is otherwise with him who gives support to the
good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[51-1](tnj02.htm#fr_0.md) The translator omitted the
clause which reads: ", and finally to be wise, that is to live according
to them". We have inserted it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](tnj03.md)
