[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnj00)  [Next](tnj02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine*, by Emanuel Swedenborg,
\[1758\], tr. by John Whitehead \[1892\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The New Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

THE NEW HEAVEN AND THE NEW EARTH, AND WHAT IS MEANT BY THE NEW
JERUSALEM. It is written in the Apocalypse: I saw a New Heaven and a New
Earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away. And I
saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a bride before her husband. The city had a wall, great and
high, which had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names
written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of Israel. And
the wall of the city had twelve foundations, in which were the names of
the twelve apostles of the Lamb. The city itself lieth four-square, and
the length is as great as the breadth. And he measured the city with the
reed, twelve thousand stadia; the length and the breadth and the height
of it were equal. And he measured the wall thereof, a hundred forty-four
cubits, the measure of a man, which is, of an angel. And the wall of it
was of jasper; and the city itself was pure gold, like unto pure glass;
and the foundations of the wall of the city were of every precious
stone. The twelve gates were twelve pearls. And the street of the city
was pure gold, as it were pellucid glass. The glory of God did lighten
it, and the lamp of it was the Lamb. The nations which were saved shall
walk in the light of it; and the Kings of the earth shall bring their
glory and honor into it. (21:1, 2, 12-24.) The man who reads these
things, understands them only according to the sense of the letter;
namely, that the visible heaven and earth will perish, and a new heaven
will exist, and that the holy city Jerusalem, answering to the measures
above described, will descend upon the new earth; but the angels
understand these things altogether differently; namely, what man
understands naturally, they understand spiritually; and as the angels
understand, so they signify; and this is the internal or spiritual sense
of the Word. In the internal or spiritual sense, "a New Heaven and a New
Earth" means a New Church, both in the heavens and on the earth, which
will be more particularly spoken of hereafter. "The city Jerusalem
coming down from God out of heaven" signifies its heavenly doctrine;
"the length," "the breadth," and "the height," which are equal, signify
all the goods and truths of that doctrine in the aggregate. By "the
wall" of it is meant the truths which protect it; "the measure of the
wall," which is "a hundred forty-four cubits, which is the measure of a
man, that is, of an angel," signifies all those protecting truths in the
aggregate, and their quality. "The twelve gates" of pearl mean
introductory truths; "the twelve angels at the gates" signify the same.
"The foundations of the wall" which are "of every precious stone," mean
the knowledges on which that doctrine is founded. "The twelve tribes of
Israel," and "the twelve apostles," mean all things of the church in
general and in particular. The city and its streets being of "gold like
unto pure glass," signifies the good of love from which the doctrine and
its truths are pellucid. "The nations" who are saved, and "the kings of
the earth" who bring glory and honor into it, mean all of the church who
are in goods and truths. "God" and "the Lamb" mean the Lord as to the
Divine itself and the Divine Human. Such is the spiritual sense of the
Word, to which the natural sense, which is that of the letter, serves as
a basis; but still these two senses, the spiritual and the natural, form
a one by correspondences. It is not the design of the present work to
show that there is such a spiritual meaning in the afore-mentioned
passages, but the proof of it may be seen in the Arcana Coelestia, in
the following places: In the Word by "land" \[earth\] the church is
signified, particularly when it is applied to the land of Canaan (n.
662, 1066, 1067, 1262, 1413, 1607, 2928, 3355, 4447, 4535, 5577, 8011,
9325, 9643). Because by "land" in the spiritual sense is meant the
nation dwelling therein, and its worship (n. 1262), "the people of the
land" signify those who are of the spiritual church (n. 2928). "A New
Heaven and a New Earth" signify something new in the heavens and on
earth, as to goods and truths, thus as to those things that relate to
the church in each (n. 1733, 1850, 2117, 2118, 3355, 4535, 10373). What
is meant by "the first heaven and the first earth" which passed away,
may be seen in Last Judgment and Babylon Destroyed, from beginning to
end, but particularly n. 65 to 72. "Jerusalem" signifies the church as
to doctrine (n. 402, 3654, 9166). "Cities" signify doctrines which are
of the church and religion (n. 402, 2449, 2712, 2943, 3216, 4492, 4493).
"The wall of a city" signifies the truth of doctrine defending (n.
6419). "The gates of a city" signify truths introducing to doctrine, and
through doctrine to the church (n. 2943, 4477, 4492, 4493). "The twelve
tribes of Israel" represented, and thence signified, all the truths and
goods of the church in general and in particular, thus all things of
faith and love (n. 3858, 3926, 4060, 6335). The same is signified by
"the Lord's twelve apostles" (n. 2129, 3272, 3354, 3488, 3858, 6397).
When it is said of the apostles, that "they shall sit upon twelve
thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel," it signifies that all
are to be judged according to the goods and truths of the church, thus
by the Lord from whom they are (n. 2129, 6397). "Twelve" signifies all
things in the aggregate (n. 577, 2089, 2129, 2130, 3272, 3858, 3913).
Also "a hundred forty-four" signifies the same because that number is
the product of twelve multiplied by twelve (n. 7973); "twelve thousand"
has also the same signification (n. 7973). All numbers in the Word
signify things (n. 482, 487, 647, 648, 755, 813, 1963, 1988, 2075, 2252,
3252, 4264, 6175, 9488, 9659, 10217, 10253). Numbers multiplied into
each other have the same signification as the simple numbers from which
they arise by multiplication (n. 5291, 5335, 5708, 7973). "Measure"
signifies the quality of a thing as to truth and good (n. 3104, 9603,
10262). "The foundations of a wall" signify the knowledges of truth on
which doctrinals are founded (n. 9643). "Quadrangular" or "square"
signifies what is perfect (n. 9717, 9861). "Length" signifies good and
its extension, and "breadth" truth and its extension (n. 1613, 9487).
"Precious stones" signify truths from good (n. 114, 9863, 9865). What
"the precious stones" in the Urim and Thummim signify, both in general
and in particular (n. 3862, 9864, 9866, 9891, 9895, 9905). What the
"jasper" of which the wall was built signifies (n. 9872). "The street of
the city" signifies the truth of doctrine from good (n. 2336). "Gold"
signifies the good of love (n. 113, 1551, 1552, 5658, 6914, 6917, 9510,
9874, 9881). "Glory" signifies the Divine truth, such as it is in
heaven, and the intelligence and wisdom thence (n. 4809, 5068, 5922,
8267, 8427, 9429, 10574). "Nations" signify those in the church who are
in good, and, in the abstract sense, the good of the church (n. 1059,
1159, 1258, 1261, 1285, 1416, 1849, 4574, 7830, 9255, 9256). "Kings"
signify those in the church who are in truths, and thence abstractly the
truth of the church (n. 1672, 2015, 2069, 4575, 5044). The rites at the
coronation of kings, involve such things as are of the Divine truth, but
the knowledge of these things is at this day lost (n. 4581, 4966).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

Before the New Jerusalem and its doctrine are treated of, something
shall be said of the New Heaven and the New Earth. What is meant by "the
first heaven and the first earth," which passed away, is shown in the
small work Last Judgment and Babylon Destroyed. Immediately after that
event, that is, after the Last Judgment was completed, a New Heaven was
created or formed by the Lord. This heaven was formed of all those who,
from the coming of the Lord to the present time, had lived the life of
faith and charity, since these alone were forms of heaven. For the form
of heaven, according to which all consociations and communications
therein are effected, is the form of the Divine truth from the Divine
good proceeding from the Lord; and this form man as to his spirit
acquires by a life according to the Divine truth. That the form of
heaven is thence may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (n.
200-212), and that all the angels are forms of heaven (n. 51-58, and
73-77). From these things it may be known, who they are of whom the New
Heaven consists; and thereby what its quality is, namely, that it is
altogether unanimous. For he who lives the life of faith and charity,
loves another as himself, and by love conjoins him to himself, and thus
reciprocally and mutually; for in the spiritual world, love is
conjunction. Wherefore, when all act thus, then from many, yea from
innumerable individuals consociated according to the form of heaven,
unanimity exists, and they become as one; for then nothing separates and
divides, but everything conjoins and unites.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

Since this heaven was formed of all those who had been such from the
coming of the Lord until the present time, it follows that it is
composed both of Christians and of Gentiles; but chiefly of all infants
from the whole world, who have died since the Lord's coming; for all
these were received by the Lord, and educated in heaven, and instructed
by the angels, and reserved, that they, together with the others, might
constitute the New Heaven; whence it may be concluded how great that
heaven is. That all who die in infancy are educated in heaven, and
become angels, may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 329-345).
And that heaven is formed of Gentiles as well as of Christians (n.
318-328).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

Moreover, with respect to this New Heaven, it is to be known, that it is
distinct from the ancient heavens which were formed before the coming of
the Lord; but still they together with this are so arranged that they
form one heaven. The reason why this New Heaven is distinct from the
ancient heavens, is because in the ancient churches there was no other
doctrine than the doctrine of love and charity; and then they did not
know of any doctrine of faith separated from love and charity. Hence
also it is that the ancient heavens constitute higher expanses, while
the New Heaven constitutes an expanse beneath them; for the heavens are
expanses one above another. In the highest expanse those dwell who are
called celestial angels, many of whom were of the Most Ancient Church;
they who are there are called celestial angels from celestial love,
which is love to the Lord. In the expanse beneath them are those who are
called spiritual angels, most of whom were of the Ancient Church; they
are called spiritual angels from spiritual love, which is charity
towards the neighbor. Below these are the angels who are in the good of
faith; these are they who have lived the life of faith. To live the life
of faith, is to live according to the doctrine of their church; and to
live is to will and to do. All these heavens, however, form a one, by
mediate and immediate influx from the Lord. But a more full idea of
these heavens may be obtained from what is said of them in the work on
Heaven and Hell, and particularly in the article which treats of the Two
Kingdoms into which the heavens in general are distinguished (n. 20-28);
and in the article concerning the Three Heavens (n. 29-40); concerning
mediate and immediate influx, in the extracts from Arcana Coelestia
(after n. 603); and concerning the Most Ancient and Ancient Churches in
the small work on The Last Judgment and Babylon Destroyed (n. 46).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

These things are concerning the New Heaven; something shall now be said
concerning "the New Earth." By "the New Earth" is meant the New Church
on the earth; for when a former church ceases to exist, then a new one
is established by the Lord. For it is provided by the Lord that there
should always be a church on earth, since by means of the church there
is a conjunction of the Lord with the human race, and of heaven with the
world; for there the Lord is known, and there are the Divine truths by
which man is conjoined to Him. That a New Church is at this time being
established, may be seen in the small work on The Last Judgment (n. 74).
The reason why a New Church is signified by "the New Earth" arises from
the spiritual sense of the Word; for in that sense, by the "earth" no
particular country is meant, but the nation dwelling there, and its
Divine worship; this, in the spiritual sense, being what answers to
earth in the natural sense. Moreover, by "earth" in the Word, when there
is no name of any particular country affixed to the term, is signified
the land of Canaan; and in the land of Canaan a church had existed from
the most ancient times; in consequence of which, all the places therein,
and in the adjacent countries, with the mountains and rivers, which are
mentioned in the Word, became representative and significative of the
things which are the internals of the church, and which are called its
spiritual things. Hence it is, as was said, that "earth" in the Word,
because it means the land of Canaan, signifies the church; in like
manner here by "the New Earth"; from this comes the custom in the church
to speak of the heavenly Canaan, by which is meant heaven. That "the
land of Canaan," in the spiritual sense of the Word, signifies the
church, is shown in the Arcana Coelestia, in various places, of which
the following are here adduced: The Most Ancient Church, which was
before the flood, and the Ancient Church, which was after the flood,
were in the land of Canaan (n. 567, 3686, 4447, 4454, 4516, 4517, 5136,
6516, 9325). Then all places in that land became representative of such
things as are in the kingdom of the Lord, and in the church (n. 1585,
3686, 4447, 5136). Therefore Abraham was commanded to go thither, since
with his posterity from Jacob, a representative church might be
established, and that the Word might be written, the ultimate of which
should consist of representatives and significatives which are there (n.
3686, 4447, 5136, 6516). Hence it is that "earth" and "the land of
Canaan," when they are mentioned in the Word, signify the church (n.
3038, 3481, 3705, 4447, 4517, 5757, 10568).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

What is meant by "Jerusalem" in the spiritual sense of the Word, shall
also be briefly stated. "Jerusalem" means the church itself as to
doctrine, because there in the land of Canaan, and in no other place,
were the temple, the altar, the sacrifices, and thus Divine worship
itself. On this account, also, three festivals were celebrated there
every year, to which every male throughout the whole land was commanded
to go. This, then, is the reason why "Jerusalem," in the spiritual
sense, signifies the church as to worship, or, what is the same, as to
doctrine; for worship is prescribed in doctrine, and is performed
according to it. The reason why it is said, "The holy city, New
Jerusalem, descending from God out of heaven," is because, in the
spiritual sense of the Word, "a city" \[civitas\] and "a town" \[urbs\],
signify doctrine, and "the holy city" the doctrine of Divine truth,
since Divine truth is what is called "holy" in the Word. It is called
"the New Jerusalem" for the same reason that "the earth" is called
"new"; because, as was observed above, "the earth" signifies the church,
and "Jerusalem," the church as to doctrine; which is said "to descend
from God out of heaven," because all Divine truth, whence doctrine is
derived, descends out of heaven from the Lord. That "Jerusalem" does not
mean a city, although it was seen as a city, manifestly appears from its
being said that: Its height was, as its length and breadth, twelve
thousand stadia (Rev. 21:16). And that the measure of its wall, which
was a hundred forty-four cubits, was the measure of a man, that is, of
the angel (Rev. 21:17). Also from its being said that: It was prepared
as a Bride adorned for her Husband (verse 2). And afterwards the angel
said: Come, I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife: and he showed
me that great city, the holy Jerusalem (verses 9, 10). The church is
called in the Word "the Bride" and "the Wife" of the Lord; she is called
"the Bride" before conjunction, and "the Wife" after conjunction. As may
be seen in the Arcana Coelestia (n. 3103, 3105, 3164, 3165, 3207, 7022,
9182).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

To add a few words respecting the doctrine which is delivered in the
following pages. This, also, is from heaven, because it is from the
spiritual sense of the Word, and the spiritual sense of the Word is the
same with the doctrine that is in heaven; for there is a church in
heaven as well as on earth. In heaven there are the Word and doctrine
from the Word, there are temples there, and preaching in them; there are
also both ecclesiastical and civil governments there: in a word, the
only difference between the things which are in heaven, and those which
are on earth, is, that in heaven all things exist in a state of greater
perfection, since those who are there are spiritual, and spiritual
things immensely exceed in perfection those that are natural. That such
things exist in heaven may be seen in the work concerning Heaven and
Hell throughout, particularly in the article concerning Governments in
Heaven (n. 213-220); and also in the article on Divine Worship in Heaven
(n. 221-227). From these things it may be evident what is meant by "the
holy city, New Jerusalem, was seen to descend from God out of heaven."
But I proceed to the doctrine itself, which is for the New Church, and
which is called Heavenly Doctrine, because it was revealed to me out of
heaven; to deliver this doctrine is the design of the present book.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE DOCTRINE. The end of the church is when there is no
faith because there is no charity. This is shown in the small work on
The Last Judgment and Babylon Destroyed (n. 33-39 seq.). Because the
churches in the Christian world have separated themselves from each
other solely by such things as are of faith, when yet there is no faith
where there is no charity, I will, by way of introduction to the
doctrine which follows, make some observations concerning the doctrine
of charity with the ancients. It is said "the churches in the Christian
world," and by them is meant the churches with the Reformed or
Evangelical and not the Papists, since the Christian church is not
there; for where the church exists the Lord is adored and the Word is
read; whereas, with the Papists, they adore themselves instead of the
Lord; they forbid the Word to be read by the people; and affirm the
Pope's decree to be equal, yea, even above it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

The doctrine of charity, which is the doctrine of life, was the doctrine
itself in the ancient churches. Concerning these churches see in Arcana
Coelestia (n. 1238, 2385). And that doctrine conjoined all churches, and
thereby formed one church out of many. For they acknowledged all those
as men of the church who lived in the good of charity, and called them
brethren, however they might differ respecting truths, which at this day
are called matters of faith. In these they instructed one another, which
was among their works of charity; nor were they indignant if one did not
accede to the opinion of another, knowing that everyone receives truth
so far as he is in good. Because the ancient churches were such,
therefore they were interior men; and because they were interior men
they excelled in wisdom. For they who are in the good of love and
charity, as to the internal man, are in heaven, and as to that are in an
angelic society which is in similar good. Hence they enjoy an elevation
of mind towards interior things, and, consequently, they are in wisdom;
for wisdom can come from no other source than from heaven, that is,
through heaven from the Lord; and in heaven there is wisdom, because
there they are in good. Wisdom consists in seeing truth from the light
of truth; and the light of truth is the light which is in heaven. But in
process of time that ancient wisdom decreased; for as mankind removed
themselves from the good of love to the Lord, and of love towards the
neighbor, which love is called charity, they removed themselves in the
same proportion from wisdom because, in the same proportion, they
removed themselves from heaven. Hence it was that man, from being
internal, became external, and this successively; and when he became
external, he became also worldly and corporeal. When such is his
quality, he cares but little for the things of heaven; for the delights
of earthly loves, and the evils which, from those loves, are delightful
to him, then possess him entirely. And then the things which he hears
concerning the life after death, concerning heaven and hell, in a word,
concerning spiritual things, are as it were out of him, and not within
him, as nevertheless they ought to be. Hence also it is, that the
doctrine of charity, which with the ancients was held in such high
estimation, is at this day among the things that are lost. For who, at
this day, knows what charity is, in the genuine sense of the term, and
what, in the same sense, is meant by our neighbor? whereas, that
doctrine not only teaches this, but innumerable things besides, of which
not a thousandth part is known at this day. The whole Sacred Scripture
is nothing else than the doctrine of love and charity, which the Lord
also teaches, when He says: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this is the
first and great commandment; the second is like unto it, thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself: on these two commandments hang all the law and
the prophets (Matt. 22:37-39). "The law and the prophets" in each and
all things are the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

In the following doctrine we will annex to each section extracts from
the Arcana Coelestia, because in these the same things are more fully
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

I. GOOD AND TRUTH. All things in the universe, which are according to
Divine order, have relation to good and truth. There is nothing in
heaven, and nothing in the world, which has not relation to these two;
the reason is, because both good and truth proceed from the Divine from
Whom all things are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

Hence it appears that there is nothing more necessary for man to know
than what good and truth are; how the one has respect to the other; and
how one is conjoined to the other. But such knowledge is especially
necessary for the man of the church; for as all things of heaven have
relation to good and truth, so also have all things of the church,
because the good and truth of heaven are also the good and truth of the
church. It is on this account that a beginning is made from good and
truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

It is according to Divine order that good and truth should be conjoined,
and not separated; thus, that they should be one, and not two; for they
proceed in conjunction from the Divine, and are conjoined in heaven, and
therefore they should be conjoined in the church. The conjunction of
good and truth is called, in heaven, the heavenly marriage, for all
there are in this marriage. Hence it is that in the Word heaven is
compared to a marriage, and that the Lord is called the Bridegroom and
Husband, but heaven, and also the church, are called the Bride and Wife.
That heaven and the church are so called, is because they who are
therein receive Divine good in truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

All the intelligence and wisdom which the angels have is from that
marriage, and not any of it from good separate from truth, nor from
truth separate from good. It is the same with the men of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

Because the conjunction of good and truth is an image of marriage, it is
plain that good loves truth, and truth, in its turn, loves good, and
that one desires to be conjoined with the other. The man of the church,
who has not such love and such desire, is not in the heavenly marriage,
consequently the church as yet is not in him; for the conjunction of
good and truth constitutes the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

Goods are manifold; in general there is spiritual good and natural good,
and both are conjoined in genuine moral good. As goods are manifold, so
also are truths, because truths are of good, and are the forms of good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

As it is with good and truth, so it is in the opposite with evil and
falsity; namely, as all things in the universe, which are according to
Divine order, have relation to good and truth, so all things which are
contrary to Divine order have relation to evil and falsity. Again, as
good loves to be conjoined to truth, and vice versa, so evil loves to be
conjoined to falsity, and vice versa. And again, as all intelligence and
wisdom are born from the conjunction of good and truth, so all insanity
and folly are born from the conjunction of evil and falsity. The
conjunction of evil and falsity is called the infernal marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

Since evil and falsity are opposite to good and truth, it is plain that
truth cannot be conjoined to evil, nor good to the falsity of evil; if
truth be adjoined to evil, it is truth no longer, but falsity, because
it is falsified; and if good be adjoined to the falsity of evil, it is
good no longer, but evil, because it is adulterated. But falsity which
is not of evil may be conjoined to good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

No one who is in evil, and thence in falsity from confirmation and life,
can know what good and truth is, for he believes his own evil to be
good, and thence he believes his falsity to be truth; but everyone who
is in good and thence in truth from confirmation and life may know what
evil and falsity are. The reason of this is, because all good and its
truth is, in its essence, heavenly, and what is not heavenly in its
essence is still from a heavenly origin; but all evil and its falsity is
in its essence infernal, and what is not infernal in its essence has
nevertheless its origin from thence; and all that is heavenly is in
light, but all that is infernal is in darkness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

FROM THE ARCANA COELESTIA. Each and all things in the universe have
relation to good and truth, and to evil and falsity; those things which
are and are done according to Divine order, to good and truth; but those
which are opposite to Divine order, to evil and falsity (n. 2452, 3166,
4390, 4409, 5232, 7256, 10122). Consequently everything in man has
reference to the understanding and will, since the understanding is the
recipient of truth, or of falsity; and the will the recipient of good,
or of evil (n. 10122). At this day it is little known what truth in its
genuine essence is, because it is little known what good is, when
nevertheless all truth is from good, and all good is by truths (n. 2507,
3603, 4136, 9186, 9995). There are four kinds of men: 1. Those who are
in falsities from evil; and those who are in falsities not from evil. 2.
Those who are in truths without good. 3. Those who are in truths, and by
them look and tend to good. 4. Those who are in truths from good. But
each of these shall be spoken of in particular.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

\[1\]. Of those who are in falsities from evil, and of those who are in
falsities not from evil; thus of falsities from evil, and of falsities
not from evil. There are innumerable kinds of falsities, namely, as many
as there are evils; and the origins of evils, and thence of falsities,
are many (n. 1188, 1212, 4729, 4822, 7574). There is falsity from evil,
or falsity of evil; and there is evil from falsity, or evil of falsity,
and again falsity thence, thus derivative (n. 1679, 2243). From one
falsity, especially if it is in the place of a principle, there flow
falsities in a continual series (n. 1510, 1511, 4717, 4721). There is
falsity from the cupidities of the love of self and of the world; and
there is falsity from the fallacies of the senses (n. 1295, 4729). There
are falsities of religion, and there are falsities of ignorance (n.
4729, 8318, 9258). There is falsity in which there is good, and falsity
in which there is not good (n. 2863, 9304, 10109, 10302). There is what
is falsified (n. 7318, 7319, 10648). All evil has falsity with it (n.
7577, 8094). Falsity from the cupidities of the love of self is the very
falsity of evil; and the worst kinds of falsities are thence (n. 4729).
Evil is heavy, and has in itself a tendency to fall into hell, but not
so falsity, unless derived from evil (n. 8279, 8298). Good is turned
into evil, and truth into falsity, when it descends from heaven into
hell, because as it were into a gross and impure atmosphere (n. 3607).
Falsities from evil appear as mists and foul waters over the hells (n.
8137, 8138, 8146). They who are in the hells speak falsities from evil
(n. 1695, 7351, 7352, 7357, 7392, 7699). They who are in evil cannot but
think falsities, when they think from themselves (n. 7437). More is said
concerning evil of falsity (n. 2408, 4818, 7272, 8265, 8279); and
concerning falsities of evil (n. 6359, 7272, 9304, 10302). Every falsity
may be confirmed, and when confirmed appears as truth (n. 5033, 6865,
8521, 8780). Therefore everything should be examined to see whether it
is true before it is confirmed (n. 4741, 7012, 7680, 7950, 8521). Care
should be taken that the falsities of religion be not confirmed, because
the persuasion of falsity arises thence, which adheres to man after
death (n. 845, 8780). How hurtful the persuasion of falsity is (n. 794,
806, 5096, 7686). Good cannot flow into truths so long as man is in evil
(n. 2434). Goods and truths are so far removed from man as he is in
evil, and thereby in falsities (n. 3402). The greatest care is taken by
the Lord lest truth be conjoined to evil, and the falsity of evil to
good (n. 3110, 3116, 4416, 5217). Profanation arises from such mixture
(n. 6348). Truths exterminate falsities, and falsities truths (n. 5207).
Truths cannot be deeply received so long as incredulity reigns (n.
3399). How truths may be falsified, from examples (n. 7318). The evil
are permitted to falsify truths, the reason (n. 7332). Truths are
falsified by the evil, by being applied and thus turned aside to evil
(n. 8094, 8149). Truth is said to be falsified when it is applied to
evil, which is done especially by fallacies and appearances in externals
(n. 7334, 8062). The evil are allowed to assault truth, but not good,
because they can falsify truth by various interpretations and
applications (n. 6677). Truth falsified from evil, is contrary to truth
and good (n. 8062). Truth falsified from evil has a grievous stench in
the other life (n. 7319). More is said concerning the falsification of
truth (n. 7318, 7319, 10648). There are falsities of religion which
agree with good, and others which disagree (n. 9258, 9259). Falsities of
religion, if they do not disagree with good, do not produce evil, except
with those who are in evil (n. 8318). Falsities of religion are not
imputed to those who are in good, but to those who are in evil (n. 8051,
8149). Truths not genuine, and also falsities, may be consociated with
genuine truths with those who are in good, but not with those who are in
evil (n. 3470, 3471, 4551, 4552, 7344, 8149, 9298). Falsities and truths
are consociated by appearances from the sense of the letter of the Word
(n. 7344). Falsities are made true by good, and grow soft when they are
applied and turned to good, and evil is removed (n. 8149). Falsities of
religion with those who are in good, are received by the Lord as truths
(n. 4736, 8149). Good whose quality is from the falsity of religion, is
accepted by the Lord, if there is ignorance, and therein innocence, and
a good end (n. 7887). Truths with man are appearances of truth and good
imbued with fallacies; but nevertheless the Lord adapts them to genuine
truths with the man who lives in good (n. 2053). Falsities in which is
good are given with those who are out of the church, and thence in
ignorance of truth; also with those who are within the church where are
falsities of doctrine (n. 2589-2604, 2861, 2863, 3263, 3778, 4189, 4190,
4197, 6700, 9256). Falsities in which there is not good are more
grievous with those who are within the church, than with those who are
out of the church (n. 7688). Truths and goods are taken away from the
evil in the other life, and given to the good, according to the words of
the Lord: To him that hath shall be given that he may abound; and from
him who hath not shall be taken away that which he hath (Matt. 25:29, n.
7770).

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

\[2\]. Of those who are in truths, and not in good; consequently of
truths without good. Truths without good are not in themselves truths
because they have no life, for all the life of truths is from good (n.
3603). Thus they are as a body without a soul (n. 8530, 9154). The
knowledges of truth and good which are only in the memory and not in the
life, are believed by them to be truths (n. 5276). The truths are not
appropriated to man, nor become his own, which he only knows and
acknowledges from causes which proceed from the love of self and the
world (n. 3402, 3834). But those are appropriated, which he acknowledges
for the sake of truth itself and good (n. 3849). Truths without good are
not accepted by the Lord (n. 4368); neither do they save (n. 2261). They
who are in truths without good, are not of the church (n. 3963). Neither
can they be regenerated (n. 10367). The Lord does not flow into truths
except through good (n. 10367). Of the separation of truth from good (n.
5008, 5009, 5022, 5028). The quality of truth without good, and its
quality from good (n. 1949, 1950, 1964, 5951); from comparisons (n.
5830). Truth without good is morose (n. 1949-1951, 1964). In the
spiritual world it appears hard (n. 6359, 7068); and pointed (n. 2799).
Truth without good is as the light of winter, in which all things of the
earth are torpid, and nothing is produced; but truth from good is as the
light of spring and summer, in which all things flourish and are
produced (n. 2231, 3146, 3412, 3413). Such a wintry light is turned into
dense darkness when light flows in from heaven; and that then they who
are in those truths come into blindness and stupidity (n. 3412, 3413).
They who separate truths from good are in darkness, and in ignorance of
truth and in falsities (n. 9186). From falsities they cast themselves
into evils (n. 3325, 8094). The errors and falsities into which they
cast themselves (n. 4721, 4730, 4776, 4783, 4925, 7779, 8313, 8765,
9222). The Word is shut to them (n. 3773, 4783, 8780). They do not see
and attend to all those things which the Lord spoke concerning love and
charity, thus concerning good (n. 2051, 3416). They know not what good
is, nor what heavenly love and charity are (n. 2471, 3603, 4136, 9995).
They who know the truths of faith, and live in evil, in the other life
abuse truths to domineer thereby; concerning their quality and lot there
(n. 4802). Divine truth condemns to hell, but Divine good elevates to
heaven (n. 2258). Divine truth terrifies, not so Divine good (n. 4180).
What it is to be judged from truth, and to be judged from good (n.
2335).

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

\[3\]. Of those who are in truths, and by them look and tend to good;
thus of truths by which there is good. What man loves, this he wills,
and what man loves or wills this he thinks, and confirms in various
ways: what man loves or wills, this he calls good, and what man thence
thinks and confirms in various ways, this he calls truth (n. 4070).
Hence it is, that truth becomes good, when it becomes of the love or
will, or when man loves and wills it (n. 5526, 7835, 10367). And because
the love or the will is the very life of man, truth does not live with
man when he only knows it, and thinks it, but when he loves and wills
it, and from love and will does it (n. 5595, 9282). Thence truths
receive life, consequently from good (n. 2434, 3111, 3607, 6077). Thence
the life of truths is from good, and they have no life without good (n.
1589, 1947, 1997, 3180, 3579, 4070, 4096, 4097, 4736, 4757, 4884, 5147,
5928, 9154, 9667, 9841, 10729); illustrated (n. 9154). When truths may
be said to have acquired life (n. 1928). Truth when it is conjoined to
good, is appropriated to man because it becomes of his life (n. 3108,
3161). That truth may be conjoined to good, there must be consent from
the understanding and will; when the will also consents, then there is
conjunction (n. 3157, 3158, 3161). When man is regenerated, truths enter
with the delight of affection, because he loves to do them, and they are
reproduced with the same affection because the two cohere (n. 2474,
2487, 3040, 3066, 3074, 3336, 4018, 5893, 7967). The affection which is
of love always adjoins itself to truths according to the uses of life,
and that affection is reproduced with the truths, and the truths are
reproduced with the affection (n. 3336, 3824, 3849, 4205, 5893, 7967).
Good acknowledges nothing else for truth than what agrees with the
affection which is of the love (n. 3161). Truths are introduced by
delights and pleasantnesses that agree therewith (n. 3502, 3512). All
genuine affection of truth is from good, and according to it (n. 4373,
8349, 8356). Thus there is an insinuation and an influx of good into
truths, and conjunction (n. 4301). And thus truths have life (n. 7917,
7967). Because the affection which is of love always adjoins itself to
truths according to the uses of life, good acknowledges its own truth,
and truth its own good (n. 2429, 3101, 3102, 3161, 3179, 3180, 4358,
5407, 5835, 9637). Thence is the conjunction of truth and good,
concerning which (n. 3834, 4096, 4097, 4301, 4345, 4353, 4364, 4368,
5365, 7623-7627, 7752-7762, 8530, 9258, 10555). Truths also acknowledge
each other, and are mutually consociated (n. 9079). This is from the
influx of heaven (n. 9079). Good is the esse of life, and truth the
existere of life thence; and thus good has its existere of life in
truth, and truth its esse of life in good (n. 3049, 3180, 4574, 5002,
9154). Hence every good has its own truth, and every truth its own good,
because good without truth does not exist, and truth without good is not
(n. 9637). Good has also its form and quality from truths, and that
truth is the form and quality of good (n. 3049, 4574, 6916, 9154). And
thus truth and good ought to be conjoined that they may be something (n.
10555). Hence good is in the perpetual endeavor and desire of conjoining
truths to itself (n. 9206, 9495); illustrated (n. 9207). And truths in
like manner with good (n. 9206). The conjunction is reciprocal, of good
with truth, and of truth with good (n. 5365, 8516). Good acts, and truth
reacts, but from good (n. 3155, 4380, 4757, 5928, 10729). Truths regard
their own good, as the beginning and end (n. 4353). The conjunction of
truth with good is as the progression of man's life from infancy, as he
first imbibes truths scientifically, then rationally, and at length
makes them of his life (n. 3203, 3665, 3690). It is also as with
offspring that is conceived, is in the womb, is born, grows up, and
becomes wise (n. 3298, 3299, 3308, 3665, 3690). It is also like seeds
and soil (n. 3671). And as with water and bread (n. 4976). The first
affection of truth is not genuine, but as man is perfected it is
purified (n. 3040, 3089). Nevertheless goods and truths, not genuine,
serve for introducing goods and truths that are genuine, and afterwards
the former are left behind (n. 3665, 3690, 3974, 3982, 3986, 4145).
Moreover man is led to good by truths, and not without truths (n. 10124,
10367). If man does not learn or receive truths, good cannot flow in,
thus man cannot become spiritual (n. 3387). The conjunction of good and
truth takes place according to the increase of knowledge (n. 3141).
Truths are received by everyone according to his capacity (n. 3385). The
truths of the natural man are scientifics (n. 3293, 3309, 3310).
Scientifics and knowledges are as vessels (n. 6004, 6023, 6052, 6071,
6077). Truths are vessels of good, because they are recipients (n. 1496,
1900, 2063, 2261, 2269, 3318, 3365, 3368). Good flows into man by an
internal way, or that of the soul, but truths by an external way, or
that of hearing and sight; and they are conjoined in his interiors by
the Lord (n. 3030, 3098). Truths are elevated out of the natural man,
and implanted in good in the spiritual man; and thus truths become
spiritual (n. 3085, 3086). And afterwards they flow thence into the
natural man, spiritual good flowing immediately into the good of the
natural, but mediately into the truth of the natural (n. 3314, 3573,
4563); illustrated (n. 3314, 3576, 3616, 3969, 3995). In a word, truths
are conjoined to good with man, so far and in such manner as man is in
good as to life (n. 3834, 3843). Conjunction is effected in one manner
with the celestial, and in another with the spiritual (n. 10124). More
concerning the conjunction of good and truth, and how it is effected (n.
3090, 3203, 3308, 4096, 4097, 4345, 4353, 5365, 7623-7627). And how
spiritual good is formed by truths (n. 3470, 3570).

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

\[4\]. Of those who are in truths from good, consequently of truths from
good. Of the difference between truth that leads to good, and truth
which proceeds from good (n. 2063). Truth is not essentially truth, any
further than as it proceeds from good (n. 4736, 10619); because truth
has its esse from good (n. 3049, 3180, 4574, 5002, 9144); and its life
(n. 2434, 3111, 6077); and because truth is the form or quality of good
(n. 3049, 4574, 5951, 9154). Truth is altogether as good with man, in
the same ratio and degree (n. 2429). In order that truth may be truth,
it must derive its essence from the good of charity and innocence (n.
3111, 6013). The truths which are from good are spiritual truths (n.
5951). Truth makes one with good when it proceeds from good, even so
that both together are one good (n. 4301, 4337, 7835, 10252, 10266). The
understanding and will make one mind and one life, when the
understanding proceeds from the will, because the understanding is the
recipient of truth, and the will, of good, but not when man thinks and
speaks otherwise than he wills (n. 3623). Truth from good is truth in
will and act (n. 4337, 4353, 4385, 4390). When truth proceeds from good,
good has its image in truth (n. 3180). In the whole heaven and world,
and in the single things thereof, there is an image of marriage (n. 54,
718, 747, 917, 1432, 2173, 2516, 5194). Particularly between truth and
good (n. 1904, 2173, 2508). Because all things in the universe have
relation to truth and good, in order that they may be anything, and to
their conjunction, in order that anything may be produced (n. 2452,
3166, 4390, 4409, 5232, 7256, 10122, 10555). The ancients also
instituted a marriage between truth and good (n. 1904). The law of
marriage is, that two be one, according to the words of the Lord (n.
10130, 10168, 10169). Love truly conjugial descends and exists from
heaven, from the marriage of truth and good (n. 2728, 2729). Man is so
far wise, as he is in good and thence in truths, but not so far as he
knows truths and is not in good (n. 3182, 3190, 4884). The man who is in
truths from good, is actually elevated from the light of the world into
the light of heaven, consequently from what is obscure into what is
clear; but on the other hand, he is in the light of the world, and what
is obscure, so long as he knows truths and is not in good (n. 3190,
3192). Man does not know what good is, before he is in it, and knows
from it (n. 3325, 3330, 3336). Truths increase immensely when they
proceed from good (n. 2846, 2847, 5345). Of which increase (n. 5355).
This increase is as fructification from a tree, and multiplication from
seeds from which whole gardens are produced (n. 1873, 2846, 2847).
Wisdom increases in a like degree, and this to eternity (n. 3200, 3314,
4220, 4221, 5527, 5859, 10303). The man also who is in truths from good
is in a like degree enlightened, and he is so far in enlightenment when
he reads the Word (n. 9382, 10548-10550, 10691, 10694). The good of love
is as fire, and truth thence as light from that fire (n. 3195, 3222,
5400, 8644, 9399, 9548, 9684). In heaven truths from good shine (n.
5219). Truths from good, by which is wisdom, increase according to the
quality and quantity of the love of good; and on the other hand,
falsities from evil, according to the quality and quantity of the love
of evil (n. 4099). The man who is in truths from good comes into angelic
intelligence and wisdom, and they lie hid in his interiors so long as he
lives in the world, but they are opened in the other life (n. 2494). The
man, who is in truths from good, becomes an angel after death (n. 8747).
Truths from good are like generations (n. 9079). They are disposed in
series (n. 5339, 5343, 5530, 7408, 10303, 10308). The arrangement of
truths from good compared with the fibers and blood-vessels in the body;
and thence with their textures and forms, according to the uses of life
(n. 3470, 3570, 3579, 9154). Truths from good form as it were a city,
and this from the influx of heaven (n. 3584). The truths which are of
the principal love are in the midst; and the rest are more or less
remote from thence according to their degrees of disagreement (n. 3993,
4551, 4552, 5530, 6028). Conversely with the evil (n. 4551, 4552).
Truths when they proceed from good are arranged in the form of heaven
(n. 4302, 4904, 5339, 5343, 5704, 6028, 10303). And this according to
the order in which are the angelic societies (n. 10303). All truths when
they proceed from good are conjoined to one another by a certain
affinity, and they are as derivations of families from one father (n.
2863). All truth has a sphere of extension into heaven, according to the
quality and quantity of the good from which it is (n. 8063). The
marriage of good and truth is the church and heaven with man (n. 2731,
7752, 7753, 9224, 9995, 10122). Of the delight and happiness of those
with whom good is in truths (n. 1470). Truths from good, in conjunction,
present an image of man (n. 8370). Man is nothing but his own good, and
truth thence derived; or evil, and falsity thence derived (n. 10298). A
summary: Faith is by truths (n. 4353, 4997, 7178, 10367). Charity
towards the neighbor is by truths (n. 4368, 7623, 7624, 8034). Love to
the Lord is by truths (n. 10143, 10153, 10310, 10578, 10645). Conscience
is by truths (n. 1077, 2053, 9113). Innocence is by truths (n. 3183,
3494, 6013). Purification from evils is by truths (n. 2799, 5954, 7044,
7918, 9088, 10229, 10237). Regeneration is by truths (n. 1555, 1904,
2046, 2189, 9088, 9959, 10028). Intelligence and wisdom are by truths
(n. 3182, 3190, 3387, 10064). The beauty of angels, and also of men, as
to the interiors which are their spirits, is by truths (n. 553, 3080,
4985, 5199). Power against evils and falsities is by truths (n. 3091,
4015, 10488). Order, such as it is in heaven, is by truths (n. 3316,
3417, 3570, 4104, 5339, 5343, 6028, 10303). The church is by truths (n.
1798, 1799, 3963, 4468, 4672). Heaven is with man by truths (n. 3690,
9832, 9931, 10303). Man becomes man by truths (n. 3175, 3387, 8370,
10298). Nevertheless all these things are by truths from good, and not
by truths without good; and good is from the Lord (n. 2434, 4070, 4736,
5147). All good is from the Lord (n. 1614, 2016, 2904, 4151, 9981).

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

All good and truth is from the Lord. The Lord is good itself and truth
itself (n. 2011, 4151, 10336, 10619). The Lord, as to both the Divine
and the Human, is the Divine good of the Divine love; and from Him
proceeds Divine truth (n. 3704, 3712, 4180, 4577). The Divine truth
proceeds from the Divine good of the Lord, comparatively as light from
the sun (n. 3704, 3712, 4180, 4577). The Divine truth proceeding from
the Lord appears in the heavens as light, and forms all the light of
heaven (n. 3195, 3223, 5400, 8694, 9399, 9548, 9684). The light of
heaven, which is the Divine truth united to the Divine good, enlightens
both the sight and the understanding of angels and spirits (n. 2776,
3138). Heaven is in light and heat, because it is in truth and good, for
the Divine truth is light there, and the Divine good is heat there (n.
3643, 9399, 9400); and in the work on Heaven and Hell (n. 126-140). The
Divine truth proceeding from the Divine good of the Lord, forms the
angelic heaven and arranges it in order (n. 3038, 9408, 9613, 10716,
10717). The Divine good united to the Divine truth, which is in the
heavens, is called the Divine truth (n. 10196). The Divine truth
proceeding from the Lord is the only reality (n. 6880, 7004, 8200). By
Divine truth all things were made and created (n. 2803, 2894, 5272,
7678). All power belongs to the Divine truth (n. 8200). Man from himself
can do nothing of good, and think nothing of truth (n. 874-876). The
rational of man cannot perceive Divine truth from itself (n. 2196, 2203,
2209). Truths which are not from the Lord, are from the proprium of man,
and they are not truths, but only appear as truths (n. 8868). All good
and truth is from the Lord, and nothing from man (n. 1614, 2016, 2904,
4151, 9981). Goods and truths are so far goods and truths, as they have
the Lord in them (n. 2904, 3061, 8480). Of the Divine truth proceeding
immediately from the Lord, and of the Divine truth proceeding mediately
through the angels, and of their influx with man (n. 7055, 7056, 7058).
The Lord flows into good with man, and by good into truths (n. 10153).
He flows in by good into truths of every kind, and particularly into
genuine truths (n. 2531, 2554). The Lord does not flow into truths
separate from good, and no parallelism exists between the Lord and man,
with respect to them, but with respect to good (n. 1831, 1832, 3514,
3564). To do good and truth for the sake of good and truth is to love
the Lord, and to love the neighbor (n. 10336). They who are in the
internal of the Word, of the church, and of worship, love to do good and
truth for the sake of good and truth; but they who are in the external
of these, without the internal, love to do good and truth for the sake
of themselves and the world (n. 10683). What it is to do good and truth
for the sake of good and truth, illustrated by examples (n. 10683).

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

Of the various kinds of goods and truths. There is an infinite variety,
and one thing is never exactly the same as another (n. 7236, 9002).
There is also an infinite variety in the heavens (n. 684, 690, 3744,
5598, 7236). Varieties in the heavens are varieties of good, and thence
is the distinction of all therein (n. 3519, 3744, 3804, 3986, 4005,
4067, 4149, 4263, 7236, 7833, 7836, 9002). These varieties are from
truths, which are manifold, by which everyone has good (n. 3470, 3519,
3804, 4149, 6917, 7236). Thence all the angelic societies in the
heavens, and every angel in a society are distinguished from each other
(n. 690, 3241, 3519, 3804, 3986, 4067, 4149, 4263, 7236, 7833, 7836).
But they all act in unity by love from the Lord, and thereby regard one
end (n. 457, 3986). In general, goods and truths are distinguished
according to degrees, into natural, spiritual, and celestial (n. 2069,
3240). In general, there are three degrees of good, and consequently of
truth, according to the three heavens (n. 4154, 9873, 10270). The goods
and thence the truths in the internal man, are of a threefold kind, and
so also in the external (n. 4154). There is natural good, civil good,
and moral good (n. 3768). Natural good, into which some are born, is not
good in the other life, unless made spiritual good (n. 2463, 2464, 2468,
3408, 3469, 3470, 3508, 3518, 7761). Of natural spiritual good; and of
that which is not spiritual (n. 4988, 4992, 5032). There is intellectual
truth, and scientific truth (n. 1904, 1911, 2503).

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

That wisdom is from good by truths. In what manner the rational is
conceived and born with man (n. 2094, 2524, 2557, 3030, 5126). This is
effected by an influx of the Lord through heaven into the knowledges and
sciences which are with man, and thence is elevation (n. 1895,
1899-1901). Elevation is according to uses, and the love of them (n.
3074, 3085, 3086). The rational is born through truths, hence such as
they are, such is the rational (n. 2094, 2524, 2557). The rational is
opened and formed by truths from good; and it is shut and destroyed by
falsities from evil (n. 3108, 5126). Man is not rational by this that he
can reason on any subject, but that he can see and perceive whether a
thing be true or not (n. 1944). Man is not born into any truth, because
not born into good; but he is to learn and imbibe both (n. 3175). It is
with difficulty that man can receive genuine truths, and thence become
wise, on account of the fallacies of the senses, the persuasions of
falsity, and the reasonings and doubts thence (n. 3175). Man first
begins to be wise, when he begins to be averse to reasonings against
truths, and to reject doubts (n. 3175). The unenlightened human rational
laughs at interior truths, from examples (n. 2654). Truths with man are
called interior when they are implanted in his life, and not in
consequence of his knowing them, although they may be truths which are
called interior (n. 10199). In good there is the faculty of becoming
wise, whence those who have lived in good in the world come into angelic
wisdom after their departure out of the world (n. 5527, 5859, 8321).
There are innumerable things in every good (n. 4005). Innumerable things
may be known from good (n. 3612). Concerning the multiplication of truth
from good (n. 5345, 5355, 5912). The good of infancy by truths, and by a
life according to them, becomes the good of wisdom (n. 3504). There is
the affection of truth and the affection of good (n. 1904, 1997). What
is the quality of those who are in the affection of truth, and what is
the quality of those who are in the affection of good (n. 2422, 2429).
Who are able to come into the affection of truth, and who are not able
(n. 2689). All truths are arranged in order under a general affection
(n. 9094). The affection of truth and the affection of good in the
natural man are as brother and sister; but in the spiritual man, as
husband and wife (n. 3160). Pure truths are not given with man, nor even
with an angel, but only with the Lord (n. 3207, 7902). Truths with man
are appearances of truth (n. 2053, 2519). The first truths with man are
appearances of truth from the fallacies of the senses, which
nevertheless are successively put off, as he is perfected as to wisdom
(n. 3131). Appearances of truth with the man who is in good are received
by the Lord for truths (n. 2053, 3207). What, and of what quality the
appearances of truth are (n. 3207, 3357-3362, 3368, 3404, 3405, 3417).
The sense of the letter of the Word in many places is according to
appearances (n. 1838). The same truths with one man are more true, with
another less so, and with another false, because falsified (n. 2439).
Truths are also truths according to the correspondence between the
natural and the spiritual man (n. 3128, 3138). Truths differ according
to the various ideas and perceptions concerning them (n. 3470, 3804,
6917). Truth when it is conjoined to good, vanishes out of the memory
because it then becomes of the life (n. 3108). Truths cannot be
conjoined to good except in a free state (n. 3158). Truths are conjoined
to good by temptations (n. 3318, 4572, 7122). There is in good a
continual endeavor of arranging truths in order, and of restoring its
state thereby (n. 3610). Truths appear undelightful when the
communication with good is intercepted (n. 8352). Man can scarcely
distinguish between truth and good, because he can scarcely distinguish
between thinking and willing (n. 9995). Good is called in the Word the
"brother" of truth (n. 4267). Also in a certain respect good is called
"lord," and truth, "servant" (n. 3409, 4267).

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

II\. THE WILL AND THE UNDERSTANDING. Man has two faculties which make
his life; one is called the Will, and the other the Understanding. These
faculties are distinct from each other, but are so created that they may
be one; and when they are one they are called the Mind. Of these, then,
the human mind consists; and the whole life of man is there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

As all things in the universe, which are according to Divine order, have
relation to good and truth, so all things with man have relation to the
will and the understanding; for good with man is of his will, and truth
with him is of his understanding; for these two faculties, or these two
lives of man, are their receptacles and subjects. The will is the
receptacle and subject of all things of good, and the understanding the
receptacle and subject of all things of truth. Goods and truths with man
are nowhere else; and because goods and truths with man are nowhere
else, so neither are love and faith elsewhere; for love is of good, and
good is of love; and faith is of truth, and truth is of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

Since, then, all things in the universe have relation to good and truth,
and all things of the church to the good of love and the truth of faith;
and since man is man from those two faculties, therefore they also are
treated of in this doctrine; otherwise man could have no distinct idea
of them, on which to found his thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

The will and the understanding also constitute the spirit of man; for
his wisdom and intelligence, and his life in general, reside in them;
the body is only obedience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

Nothing is more important to know than how the will and the
understanding make one mind. They make one mind as good and truth make
one; for there is a similar marriage between the will and the
understanding as there is between good and truth. What is the quality of
that marriage may fully appear from what has been quoted above,
concerning good and truth, namely, as good is the very esse of a thing,
and truth the existere of a thing thence derived, so the will with man
is the very esse of his life, and the understanding the existere of life
thence; for good, which is of the will, forms and renders itself visible
in the understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

They who are in good and truth have will and understanding, but they who
are in evil and in falsity have not will and understanding; but instead
of will they have cupidity, and instead of understanding they have
science. For the truly human will is the receptacle of good, and the
understanding is the receptacle of truth; for which reason will cannot
be predicated of evil, nor can understanding be predicated of falsity,
because they are opposites, and opposites destroy each other. Hence it
is, that the man who is in evil and thence in falsity, cannot be called
rational, wise, and intelligent. With the evil, also, the interiors of
the mind, in which the will and the understanding principally reside,
are closed. It is believed that the evil also have will and
understanding, because they say that they will, and that they
understand; but their willing is only cupidity, and their understanding
is only knowing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

FROM THE ARCANA COELESTIA Spiritual truths cannot be comprehended,
unless the following universals are known: I. All things in the universe
have relation to good and truth, and to the conjunction of both, in
order that they may be anything; consequently to love and faith, and
their conjunction. II. With man there is will and understanding, and the
will is the receptacle of good, and the understanding the receptacle of
truth, and all things with man have relation to those two, and to their
conjunction, as all things relate to good and truth, and their
conjunction. III. There is an internal man and an external, and they are
distinct one from the other like heaven and the world, and nevertheless
that they ought to make one, in order that man may be truly man. IV. The
light of heaven is that in which the internal man is, and the light of
the world that in which the external is; and the light of heaven is the
Divine truth itself, from which is all intelligence. V. There is a
correspondence between the things which are in the internal, and those
which are in the external man; and consequently they appear in each
under a different form, so that they can only be discerned by the
science of correspondences. Unless these and many other things are
known, it is impossible to form any ideas concerning spiritual and
celestial things, but such as are incongruous; and thus the scientifics
and knowledges, which are of the external man, without these universals,
can be of little service to the rational man for understanding and
growth. Hence it appears, how necessary scientifics are. Concerning
those universals, much is said in the Arcana Coelestia.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

Man has two faculties, one which is called the will, and the other the
understanding (n. 35, 641, 3539, 3623, 5969, 10122). Those two faculties
constitute the very man (n. 10076, 10109, 10110, 10264, 10284). The
quality of man is according to those two faculties with him (n. 7342,
8885, 9282, 10264, 10284). By them also man is distinguished from
beasts, by reason that the understanding of man may be elevated by the
Lord, and see Divine truths, and in like manner his will may be elevated
and perceive Divine goods; and thus man may be conjoined to the Lord by
those two faculties, which make him; but that the case is otherwise with
beasts (n. 4525, 5114, 5302, 6323, 9231). And since man may thus be
conjoined to the Lord, he cannot die as to his interiors, which are his
spirit, but he lives forever (n. 5302). Man is not man from his form,
but from good and truth, which are of his will and understanding (n.
4051, 5302). As all things in the universe relate to good and truth, so
do all things in man to the will and the understanding (n. 803, 10122).
For the will is the receptacle of good, and the understanding is the
receptacle of truth (n. 3332, 3623, 5835, 6065, 6125, 7503, 9300, 9930).
It amounts to the same, whether you say truth or faith, for faith is of
truth, and truth is of faith; and it amounts to the same whether you say
good or love, for love is of good, and good is of love; for what a man
believes, that he calls true; and what he loves, that he calls good (n.
4353, 4997, 7178, 10122, 10367). Hence it follows that the understanding
is the recipient of faith, and the will the recipient of love; and that
faith and love are in man, when they are in his understanding and will,
for the life of man is nowhere else (n. 7179, 10122, 10367). And since
the understanding of man is capable of receiving faith in the Lord, and
the will of receiving love to the Lord, that by faith and love he may be
conjoined to the Lord, and whoever is capable of conjunction with the
Lord by faith and love, cannot die to eternity (n. 4525, 6323, 9231).
Love is conjunction in the spiritual world (n. 1594, 2057, 3939, 4018,
5807, 6195, 6196, 7081, 7086, 7501, 10130). The will of man is the very
esse of his life, because it is the receptacle of good, and the
understanding is the existere of life thence derived, because it is the
receptacle of truth (n. 3619, 5002, 9282). Thus the life of the will is
the principal life of man, and the life of the understanding proceeds
therefrom (n. 585, 590, 3619, 7342, 8885, 9282, 10076, 10109, 10110);
comparatively as light proceeds from fire or flame (n. 6032, 6314).
Whatever things enter into the understanding, and at the same time into
the will, are appropriated to man, but not those which are received in
the understanding alone (n. 9009, 9069, 9071, 9133, 9182, 9386, 9393,
10076, 10109, 10110). Those things become of the life of man, which are
received in the will, and thence in the understanding (n. 8911, 9069,
9071, 10076, 10109, 10110). Every man also is loved and esteemed by
others according to the good of his will and thence of his
understanding; for he who wills well and understands well is loved and
esteemed, and he who understands well and does not will well, is
rejected and is held in low estimation (n. 8911, 10076). Man also after
death remains such as his will and the understanding are (n. 9069, 9071,
9386, 10153) and those things which are of the understanding, and not at
the same time of the will, then vanish, because they are not in man's
spirit (n. 9282). Or, what amounts to the same, man after death remains
as his love and its faith are, or as his good and its truth are; and the
things which are of the faith and not at the same time of the love, or
the things which are of truth and not at the same time of good, vanish,
because they are not in the man, thus not man's (n. 553, 2363, 10153).
Man is capable of comprehending with the understanding what he does not
do from the will, or he may understand what he does not will, because it
is against his love (n. 3539). The will and the understanding constitute
one mind (n. 35, 3623, 5835, 10122). Those two faculties of life ought
to act as one, that man may be man (n. 3623, 5835, 5969, 9300). How
perverted a state they are in, whose understanding and will do not act
as one (n. 9075). Such is the state of hypocrites, the deceitful,
flatterers, and simulators (n. 2426, 3573, 4799, 8250). The will and the
understanding are reduced to one in another life, and there it is not
allowable to have a divided mind (n. 8250). Every doctrinal of the
church has its own ideas by which its quality is perceived (n. 3310).
The understanding of the doctrinal is according to those ideas, and
without an intellectual idea, man would only have an idea of words, and
none of things (n. 3825). The ideas of the understanding extend
themselves widely into the societies of spirits and angels round about
(n. 6599, 6600-6605, 6609, 6613). The ideas of man's understanding are
opened in another life, and appear to the life as to their quality (n.
1869, 3310, 5510). Of what quality the ideas of some appear (n. 6200,
8885). All the will of good and the understanding of truth is from the
Lord, but not so the understanding of truth separate from the will of
good (n. 1831, 3514, 5482, 5649, 6027, 8685, 8701, 10153). It is the
understanding which is enlightened by the Lord (n. 6222, 6608, 10659).
The Lord grants to those who are enlightened, to see and understand
truth (n. 9382, 10659). The enlightening of the understanding is
various, according to the states of man's life (n. 5221, 7012, 7233).
The understanding is enlightened as far as man receives truth in the
will, that is, as far as he wills to act according thereto (n. 3619).
They have their understanding enlightened who read the Word from the
love of truth and from the love of the uses of life; but not they who
read it from the love of fame, honor, and gain (n. 9382, 10548, 10549,
10551). Enlightenment is an actual elevation of the mind into the light
of heaven (n. 10330); from experience (n. 1526, 6608). Light from heaven
is the enlightenment of the understanding, as light from the world is to
the sight (n. 1524, 5114, 6608, 9128). The light of heaven is the Divine
truth, from which is all wisdom and intelligence (n. 3195, 3222, 5400,
8644, 9399, 9548, 9684). It is the understanding of man which is
enlightened by that light (n. 1524, 3138, 3167, 4408, 6608, 8707, 9128,
9399, 10569). The understanding is such as are the truths from good, of
which it is formed (n. 10064). The understanding is that which is formed
by truths from good, but not what is formed by falsities from evil (n.
10675). The understanding consists in seeing truths, the causes of
things, their connections, and consequences in regular order, from those
things which are of experience and science (n. 6125). The understanding
consists in seeing and perceiving whether a thing be true, before it is
confirmed, but not in being able to confirm everything (n. 4741, 7012,
7680, 7950, 8521, 8780). The light of confirmation without a previous
perception of truth, is natural light, and may be possessed even by
those who are not wise (n. 8780). To see and perceive whether a thing be
true before it is confirmed, is only given with those who are affected
with truth for the sake of truth, consequently who are in spiritual
light (n. 8780). Every dogma even what is false, may be confirmed, even
so as to appear true (n. 2243, 2385, 4677, 4741, 5033, 6865, 7950). How
the rational is conceived and born with man (n. 2094, 2524, 2557, 3030,
5126). It is from the influx of the light of heaven from the Lord
through the internal man into theknowledges and sciences, which are in
the external, and an elevation thence (n. 1895, 1899, 1902). The
rational is born by truths, and not by falsities; consequently according
to the quality of the truths, such is the rational (n. 2094, 2524,
2557). The rational is opened and formed by truths from good, and it is
shut and destroyed by falsities from evil (n. 3108, 5126). A man is not
rational who is in falsities from evil; and consequently a man is not
rational from being able to reason upon every subject (n. 1944). Man
scarcely knows how to distinguish between the understanding and the
will, because he scarcely knows how to distinguish between thinking and
willing (n. 9995). Many more things concerning the will and the
understanding may be known and concluded from what has been just adduced
concerning good and truth, provided the will be perceived instead of
good, and the understanding instead of truth, for the will is of good,
and the understanding is of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

III\. THE INTERNAL AND THE EXTERNAL MAN. Man is so created as to be in
the spiritual world and in the natural world at the same time. The
spiritual world is where the angels are, and the natural world where men
are. As man is so created, there has been given to him an internal and
an external; an internal by which he is in the spiritual world, and an
external by which he is in the natural world. His internal is what is
called the internal man, and his external is what is called the external
man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

Every man has an internal and an external; but they differ with the good
and the evil. With the good, the internal is in heaven, and in its
light, and the external is in the world, and in its light, which light
with them is illumined by the light of heaven, so that the internal and
the external act as one, like the efficient cause and the effect, or
like what is prior and what is posterior. But with the evil, the
internal is in the world, and in its light; as is also the external; for
which reason they see nothing from the light of heaven, but only from
the light of the world, which they call the light of nature. Hence it is
that to them the things of heaven are in thick darkness, whilst the
things of the world are in light. From this it is manifest that the good
have both an internal and an external man, but that the evil have not an
internal man, but only an external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

The internal man is called the spiritual man, because it is in the light
of heaven, which light is spiritual; and the external man is called the
natural man, because it is in the light of the world, which light is
natural. The man whose internal is in the light of heaven, and whose
external is in the light of the world, is a spiritual man as to both;
but the man whose internal is not in the light of heaven, but only in
the light of the world, in which is his external also, is a natural man
as to both. The spiritual man is called in the Word "living," but the
natural man is called "dead."

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

The man whose internal is in the light of heaven, and his external in
the light of the world, thinks both spiritually and naturally; but then
his spiritual thought flows into his natural thought, and is there
perceived. But the man whose internal and external are in the light of
the world, does not think spiritually, but materially; for he thinks
from such things as are in the nature of the world, all which are
material. To think spiritually is to think of things themselves as they
are in themselves, to see truths in the light of truth, and to perceive
goods from the love of good; also, to see the qualities of things, and
to perceive their affections, abstractly from matter. But to think
materially is to think, see, and perceive them together with matter, and
in matter, thus in a gross and obscure manner respectively.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

The internal spiritual man, regarded in himself, is an angel of heaven;
and, also, during his life in the body, is in society with angels,
although he does not then know it; and after his separation from the
body, he comes among the angels. But the merely natural internal man,
regarded in himself, is a spirit, and not an angel; and, also, during
his life in the body, is in society with spirits, but with those who are
in hell, among whom he also comes after his separation from the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

The interiors, with those who are spiritual men, are also actually
elevated towards heaven, for that is what they primarily regard; but the
interiors which are of the mind with those who are merely natural, are
actually turned to the world, because that is what they primarily
regard. The interiors, which are of the mind \[mens\], are turned with
everyone to that which he loves above all things; and the exteriors
which are of the mind \[animus\], are turned the same way as the
interiors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

They who have only a general idea concerning the internal and the
external man, believe that it is the internal man which thinks and
wills, and the external which speaks and acts; because to think and to
will is internal, and to speak and to act thence is external. But it is
to be known that when man thinks intelligently and wills wisely, he then
thinks and wills from a spiritual internal; but when man does not think
intelligently, and will wisely, he thinks and wills from a natural
internal. Consequently, when a man thinks well concerning the Lord, and
those things which are of the Lord, and well concerning the neighbor,
and those things which are of the neighbor, and wills well to them, he
then thinks and wills from a spiritual internal, because he then thinks
from the faith of truth and from the love of good, thus from heaven. But
when man thinks and wills wickedly concerning them, he then thinks and
wills from a natural internal, because he thinks and wills from the
faith of falsity and from the love of evil, thus from hell. In a word,
so far as man is in love to the Lord, and in love towards the neighbor,
so far he is in a spiritual internal, from which he thinks and wills,
and from which also he speaks and acts; but so far as man is in the love
of self, and in the love of the world, so far he is in a natural
internal, from which he thinks and wills, and from which also he speaks
and acts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

It is so provided and ordered by the Lord, that so far as man thinks and
wills from heaven, so far the internal spiritual man is opened and
formed. It is opened into heaven even to the Lord, and the formation is
according to those things which are of heaven. But, on the contrary, so
far as man does not think and will from heaven, but from the world, so
far the internal spiritual man is closed, and the external is opened.
The opening is into the world, and the formation is to those things
which are of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

They with whom the internal spiritual man is opened into heaven to the
Lord, are in the light of heaven, and in enlightenment from the Lord,
and thence in intelligence and wisdom; these see truth because it is
truth, and perceive good because it is good. But they with whom the
internal spiritual man is closed, do not know that there is an internal
man, and much less what the internal man is; neither do they believe
that there is the Divine, nor that there is a life after death;
consequently they do not believe the things which are of heaven and of
the church. And because they are only in the light of the world and in
the enlightenment thence, they believe in nature as the Divine, they see
falsity as truth, and they perceive evil as good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

He whose internal is so far external, that he believes nothing but what
he can see with his eyes and touch with his hands, is called a sensual
man; this is the lowest natural man, and is in fallacies concerning all
the things which are of the faith of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

The internal and the external, which have been treated of, are the
internal and the external of the spirit of man; his body is only a
superadded external, within which they exist; for the body does nothing
from itself, but from its spirit which is in it. It is to be known that
the spirit of man, after its separation from the body, thinks and wills,
speaks and acts, the same as before; to think and to will is its
internal, and to speak and to act is its external; concerning which, see
in the work on Heaven (n. 234-245, 265-275, 432-444, 453-484).

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

FROM THE ARCANA COELESTIA. Of the internal and the external with man. It
is known in the Christian world, that man has an internal and an
external, or an internal man and an external man; but it is little known
what is the quality of the one and of the other (n. 1889, 1940). The
internal man is spiritual, and the external is natural (n. 978, 1015,
4459, 6309, 9701-9709). How the internal man which is spiritual is
formed to the image of heaven; and the external which is natural to the
image of the world; and man was therefore called by the ancients a
microcosm (n. 3628, 4523, 4524, 6057, 6314, 9706, 10156, 10472). Thus in
man the spiritual world and natural world are conjoined (n. 6057,
10472). Thence man is such that he can look up towards heaven, and down
towards the world (n. 7601, 7604, 7607). When he looks upwards, he is in
the light of heaven and sees thence; but when he looks downwards, he is
in the light of the world and sees thence (n. 3167, 10134). There is
given with man a descent from the spiritual world into the natural (n.
3702, 4042). The internal man which is spiritual, and the external man
which is natural, are altogether distinct (n. 1999, 2018, 3691, 4459).
The distinction is such as exists between cause and effect, and between
prior and posterior, and there is no continuity (n. 3691, 4154, 5145,
5146, 5711, 6275, 6284, 6299, 6326, 6465, 8603, 10076, 10099, 10181).
Consequently that the distinction is like that between heaven and the
world, or between the spiritual and the natural (n. 4292, 5032, 5620,
5639). The interiors and exteriors of man are not continuous, but
distinct according to degrees, and each degree is terminated (n. 3691,
4145, 5114, 6326, 6465, 8603, 10099). He who does not perceive the
distinctions of the interiors and the exteriors of man according to
degrees, and does not understand the quality of those degrees, cannot
comprehend the internal and the external of man (n. 5146, 6465, 10099,
10181). The things of a higher degree are more perfect than those of a
lower degree (n. 3405). There are three degrees in man answering to the
three heavens (n. 4154). The exteriors are more remote from the Divine
with man, and therefore they are respectively obscure, and of a general
nature (n. 6451). And they are also respectively not in order (n. 996,
3855). The interiors are more perfect, because nearer to the Divine (n.
5146, 5147). In the internal there are thousands and thousands of
things, which in the external appear as one general thing (n. 5707).
Thence thought and perception is clearer in proportion as it is interior
(n. 5920). Hence it follows that man ought to be in internals (n. 1175,
4464). The interiors of the mind, with the man who is in love and
charity, are actually elevated by the Lord, and otherwise they would
look downwards (n. 6952, 6954, 10330). Influx and enlightenment from
heaven with man, is an actual elevation of the interiors by the Lord (n.
7816, 10330). Man is elevated when he advances to spiritual things (n.
9922). As far as man is elevated from externals towards interiors, so
far he comes into light, consequently into intelligence; and this is
what is meant by being withdrawn from sensual things, according to the
saying of the ancients (n. 6183, 6313). Elevation from the external to
the interiors, is like that from mist into light (n. 4598). Influx from
the Lord is through the internal man into the external (n. 1940, 5119).
Interiors can flow into exteriors, but not the contrary; consequently
that influx is spiritual and not physical, namely, from the spiritual
man into the natural, and not from the natural man into the spiritual
(n. 3219, 5119, 5259, 5427, 5428, 5477, 6322, 9109, 9110). The Lord from
the internal, where there is peace, governs the external, where there is
turbulence (n. 5396). The internal can see all things in the external,
but not the reverse (n. 1914, 1953, 5427, 5428, 5477). When man lives in
the world, he thinks from the internal in the external, consequently his
spiritual thought flows into his natural, and there presents itself
naturally (n. 3679). When man thinks well, it is from the internal or
spiritual in the external or natural (n. 9704, 9705, 9707). The external
man thinks and wills according to conjunction with the internal (n.
9702, 9703). There is an interior and an exterior thought; the quality
of the one and the other (n. 2515, 2552, 5127, 5141, 5168, 6007). The
thought and affection in the internal is not perceived by man during his
life in the world, but only that which is in the external therefrom (n.
10236, 10240). But in the other life externals are taken away, and man
is then let into his own internals (n. 8870). It then becomes manifest
what is the quality of his internals (n. 1806, 1807). The internal
produces the external (n. 994, 995). And the internal then invests
itself with such things as enable it to produce its effects in the
external (n. 6275, 6284, 6299); and by which it may live in the external
(n. 1175, 6275). The Lord conjoins the internal or spiritual man to the
external or natural man, when He regenerates him (n. 1577, 1594, 1904,
1999). The external or natural man is then reduced into order through
the internal or spiritual man, and is subordinated (n. 9708). The
external must be subordinate and subject to the internal (n. 5077, 5125,
5128, 5786, 5947, 10272). The external is so created, that it may serve
the internal (n. 5947). The internal must be lord, and the external its
minister, and in a certain respect its servant (n. 10471). The external
ought to be in correspondence with the internal, that there may be
conjunction (n. 5427, 5428, 5477). What the quality of the external is
when it corresponds with the internal, and what when it does not
correspond (n. 3493, 5422, 5423, 5427, 5428, 5477, 5511). In the
external man there are things which correspond and agree with the
internal, and there are things which do not correspond and agree (n.
1563, 1568). The external has its quality from the internal (n. 9912,
9921, 9922). How great the beauty of the external man is, when it is
conjoined with the internal (n. 1590). And how great its foulness when
not conjoined (n. 1598). Love to the Lord and charity towards the
neighbor conjoin the external man with the internal (n. 1594). Unless
the internal man be conjoined with the external, there is no
fructification (n. 3987). The interiors successively flow into the
exteriors, even into the extreme or ultimate, and they there exist and
subsist together (n. 634, 6239, 9215, 9216). They not only flow in
successively, but also form in the ultimate what is simultaneous, in
what order (n. 5897, 6451, 8603, 10099). All the interiors are held in
connection from the first, through the ultimate (n. 9828). Thence also
in the ultimates are strength and power (n. 9836). And therefore
responses and revelations were made from the ultimates (n. 9905, 10548).
Thence also the ultimate is more holy than the interiors (n. 9824).
Hence also in the Word, "first and last" signify all and every
particular, thus the whole (n. 10044, 10329, 10335). The internal man is
open to him who is in Divine order, but shut to him who is not in Divine
order (n. 8513). There is no conjunction of heaven with the external man
without the internal (n. 9380). Evils and the falsities of evil shut the
internal man, and cause man to be only in externals (n. 1587, 10492).
Especially evils from the love of self (n. 1594). The interiors are shut
even to the sensual, which is the ultimate, if the Divine is denied (n.
6564). With the intelligent and learned of the world, who from the
sciences confirm themselves against the things of heaven and the church,
the internal is shut more than with the simple (n. 10492). Because the
internal man is in the light of heaven, and the external in the light of
the world, therefore they who are in the external without the internal,
that is, they with whom the internal is shut, do not care for the
internal things of heaven and the church (n. 4464, 4946). In the other
life they cannot at all endure internal things (n. 10694, 10701, 10707).
They believe nothing (n. 10396, 10400, 10411, 10429). They love
themselves and the world above all things (n. 10407, 10412, 10420).
Their interiors, or the things which are of their thought and affection,
are vile, filthy, and profane, howsoever they may appear in externals
(n. 1182, 7046, 9705, 9707). The ideas of their thought are material,
and not at all spiritual (n. 10582). The quality further described of
those whose internal that looks heavenward is shut (n. 4459, 9709,
10284, 10286, 10429, 10472, 10492, 10602, 10683). So far as the
internal, which is spiritual, is opened, so far truths and goods are
multiplied; and so far as the internal, which is spiritual, is shut, so
far truths and goods vanish (n. 4099). The church is in the internal
spiritual man, because that is in heaven, and not in the external
without it (n. 10698). Hence the external church with man is nothing
without the internal (n. 1795). External worship without internal
worship is no worship (n. 1094, 1175). Concerning those who are in the
internal of the church, of worship, and of the Word; of those who are in
the external in which is the internal; and of those who are in the
external without the internal (n. 10683). The external without the
internal is hard (n. 10683). The merely natural man is in hell, unless
he be made spiritual by regeneration (n. 10156). All who are in the
external without the internal, or with whom the spiritual internal is
shut, are in hell (n. 9128, 10483, 10489). The interiors of man are
actually turned according to his loves (n. 10702). In each and all
things there must be an internal and an external that they may subsist
(n. 9473). "Above" and "high" in the Word, signifies the internal (n.
1725, 2148, 4210, 4599). Thence in the Word higher is interior, and
lower is exterior (n. 3084).

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

Of the natural and the spiritual. How perverse it is that the world at
this day attributes so much to nature, and so little to the Divine (n.
3483). Why it is so (n. 5116). When nevertheless each and every
particular in nature not only exists, but likewise continually subsists
from the Divine, and through the spiritual world (n. 775, 8211). Divine,
celestial, and spiritual things terminate in nature (n. 4240, 4939).
Nature is the ultimate plane whereon they stand (n. 4240, 5651, 6275,
6284, 6299, 9216). Celestial, spiritual, and natural things follow and
succeed each other in order; so do Divine things with them, because they
are from the Divine (n. 880, 4938, 4939, 9992, 10005, 10017, 10068).
Celestial things are the head, spiritual things the body, and natural
things the feet (n. 4938, 4939). They also inflow in an order similar to
that wherein they follow and succeed each other (n. 4938, 4939). The
good of the inmost or third heaven is called celestial, the good of the
middle or second heaven is called spiritual, and the good of the
ultimate or first heaven is called spiritual natural, whence it may be
known what is the celestial, spiritual, and natural (n. 4279, 4286,
4938, 4939, 9992, 10005, 10017, 10068); and in the work on Heaven and
Hell (n. 20-28, 29-40). All things of the natural world are from the
Divine through the spiritual world (n. 5013). Consequently the spiritual
is in every natural thing, just as the efficient cause is in the effect
(n. 3562, 5711); or as effort is in motion (n. 5173), and as the
internal is in the external (n. 3562, 5326, 5711). And since the cause
is the very essential in the effect, as effort is in motion, and the
internal in the external; hence it follows, that the spiritual, and
consequently the Divine, is the very essential in the natural (n.
2987-3002, 9701-9709). Spiritual things are presented to view in the
natural, and the things manifested are representatives and
correspondences (n. 1632, 2987-3002). Hence all nature is a theater
representative of the spiritual world, that is, of heaven (n. 2758,
2999, 3000, 4939, 8848, 9280). All things in nature are disposed in
order and series according to ends (n. 4104). This is from the spiritual
world, that is, from heaven, because ends, which are uses, reign there
(n. 454, 696, 1103, 3645, 4054, 7038). Man is so created that Divine
things descending according to order into nature, may be perceived in
him (n. 3702). With every man, who is in Divine order, there is an
internal and an external, his internal is called the spiritual, or the
spiritual man, and his external is called the natural, or the natural
man (n. 978, 1015, 4459, 6309, 9701-9709). The spiritual man is in the
light of heaven, and the natural man in the light of the world (n.
5965). The natural man can discern nothing from himself, but from the
spiritual (n. 5286). The natural is like a face in which the interiors
see themselves, and thus man thinks (n. 5165). The spiritual man thinks
in the natural, consequently naturally, so far as it comes to the
sensual perception of the natural (n. 3679, 5165, 6284, 6299). The
natural is the plane, in which the spiritual terminates (n. 5651, 6275,
6284, 6299, 9216). The spiritual sees nothing, unless the natural be in
correspondence (n. 3493, 3620, 3623). The spiritual or internal man can
see what is being done in the natural or external, but not the contrary,
because the spiritual flows into the natural, and not the natural into
the spiritual (n. 3219, 4667, 5119, 5259, 5427, 5428, 5477, 6322, 9109,
9110). The natural man from his own light, which is called the light
\[lumen\] of nature, knows nothing concerning God, nor concerning
heaven, nor concerning the life after death; neither does he believe, if
he hears of such things, unless spiritual light, which is light from
heaven, flows into that natural light \[lumen\] (n. 8944). The natural
man of himself, by birth, is opposite to the spiritual man (n. 3913,
3928). Therefore as long as they are opposite to each other, man feels
it grievous to think of spiritual and celestial things, but delightful
to think of natural and corporeal things (n. 4096). He nauseates the
things of heaven, and even the bare mention of anything spiritual, from
experience (n. 5006, 9109). Merely natural men regard spiritual good and
truth as a servant (n. 5013, 5025). When nevertheless the natural man
ought to be subordinate to the spiritual man, and serve him (n. 3019,
5168). The spiritual man is said to serve the natural, when the latter
from the intellectual principle seeks confirmations of the objects of
his concupiscence, particularly from the Word (n. 3019, 5013, 5025,
5168). How merely natural men appear in another life, and what is the
quality of their state and lot there (n. 4630, 4633, 4940-4952, 5032,
5571). The truths, which are in the natural man, are called scientifics
and knowledges (n. 3293). The imagination of the natural man, when
viewed in itself, is material, and his affections are like those of
beasts (n. 3020). But there is a genuine thinking and imaginative
principle from the internal or spiritual man when the natural man sees,
acts, and lives therefrom (n. 3493, 5422, 5423, 5427, 5428, 5477, 5510).
The things which are in the natural man, respectively to those which are
in the spiritual man, are general (n. 3513, 5707); and consequently
obscure (n. 6686). There is an interior and an exterior natural with man
(n. 3293, 3294, 3793, 5118, 5126, 5497, 5649). There is also a medium
between them (n. 4570, 9216). The discharges of the spiritual man are
made into the natural, and by it (n. 9572). They who do good merely from
a natural disposition, and not from religion, are not received in heaven
(n. 8002, 8772).

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

Of the light of heaven in which the spiritual man is. There is great
light in the heavens (n. 1117, 1521, 1533, 1619-1632). The light in the
heavens exceeds the meridian light on earth by many degrees (n. 1117,
1521, 4527, 5400, 8644). That light has been often seen by me (n. 1522,
4527, 7174). The light which the angels of the inmost or third heaven
have is as the light from the sun, but the light which the angels of the
second heaven have is as the light from the moon (n. 1529, 1530). The
light in the inmost heaven is flamy, but in the second heaven it is
bright white (n. 9570). All light in the heavens is from the Lord as a
sun there (n. 1053, 1521, 3195, 3341, 3636, 3643, 4415, 9548, 9684,
10809). The Lord is the sun of the angelic heaven, and His Divine love
is that sun (n. 1521, 1529, 1530, 1531, 1837, 4321, 4696, 7078, 7083,
7173). The Divine truth proceeding from the Lord in the heavens appears
as light, and constitutes all the light of heaven; and consequently that
light is spiritual light (n. 3195, 3322, 5400, 8644, 9399, 9548, 9684).
Therefore the Lord in the Word is called light (n. 3195). Because that
light is the Divine truth, there is in it Divine wisdom and intelligence
(n. 3195, 3485, 3636, 3643, 3993, 4302, 4413, 4415, 9548, 9684). How
light from the Lord flows into the heavens, illustrated by the circles
of rays round the sun (n. 9407). That the Lord is a sun to the heavens,
and from Him is all the light there may be seen in the work on Heaven
and Hell (n. 116-125). And the light from that sun is the Divine truth,
and the heat from it the Divine good of the Divine love (n. 126-140).
The light of heaven enlightens both the sight and the understanding of
angels and spirits (n. 2776, 3138). They have light there according to
their understanding and wisdom (n. 1524, 3339). Testified from the Word
(n. 1529, 1530). There are as many differences of light in the heavens
as there are angelic societies (n. 4414); since there are perpetual
varieties in the heavens as to good and truth, thus as to wisdom and
intelligence (n. 684, 690, 3241, 3744, 3745, 5598, 7236, 7833, 7836).
Heaven's being in light and heat signifies its being in wisdom and in
love (n. 3643, 9399, 9400). The light of heaven enlightens the
understanding of man (n. 1524, 3138, 3167, 4408, 6608, 8707, 9128, 9399,
10569). Man, when he is elevated from the sensual, comes into a milder
light \[lumen\], and at length into celestial light \[lux\] (n. 6313,
6315, 9407). There is elevation into the light of heaven when man comes
into intelligence (n. 3190). What great light was perceived, when I have
been withdrawn from worldly ideas (n. 1526, 6608). The sight of the
internal man is in the light of heaven, and therefore man is able to
think analytically and rationally (n. 1532). The light of heaven from
the Lord is always present with man, but it flows in only so far as he
is in truths from good (n. 4060, 4214). That light is according to truth
from good (n. 3094). Truths shine in the spiritual world (n. 5219).
Spiritual heat and spiritual light make the true life of man (n. 6032).
The light of the world is for the external man, and the light of heaven
for the internal (n. 3223, 3324, 3337). The light of heaven flows into
natural light \[lumen\] and the natural man is so far wise as he
receives that light (n. 4302, 4408). There is a correspondence between
those lights (n. 3225). The things which are in the light of heaven
cannot be seen from the light of the world with man, which is called his
natural light \[lumen\]; but the things in the light of the world may be
seen from the light of heaven (n. 9577). Whence it follows, that they
who are only in the light of the world, which is called natural light
\[lumen\], do not perceive those things which are of the light of heaven
(n. 3108). To those who are in falsities from evil, the light of heaven
is thick darkness (n. 1783, 3337, 3413, 4060, 6907, 8197). The light of
the world with the evil is glowing, and so far as it glows, so far the
things which are of the light of heaven are dark to them (n. 6907). The
light of the world does not appear to the angels (n. 1521, 1783, 1880).
In the heavens all light is from the Lord, and all shade from the
ignorance and proprium of the angels and spirits; hence the
modifications and variegations of light and shade, which are colors
there (n. 3341). Concerning the variegations of light by the Urim and
Thummim (n. 3862). The light of those who are in faith separate from
charity is snowy, and like the light of winter (n. 3412, 3413). That
light is turned into mere darkness on the influx of light from heaven
(n. 3412). Of the light of those who are in a persuasive faith, and in a
life of evil (n. 4416). Of what quality the light appears with those who
are in intelligence from the proprium, and what with those who are in
intelligence from the Lord (n. 4419). There is light \[lumen\] in the
hells, but fatuous (n. 1528, 3340, 4214, 4418, 4531). This light is as
light from a coal fire (n. 1528, 4418, 4531). They who are in the hells
appear to themselves in their own light as men, but in the light of
heaven as devils and monsters (n. 4532, 4533, 4674, 5057, 5058, 6605,
6626). All things in the light of heaven appear according to their true
quality (n. 4674). The hells are said to be in thick darkness and
darkness, because they are in falsities from evils (n. 3340, 4418,
4531). "Darkness" signifies falsities, and "thick darkness" the falsity
of evil (n. 1839, 1860, 7688, 7711).

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

Of the sensual man, who is the lowest degree natural (spoken of in the
doctrine above, n. 45). The sensual is the ultimate of the life of man,
adhering to and inhering in his corporeal (n. 5077, 5767, 9212, 9216,
9331, 9730). He who judges and concludes concerning everything from the
bodily senses, and who believes nothing but what he can see with his
eyes and touch with his hands, saying that these are something, and
rejecting all things else, is a sensual man (n. 5094, 7693). Such a man
thinks in outmosts, and not interiorly in himself (n. 5089, 5094, 6564,
7693). His interiors are shut, so that he sees nothing of truth therein
(n. 6564, 6844, 6845). In a word, he is in gross natural light, and thus
perceives nothing which is from the light of heaven (n. 6201, 6310,
6564, 6598, 6612, 6614, 6622, 6624, 6844, 6845). Consequently he is
interiorly against the things which are of heaven and the church (n.
6201, 6316, 6844, 6845, 6948, 6949). The learned, who have confirmed
themselves against the truths of the church, are sensual (n. 6316).
Sensual men reason sharply and shrewdly, because their thought is so
near their speech as to be almost in it, and because they place all
intelligence in discourse from the memory alone (n. 195, 196, 5700,
10236). But they reason from the fallacies of the senses, with which the
common people are captivated (n. 5084, 6948, 6949, 7693). Sensual men
are more crafty and malicious than others (n. 7693, 10236). The
avaricious, adulterers, the voluptuous, and the deceitful especially are
sensual (n. 6310). Their interiors are foul and filthy (n. 6201). By
means thereof they communicate with the hells (n. 6311). They who are in
the hells are sensual in proportion to their depth (n. 4623, 6311). The
sphere of infernal spirits conjoins itself with man's sensual from
behind (n. 6312). They who reasoned from the sensual, and thereby
against the truths of faith, were called by the ancients serpents of the
tree of knowledge (n. 195-197, 6398, 6949, 10313). The sensual of man,
and the sensual man himself, is further described (n. 10236). And the
extension of the sensual with man (n. 9731). Sensual things ought to be
in the last place, not in the first, and with a wise and intelligent man
they are in the last place and subject to the interiors; but with an
unwise man they are in the first place, and have dominion; these are
they who are properly called sensual (n. 5077, 5125, 5128, 7645). If
sensual things are in the last place, and are subject to the interiors,
a way is opened through them to the understanding, and truths are
refined by a kind of extraction (n. 5580). The sensual things of man
stand nearest to the world, and admit things that flow from the world,
and as it were sift them (n. 9726). The external or natural man
communicates with the world by means of those sensuals, and with heaven
by means of rationals (n. 4009). Thus sensual things administer those
things which are serviceable to the interiors of man (n. 5077, 5081).
There are sensual things ministering to the intellectual part, and
likewise to the will part (n. 5077). Unless the thought is elevated from
sensual things, man possesses but little wisdom (n. 5089). A wise man
thinks above the sensual (n. 5089, 5094). Man, when his thought is
elevated above sensual things, comes into a clearer light \[lumen\], and
at length into heavenly light \[lux\] (n. 6183, 6313, 6315, 9407, 9730,
9922). Elevation above sensual things, and withdrawal from them, was
known to the ancients (n. 6313). Man with his spirit may see the things
which are in the spiritual world, if he can be withdrawn from the
sensual things of the body, and elevated by the Lord into the light of
heaven (n. 4622). The reason is, because the body does not feel, but the
spirit in the body; and so far as the spirit perceives in the body, so
far is the perception gross and obscure, consequently in darkness; but
so far as not in the body, so far is the perception clear and in the
light (n. 4622, 6614, 6622). The ultimate of the understanding is the
sensual scientific, and the ultimate of the will the sensual delight,
concerning which see n. 9996. What is the difference between the sensual
things that are common with beasts, and those that are not common with
them (n. 10236). There are sensual men who are not evil, inasmuch as
their interiors are not so much closed; concerning whose state in
another life (see n. 6311).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](tnj02)
