<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inca](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oll00)  [Next](oll02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Apu Ollantay*, by Clements Markham, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE drama was cultivated by the Incas, and dramatic performances were
enacted before them. Garcilasso de la Vega, Molina, and Salcamayhua are
the authorities who received and have recorded the information given by
the Amautas respecting the Inca drama. Some of these dramas, and
portions of others, were preserved in the memories of members of Inca
and Amauta families. The Spanish priests, especially the Jesuits of
Juli, soon discovered the dramatic aptitude of the people. Plays were
composed and acted, under priestly auspices, which contained songs and
other fragments of the ancient Inca drama. These plays were called
'Autos Sacramentales.'

But complete Inca dramas were also preserved in the memories of members
of the Amauta caste and, until the rebellion of 1781, they were acted.
The drama of Ollantay was first reduced to writing and arranged for
acting by Dr. Don Antonio Valdez, the Cura of Tinto. It was acted before
his friend José Gabriel Condorcanqui <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)1

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

in about 1775. Taking the name of his maternal ancestor, the Inca Tupac
Amaru, the ill-fated Condorcanqui rose in rebellion, was defeated,
taken, and put to death under torture, in the great square of Cuzco. In
the monstrous sentence 'the representation of dramas as well as all
other festivals which the Indians celebrate in memory of their Incas'
was prohibited. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) This is a clear proof
that before 1781 these Quichua dramas were acted.

The original manuscript of Valdez was copied by his friend Don Justo
Pastor Justiniani, and this copy was inherited by his son. There was
another copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, but it is corrupt,
and there are several omissions and mistakes of a copyist. Dr. Valdez
died, at a very advanced age, in 1816. In 1853 the original manuscript
was in the possession of his nephew and heir, Don Narciso Cuentas of
Tinta.

The Justiniani copy was, in 1853, in the possession of Dr. Don Pablo
Justiniani, Cura of Laris, and son of Don Justo Pastor Justiniani. He is
a descendant of

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

the Incas. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) In April 1853 I went to
Laris, a secluded valley of the Andes, and made a careful copy of the
drama of *Ollantay*. From this Justiniani text my first very faulty
line-for-line translation was made in 1871, as well as the present free
translation.

The first printed notice of *Ollantay* appeared in the *Museo Erudito*,
Nos. 5 to 9, published at Cuzco in 1837, and edited by Don José
Palacios. The next account of the drama, with extracts, was in the
'Antiguedades Peruanas,' a work published in 1851 jointly by Dr. von
Tschudi and Don Mariaiao Rivero of Arequipa. The complete text, from the
copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, was first published at
Vienna in 1853 by Dr. von Tschudi in his 'Die Kechua Sprache. It

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

was obtained for him by Dr. Ruggendas of Munich. The manuscript was a
corrupt version, and in very bad condition, in parts illegible from
damp. In 1868 Don José Barranca published a Spanish translation, from
the Dominican text of von Tschudi. The learned Swiss naturalist, von
Tschudi, published a revised edition of his translation at Vienna in
1875, with a parallel German translation. In 18711 printed the
Justiniani text with a literal, line-for-line translation, but with many
mistakes, since corrected; and in 1874, a Peruvian, Don José Fernandez
Nodal, published the Quichua text with a Spanish translation.

In 1878 Gavino Pacheco Zegarra published his version of *Ollantay*, with
a free translation in French. His text is a manuscript of the drama
which he found in his uncle's library. Zegarra, as a native of Peru
whose language was Quichua, had great advantages. He was a very severe,
and often unfair, critic of his predecessors.

The work of Zegarra is, however, exceedingly valuable. He was not only a
Quichua scholar, but also accomplished and well read. His notes on
special words and on the construction of sentences are often very
interesting. But his conclusions respecting several passages which are
in the Justiniani text, but not in the others, are certainly erroneous.
Thus he entirely spoils the dialogue between the Uillac Uma and Piqui
Chaqui by omitting the humorous part contained in the Justiniani text;
and makes other similar omissions merely because the passages are not in
his text. Zegarra gives a useful vocabulary at the end of all the words
which occur in the drama.

The great drawback to the study of Zegarra's work is that he invented a
number of letters to express the various modifications of sound as they
appealed to his

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

ear. No one else can use them, while they render the reading of his own
works difficult and intolerably tiresome.

The last publication of a text of *Ollantay* was by the Rev. J. H.
Gybbon Spilsbury, at Buenos Ayres in 1907, accompanied by Spanish,
English, and French translations in parallel columns.

There is truth in what Zegarra says, that the attempts to translate line
for line, by von Tschudi and myself, 'fail to convey a proper idea of
the original drama to European readers, the result being alike contrary
to the genius of the modern languages of Europe and to that of the
Quichua language.' Zegarra accordingly gives a very free translation in
French.

In the present translation I believe that I have always preserved the
sense of the original, without necessarily binding myself to the words.
The original is in octosyllabic lines. Songs and important speeches are
in quatrains of octosyllabic lines, the first and last rhyming, and the
second and third. I have endeavoured to keep to octosyllabic lines as
far as possible, because they give a better idea of the original; and I
have also tried to preserve the form of the songs and speeches.

The drama opens towards the close of the reign of the Inca Pachacuti,
the greatest of all the Incas, and the scene is laid at Cuzco or at
Ollantay-tampu, in the valley of the Vilcamayu. The story turns on the
love of a great chief, but not of the blood-royal, with a daughter of
the Inca. This would not have been prohibited in former reigns, for the
marriage of a sister by the sovereign or his heir, and the marriage of
princesses only with princes of the blood-royal, were rules first
introduced by Pachacuti. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) His imperial
power and greatness led

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

him to endeavour to raise the royal family far above all others.

The play opens with a dialogue between Ollantay and Piqui Chaqui, his
page, a witty and humorous lad. Ollantay talks of his love for the
Princess Cusi Coyllur, and wants Piqui Chaqui to take a message to her,
while the page dwells on the danger of loving in such a quarter, and
evades the question of taking a message. Then to them enters the Uillac
Uma, or High Priest of the Sun, who remonstrates with Ollantay--a scene
of great solemnity, and very effective.

The next scene is in the Queen's palace. Anahuarqui, the Queen, is
discovered with the Princess Cusi Coyllur, who bitterly laments the
absence of Ollantay. To them enters the Inca Pachacuti, quite ignorant
that his daughter has not only married Ollantay in secret, but that she
is actually with child by him. Her mother keeps her secret. The Inca
indulges in extravagant expressions of love for his daughter. Then boys
and girls enter dancing and singing a harvest song. Another very
melancholy *yarahui* is sung; both capable of being turned by the
Princess into presages of the fate of herself and her husband.

In the third scene Ollantay prefers his suit to the Inca Pachacuti in
octosyllabic quatrains, the first and last

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

lines rhyming, and the second and third. His suit is rejected with scorn
and contempt. Ollantay next appears on the heights above Cuzco. In a
soliloquy he declares himself the implacable enemy of Cuzco and the
Inca. Then Piqui Chaqui arrives with the news that the Queen's palace is
empty, and abandoned, and that Cusi Coyllur has quite disappeared; while
search is being made for Ollantay. While they are together a song is
sung behind some rocks, in praise of Cusi Coyllur's beauty. Then the
sound of clarions and people approaching is heard, and Ollantay and
Piqui Chaqui take to flight. The next scene finds the Inca enraged at
the escape of Ollantay, and ordering his general Rumi-ñaui to march at
once, and make him prisoner. To them enters a *chasqui*, or messenger,
bringing the news that Ollantay has collected a great army at
Ollantay-tampu, and that the rebels have proclaimed him Inca.

The second act opens with a grand scene in the hall of the
fortress-palace of Ollantay-tampu. Ollantay is proclaimed Inca by the
people, and he appoints the Mountain Chief, Urco Huaranca, general of
his army. Urco Huaranca explains the dispositions he has made to oppose
the army advancing from Cuzco, and his plan of defence. In the next
scene Rumi-ñaui, as a fugitive in the mountains, describes his defeat
and the complete success of the strategy of Ollantay and Urco Huaranca.
His soliloquy is in the octosyllabic quatrains. The last scene of the
second act is in the gardens of the Convent of Virgins of the Sun. A
young girl is standing by a gate which opens on the street. This, as
afterwards appears, is Yma Sumac, the daughter of Ollantay and Cusi
Coyllur, aged ten, but ignorant of her parentage. To her enters Pitu
Salla, an attendant, who chides her for being so fond of looking out at
the gate. The conversation which follows shows that Yma Sumac detests
the convent and

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

refuses to take the vows. She also has heard the moans of some sufferer,
and importunes Pitu Salla to tell her who it is. Yma Sumac goes as Mama
Ccacca enters and cross examines Pitu Salla on her progress in
persuading Yma Sumac to adopt convent life. This Mama Ccacca is one of
the Matrons or *Mama Cuna*, and she is also the jailer of Cusi Coyllur.

The third act opens with an amusing scene between the Uillac Uma and
Piqui Chaqui, who meet in a street in Cuzco. Piqui Chaqui wants to get
news, but to tell nothing, and in this he succeeds. The death of Inca
Pachacuti is announced to him, and the accession of Tupac Yupanqui, and
with this news he departs.

Next there is an interview between the new Inca Tupac Yupanqui, the
Uillac Uma, and the defeated general Rumi-ñaui, who promises to retrieve
the former disaster and bring the rebels to Cuzco, dead or alive. It
after wards appears that the scheme of Rumi-ñaui was one of treachery.
He intended to conceal his troops in eaves and gorges near
Ollantay-tampu ready to rush in, when a signal was made. Rumi-ñaui then
cut and slashed his face, covered himself with mud, and appeared at the
gates of Ollantay-tampu, declaring that he had received this treatment
from the new Inca, and imploring protection. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) Ollantay received him with the greatest
kindness and hospitality. In a few days Ollantay and his people
celebrated the *Raymi* or great festival of the sun with

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

much rejoicing and drinking. Rumi-ñaui pretended to join in the
festivities, but when most of them were wrapped in drunken sleep, he
opened the gates, let in his own men, and made them all prisoners.

There is next another scene in the garden of the convent, in which Yma
Sumac importunes Pitu Salla to tell her the secret of the prisoner. Pitu
Salla at last yields and opens a stone door. Cusi Coyllur is discovered,
fastened to a wall, and in a dying state. She had been imprisoned, by
order of her father, Inca Pachacuti on the birth of Yma Sumac. She is
restored with food and water, and the relationship is discovered when
Cusi Coyllur hears the child's name, for she had given it to her.

Next the Inca Tupac Yupanqui is discovered in the great hall of his
palace, seated on his tiana or throne, with the Uillac Uma in
attendance. To them enters a chasqui, or messenger, who describes the
result of Rumi-ñaui's treachery in octosyllabic quatrains. Rumi-ñaui
himself enters and receives the thanks of his sovereign. Then the
prisoners are brought in guarded-Ollantay, Hanco Huayllu, Urco Huaranca,
and Piqui Chaqui. The Inca upbraids them for their treason. He then asks
the Uillac Uma for his judgment. The High Priest recommends mercy.
Rumi-ñaui advises immediate execution: The Inca seems to concur and they
are ordered off, when suddenly the Inca cries 'Stop.' He causes them all
to be released, appoints Ollantay to the highest post in the empire next
to himself, and Urco Huaranca to a high command. There are rejoicings,
and in the midst of it all Yma Sumac forces her way into the hall, and
throws herself at the Inca's feet, entreating him to save her mother
from death. The Inca hands over the matter to Ollantay, but this Yma
Sumac will not have, and, the Uillac Uma intervening, the Inca consents
to go with the child.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

The final scene is in the gardens of the convent. The Inca enters with
Yma Sumac, followed by the whole strength of the company. Mama Ccacca is
ordered to open the stone door and Cusi Coyllur is brought out, She
proves to be the sister of the Inca and the wife of Ollantay. There are
explanations, and all ends happily.

Of the antiquity of the drama of Ollantay there is now no question.
General Mitre wrote an elaborate paper on its authenticity, raising
several points to prove that it was of modern origin. But every point he
raised has been satisfactorily refuted. At the same time there are many
other points, some of them referred to by Zegarra, which establish the
antiquity of the drama beyond any doubt. The antiquity of the name
Ollantay-tampu, applied to the fortress in memory of the drama, is
proved by its use in the narratives of Molina (1560) and of Salcamayhua.

An able review of the literature connected with the drama of Ollantay
was written by Don E. Larrabure y Unanue, the present Vice-President of
Peru, who considers that Ollantay would make a good acting play with
magnificent scenic effects.

MS. TEXTS.

1\. The original text of Valdez. In 1853 the property of Don Narciso
Cuentas of Tinta, heir of Dr. Valdez.

2\. The Justiniani text. In 1853 at Laris. Copy of the Valdez text.

3\. Markham's copy of the Justiniani text (printed 1871).

4\. Rosas copy of the Justiniani text.

5\. Copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco (the Dominican text).

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

6\. Von Tschudi's copy of the Dominican text (printed 1853).

7\. Text of Zegarra (printed 1878).

8\. Second text of von Tschudi.

9\. Text of Spilsbury.

10\. Text of Sahuaraura *penes* Dr. Gonzalez de la Rosa.

There is light thrown upon the name *Ollantay* by the evidence taken
during the journey of the Viceroy Toledo from Jauja to Cuzco, from
November 1570 to March 1571. He wanted information respecting the origin
of the Inca government, and 200 witnesses were examined, the parentage
or lineage of each witness being recorded. Among these we find six
witnesses of the *Antasayac ayllu*. *Sayac* means a station or division,
*Anta* is a small town near Cuzco. The names of the six *Anta* witnesses
were

ANCAILLO; USCA; HUACRO;  
MANCOY; AUCA PURI; ULLANTAY;  
Besides ANTONIO PACROTRICA and PUNICU PAUCAR,  
Chiefs of *Anta*.

We thus find that the name of *Ollantay* belonged to *Anta*. Now the
Incas were under great obligations to the chief of *Anta*, for that
chief had rescued the eldest son of *Inca Rocca* from the chief of
*Ayamarca*, and had restored him to his father. For this great service
the chief of *Anta* was declared to be a noble of the highest rank and
cousin to the Inca family. Moreover, the daughter of the Anta chief was
married to the Inca *Uira-cocha*, and was the mother of *Pachacuti*.
Assuming, as seems probable, that *Ollantay* was a son of the chief of
Anta, he would be a cousin of the Inca, and of very

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

high rank, though not an agnate of the reigning family. This, I take it,
is what is intended. *Pachacuti* desired to raise his family high above
all others, and that, consequently, there should be no marriages with
subjects even of the highest rank; and his excessive severity on the
transgression of his rule by his daughter is thus explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[325:1](oll01.htm#fr_0)

INCA-PACHACUTI  
\|  
TUPAC YUPANQUI  
\|  
INCA HUAYNA CCAPAC  
\|  
MANCO INCA  
\|  
TUPAC AMARU  
\|  
+------+         
\|                
JUANA ÑUSTA = DIEGO CONDORCANQUI  
\|  
FELIPE CONDORCANQUI  
\|  
PEDRO CONDORCANQUI  
\|  
MIGUEL CONDORCANQUI  
\|  
JOSÉ GABRIEL CONDORCANQUI  
(TUPAC AMARU)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[326:1](oll01.htm#fr_1) '*Sentencia pronunciada
en el Cuzco por el Visitador Don José Antonio de Areche, contra José
Gabriel Tupac Amaru*.' In *Coleccion de obras y documentos* de Don Pedro
de Angelis, vol. V. (Buenos Ayres, 1836-7).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[327:1](oll01.htm#fr_2)

INCA PACHACUTI.  
\|  
TUPAC YUPANQUI  
\|  
HUAYNA CCAPAC  
\|  
MANCO INCA  
\|  
MARIA TUPAC USCA = PEDRO ORTIZ DE ORUE  
\|  
+------+         
\|                
CATALINA ORTIZ =LUIS JUSTINIANI  
\|  
LUIS JUSTINIANI  
\|  
LUIS JUSTINIANI  
\|  
NICOLO JUSTINIANI  
\|  
JUSTO PASTOR JUSTINIANI  
\|  
Dr. PABLO POLICARPO JUSTINIANI  
(Cura of Laris)

<span id="fn_3"></span>[329:1](oll01.htm#fr_3) The wives of the Incas
were called *ccoya*. The ccoya of the second Inca was a daughter of the
chief of *Sanoc*. The third Inca married a daughter of the chief of
*Oma*, the fourth married a girl of *Tacucaray*, the wife of the fifth
was a daughter of a *Cuzco* chief. The sixth Inca married a daughter of
the chief of *Huayllacan*, the seventh married a daughter of the chief
of *Ayamarca*, and the eighth went to *Anta* for a wife. This Anta lady
was the mother of Pachacuti. The wife of Pachacuti, named *Anahuarqui*,
was a daughter of the chief of *Choco*. There was no rule about marrying
sisters when Pachacuti succeeded. He introduced it by making his son
Tupac Yupanqui marry his daughter Mama Ocllo, but this was quite
unprecedented. The transgression of a rule which he had just made may
account for his extreme severity.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[332:1](oll01.htm#fr_4) A bust, on an earthen
vase, was presented to Don Antonio Maria Alvarez, the political chief of
Cuzco, in 1837, by an Indian who declared that it had been handed down
in his family from time immemorial, as a likeness of the general,
Rumi-ñaui, who plays an important part in this drama of Ollantay. The
person represented must have been a general, from the ornament on the
forehead, called mascapaycha, and there are wounds cut on the
face.--Museo Erudito, No. B.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts and Scenes](oll02)

</div>
