[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16004)  [Next](cc16006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 53.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Who hath believed our report? and to
whom is the arm of the LORD revealed?

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quis credet auditui nostro? et brachium
Iehovae cui (*ad verbum, super quem*)?

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** For he shall grow up before him as a
tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor
comeliness; and when we shall see him, *there is* no beauty that we
should desire him.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ascendet tamen sicut virgultum coram
eo, et sicut radix e terra deserta. Non forma ei, neque decor. Videbimus
eum; et non aspectus, ut desideremus eum.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** He is despised and rejected of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were *our*
faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Despectus et rejectus inter homines,
vir dolorum, peritus infirmitatis; quasi abscondimus faciem ab eo, et
nihili reputavimus eum.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Surely he hath borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Sane langoures nostros ipse tulit, et
dolores nostros ipse portavit; et nos existimavimus eum percussum,
vulneratum a Deo et humiliatum.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** But he *was* wounded for our
transgressions, *he was* bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace *was* upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Atqui Apse vulneratus est propter
iniquitates nostras, attritus est propter peccata nostra. Castigatio
pacis nostrae super eum, et in livore ejus sanatio (*vel, medela*)
nobis.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** All we like sheep have gone astray; we
have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the
iniquity of us all.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Omnes nos tanquam oves erravimus,
quisque in viam suam declinavit. Et Iehova traduxit in eum nostras
omniurn iniquitatcs.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not
his mouth.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Mulctatus est, et afflictus, (*vel,
oppressus*,) nec aperuit os suum. Quasi pecus ad mactationem ducetur, et
tanquam ovis coram tonsoribbus suis obmutescet, nec aperiet os suum.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** He was taken from prison and from
judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out
of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he
stricken.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** E carcere et judicio sublatus est, et
generationem ejus quis enarrabit? Quoniam succisus est e terra
viventium; propter transgressionem populi mei plaga illi.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he made his grave with the wicked,
and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither
*was any* deceit in his mouth.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et exposuit impiis sepulchrum ejus, et
diviti mortem ejus; quamvis iniquitatem non fecerit, nec fecerit dolos
in ore ejus revelatum est?

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>**10.** Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise
him; he hath put *him* to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see *his* seed, he shall prolong *his* days,
and the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in his hand.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Voluit tamen Iehova conterere eum,
infirmitati subjicere. Cum posuerit in sacrificium animam suam, videbit
semen, prorogabit dies, et voluntas Iehovae in manu ejus prosperabitur.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**11.** He shall see of the travail of his
soul, *and* shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**11.** E labore animae suae videbit, et
saturabitur; et doctrina sua (*vel, cognitione sui*) justificabit justus
servus meus multos; quia iniquitates eorum ipse portabit.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>**12.** Therefore will I divide him *a
portion* with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong;
because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with
the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession
for the transgressors.

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Propterea distribuam illi partem cum
magnis, et eum robustis spolia dividet. Quoniam profudit in mortem
animam suam, et cum iniquis reputatus est; ipse peccatum multorum tulit,
et pro iniquis oravit.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span><span id="vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span>**1.** *Who will believe our report?* This
division, or rather dismemberment, of the chapter, ought to be
disregarded; for it ought to have begun with the thirteenth verse of the
former chapter, and these words ought to be connected with what goes
before.  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) Here the Prophet pauses,
as it were, in the middle of his discourse; for, having formerly said
that the name of Christ would be everywhere proclaimed, and would be
revealed to unknown nations, and yet would have so mean an aspect that
it might appear as if these things were fabulous, he breaks off his
discourse, and exclaims that “Nobody will believe those things.” At the
same time, he describes his grief, that men are so unbelieving as to
reject their salvation.

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>Thus, it is a holy complaint made by one who
wished that Christ should be known by all, and who, notwithstanding of
this, sees that there are few who believe the Gospel, and therefore
groans and cries out, “Who hath believed our report?“ Let us therefore
groan and complain along with the Prophet, and let us be distressed with
grief when we see that our labor is unprofitable, and let us complain
before God; for godly ministers must be deeply affected, if they wish to
perform their work faithfully. Isaiah declares that there will be few
that submit to the Gospel of Christ; for, when he exclaims, “Who will
believe the preaching?” he means that of those who hear the Gospel
scarcely a hundredth person will be a believer.

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span>Nor does he merely speak of himself alone,
but like one who represents all teachers. Although therefore God gives
many ministers, few will hold by their doctrine; and what then will
happen when there are no ministers? Do we wonder that the greatest
blindness reigns there? If cultivated ground is unfruitful, what shall
we look for from a soil that is uncultivated and barren? And yet it does
not detract anything from the Gospel of Christ, that there are few
disciples who receive it; nor does the small number of believers lessen
its authority or obscure its infinite glory; but, on the contrary, the
loftiness of the mystery is a reason why it scarcely obtains credit in
the world. It is reckoned to be folly, because it exceeds all human
capacities.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>*To whom* (literally, *on whom*) *is the arm
of Jehovah revealed?* In this second clause he points out the reason why
the number of believers will be so small. It is, because no man can come
to God but by an extraordinary revelation of the Spirit. To suppose that
by the word “Arm” Christ is meant, is, in my opinion, a mistake. It
assigns the cause why there are so few that believe; and that is, that
they cannot attain it by the sagacity of their own understanding. This
is a remarkable passage, and is quoted by John and Paul for that
purpose. “Though Jesus,” said John, “had performed many miracles in
their presence, they believed not in him, that the saying of Isaiah the
Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake,

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>“Lord, who hath believed our report, and to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?”  
(<span id="vi.i-p33.2"></span>[John
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)<span id="vi.i-p33.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>And Paul says, “But they do not all believe
the Gospel; for Isaiah saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?“
(<span id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>[Ro
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>)
Both of them declare that there will be no reason to wonder, if that
which was long ago foretold shall happen; and they do so for the purpose
of removing offense which might have arisen from the revolt of that
nation, which ought to have acknowledged Christ, but obstinately
resisted him.

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>Isaiah does not include merely the men of his
own time, but all posterity to the end of the world; for, so long as the
reign of Christ shall endure, this must be fulfilled; and therefore
believers ought to be fortified by this passage against such a scandal.
These words refute the ignorance of those who think that faith is in the
power of every person, because preaching is common to all. Though it is
sufficiently evident that all are called to salvation, yet the Prophet
expressly states that the external voice is of no avail, if it be not
accompanied by a special gift of the Spirit. And whence proceeds the
difference, but from the secret election of God, the cause of which is
hidden in himself?

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span><span id="vi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>**2.** *Yet he shall grow up before him as a
twig.* This verse refers to what was formerly said, that Christ will at
first have no magnificence or outward display among men; but that before
God he will nevertheless be highly exalted, and will be held in
estimation. Hence we see that we must not judge of the glory of Christ
by human view, but must discern by faith what is taught us concerning
him by the Holy Scriptures; and therefore the phrase “before him,” is
here contrasted with human senses, which cannot comprehend that lofty
greatness. Almost the same metaphor was used by the Prophet, (<span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>[Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>) when he said, “A branch shall spring out of the
stock of Jesse;” for the house of David was like a dry stock, in which
no rigor and no comeliness was visible, and on that account is there
called not a royal house, but “Jesse,” a name which bore no celebrity.
Only the Prophet adds here, —

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>*In a desert land*; by which he means that
Christ’s power of springing up will not be derived from the sap of the
earth, as in trees, but contrary to the ordinary course of nature. They
who in this passage speculate about the virgin Mary, and suppose that
she is called a desert land, because she conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and not by ordinary generation, speak beside the purpose; for the
present subject is not the birth of Christ, but his whole reign. He says
that it will resemble a twig springing out of a dry soil, which looks as
if it could never become large. If we take into account the whole method
of establishing his kingdom, and the agency which he employed, and how
feeble were its beginnings, and how many foes it encountered, we shall
easily understand that all these things were fulfilled as they had been
foretold. What sort of men were the Apostles that they should subdue so
many kings and nations by the sword of the word? Are they not justly
compared to offshoots? Thus the Prophet shows by what means the kingdom
of Christ must be set up and established, that we may not judge of it by
human conceptions.

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span>*He hath no form nor comeliness.* This must
be understood to relate not merely to the person of Christ, who was
despised by the world, and was at length condemned to a disgraceful
death; but to his whole kingdom, which in the eyes of men had no beauty,
no comeliness, no splendor, which, in short, had nothing that could
direct or captivate the hearts of men to it by its outward show.
Although Christ arose from the dead, yet the Jews always regarded him as
a person who had been crucified and disgraced, in consequence of which
they haughtily disdained him.

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span><span id="vi.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>**3.** *Despised and rejected.* This verse
conveys the same statement as the preceding, namely, that Christ will be
“rejected” by men, in consequence of their beholding in him nothing but
grief and infirmity. These things needed to be often repeated to the
Jews, that they might not form a false conception of Christ and his
kingdom; for, in order to know his glory, we must proceed from his death
to his resurrection. Many stumble at his death, as if he had been
vanquished and overwhelmed by it; but we ought to contemplate his power
and majesty in the resurrection; and if any one choose to begin with the
resurrection, he will not follow the order laid down by the Prophet, nor
comprehend the Lord’s strength and power.

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span>*We hid the face from him.* Not without
reason does he use the first person, *we;* for he declares that there
will be a universal judgment; and no man will ever be able to comprehend
it by his own understanding till the Lord correct and form him anew by
his Spirit. Although he appears chiefly to censure the Jews, who ought
not to have so haughtily rejected the Son of God promised and offered to
them, and therefore reckons himself as one of the number, because he was
an individual belonging to that nation; yet let us learn from this
passage that all men are accursed and condemned for ingratitude in
despising Christ, because they do not even consider him to be worthy of
being looked at, but turn away their eyes as if from something
detestable.

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span><span id="vi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span>**4.** *Surely he carried our sicknesses.*
The particle <span id="vi.i-p44.1"></span>אכן (*aken*) is not only a
strong affirmation, but is likewise equivalent to *for,* and assigns a
reason of something which went before, and which might have been thought
new and strange; for it is a monstrous thing that he to whom God has
given supreme authority over all the creatures should be thus trampled
on and scorned; and if the reason were not assigned, it would have been
universally pronounced to be ridiculous. The reason, therefore, of the
weakness, pains, and shame of Christ is, that “he carried our
sicknesses.”

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>Matthew quotes this prediction, after having
related that Christ cured various diseases; though it is certain that he
was appointed not to cure bodies, but rather to cure souls; for it is of
spiritual disease that the Prophet intends to speak. But in the miracles
which Christ performed in curing bodies, he gave a proof of the
salvation which he brings to our souls. That healing had therefore a
more extensive reference than to bodies, because he was appointed to be
the physician of souls; and accordingly Matthew applies to the outward
sign what belonged to the truth and reality.

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span>*We thought him to be smitten, wounded by
God, and afflicted.* In this second clause he shows how great was the
ingratitude and wickedness of the people, who did not know why Christ
was so severely afflicted, but imagined that God smote him on account of
his own sins, though they knew that he was perfectly innocent, and his
innocence was attested even by his judge. (<span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>[Mt 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="vi.i-p46.1"></span>; <span id="vi.i-p46.2"></span>[Luke
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#004),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#014),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p46.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p46.3"></span>[Joh
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#038)<span id="vi.i-p46.3"></span>)
Since therefore they know that an innocent man is punished for sins
which he did not commit, why do they not think that it indicated some
extraordinary excellence to exist in him? But because they see him
wounded and despised, they do not inquire about the cause, and from the
event alone, as fools are wont to do, they pronounce judgment.
Accordingly, Isaiah complains of the wicked judgment of men, in not
considering the cause of Christ’s heavy afflictions; and especially he
deplores the dullness of his own nation, because they thought that God
was a deadly enemy of Christ, and took no account of their own sins,
which were to be expiated in this manner.

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span><span id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span>**5.** *And he was wounded for our
iniquities.* He again repeats the cause of Christ’s great afflictions,
in order to meet the scandal which might have arisen from it. The
spectacle of the cross alienates many persons from Christ, when they
consider what is presented to their eyes, and do not observe the object
to be accomplished. But all offense is removed when we know that by his
death our sins have been expiated, and salvation has been obtained for
us.

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span>*The chastisement of our peace*. Some think
that this is called “the chastisement of peace,” on account of men being
careless and stupefied amidst their afflictions, and therefore that it
was necessary that Christ should suffer. Others view “peace” as relating
to the consciences, that is, that Christ suffered, in order that we
might have peaceful consciences; as Paul says that, “being justified by
faith through Christ, we have peace with God.” (<span
id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>[Ro 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>) But I take it to denote simply reconciliation.
Christ was the price of “our chastisement,” that is, of the chastisement
which was due to us. Thus the wrath of God, which had been justly
kindled against us, was appeased; and through the Mediator we have
obtained “peace,” by which we are reconciled.

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>We ought to draw from this a universal
doctrine, namely, that we are reconciled to God by free grace, because
Christ hath paid the price of “our peace.” This is indeed acknowledged
by the Papists; but then they limit this doctrine to original sin, as if
after baptism there were no longer any room for reconciliation through
free grace, but that we must give satisfaction by our merits and works.
But the Prophet does not here treat of a single species of pardon, but
extends this blessing to the whole course of life; and therefore it
cannot be thus undervalued or limited to a particular time, without most
heinous sacrilege. Hence also the frivolous distinction of the Papists,
between the remission of punishment and the pardon of sin, is easily
refuted. They affirm that punishment is not remitted to us, unless it be
washed out by satisfactions. But the Prophet openly declares that the
punishment of our sins was transferred to him. What, then, do the
Papists intend but to be Christ’s equals and companions, and to lay
claim to share with him in his authority?

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span>*In his wound* (or, *in his medicine) we have
healing.* He again directs us to Christ, that we may betake ourselves to
his wounds, provided that we wish to regain life. Here the Prophet draws
a contrast between us and Christ; for in us nothing call be found but
destruction and death; in Christ alone is life and salvation, he alone
brought medicine to us, and even procures health by his weakness, and
life by his death; for he alone hath pacified the Father, he alone hath
reconciled us to him. Here we might bring forward many things about the
blessed consequences of Christ’s sufferings, if we had not determined to
expound rather than to preach; and therefore let us be satisfied with a
plain exposition. Let every one, therefore, draw consolation from this
passage, and let him apply the blessed result of this doctrine to his
own use; for these words are spoken to all in general, and to
individuals in particular.

<span id="vi.i-p52"></span><span id="vi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p53"></span>**6.** *We all, like sheep, have gone
astray.* In order to impress more deeply on our hearts the benefit of
the death of Christ, he shows how necessary is that healing which he
formerly mentioned. If we do not perceive our wretchedness and poverty,
we shall never know how desirable is that remedy which Christ has
brought to us, or approach him with due ardor of affection. As soon as
we know that we are ruined, then, aware of our wretchedness, we eagerly
run to avail ourselves of the remedy, which otherwise would be held by
us in no estimation. In order, therefore, that Christ may be appreciated
by us, let every one consider and examine himself, so as to acknowledge
that he is ruined till he is redeemed by Christ.

<span id="vi.i-p54"></span>We see that here none are excepted, for the
Prophet includes “all.” The whole human race would have perished, if
Christ had not brought relief. He does not even except the Jews, whose
hearts were puffed up with a false opinion of their own superiority, but
condemns them indiscriminately, along with others, to destruction. By
comparing them to sheep, he intends not to extenuate their guilt, as if
little blame attached to them, but to state plainly that it belongs to
Christ to gather from their wanderings those who resembled brute beasts.

<span id="vi.i-p55"></span>*Every one hath turned to his own way.* By
adding the term *every one*, he descends from a universal statement, in
which he included all, to a special statement, that every individual may
consider in his own mind if it be so; for a general statement produces
less effect upon us than to know that it belongs to each of us in
particular. Let “every one,” therefore, arouse his conscience, and
present himself before the judgment­seat of God, that he may confess his
wretchedness. Moreover, what is the nature of this “going astray” the
Prophet states more plainly. It is, that every one hath followed the way
which he had chosen for himself, that is, hath determined to live
according to his own fancy; by which he means that there is only one way
of living uprightly, and if any one “turn aside” from it, he can
experience nothing but “going astray.”

<span id="vi.i-p56"></span>He does not speak of works only, but of
nature itself, which always leads us astray; for, if we could by natural
instinct or by our own wisdom, bring ourselves back into the path, or
guard ourselves against going astray, Christ would not be needed by us.
Thus, in ourselves we all are undone unless Christ (<span
id="vi.i-p56.1"></span>[Joh 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span
id="vi.i-p56.1"></span>) sets us free; and the more we rely on our
wisdom or industry, the more dreadfully and the more speedily do we draw
down destruction on ourselves. And so the Prophet shows what we are
before we are regenerated by Christ; for all are involved in the same
condemnation. “There is none righteous, none that understandeth, none
that seeketh God. All have turned aside, and have become unprofitable.
There is none that doeth good; no, not one.” (<span
id="vi.i-p56.2"></span>[Ps 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span
id="vi.i-p56.2"></span>) All this is more fully explained by Paul.
(<span id="vi.i-p56.3"></span>[Ro
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p56.3"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p57"></span>*And Jehovah hath laid upon him.* Here we
have a beautiful contrast. In ourselves we are scattered; in Christ we
are gathered together. By nature we go astray, and are driven headlong
to destruction; in Christ we find the course by which we are conducted
to the harbor of salvation. Our sins are a heavy load; but they are laid
on Christ, by whom we are freed from the load. Thus, when we were
ruined, and, being estranged from God, were hastening to hell, Christ
took upon him the filthiness of our iniquities, in order to rescue us
from everlasting destruction. This must refer exclusively to guilt and
punishment; for he was free from sin. (<span id="vi.i-p57.1"></span>[Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="vi.i-p57.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p57.2"></span>[1Pe
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p57.2"></span>) Let
every one, therefore, diligently consider his own iniquities, that he
may have a true relish of that grace, and may obtain the benefit of the
death of Christ.

<span id="vi.i-p58"></span><span id="vi.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p59"></span>**7.** *He was punished.* Here the Prophet
applauds the obedience of Christ in suffering death; for if his death
had not been voluntary, he would not have been regarded as having
satisfied for our disobedience. “As by one man’s disobedience,” says
Paul, “all became sinners, so by one man’s obedience many were made
righteous. (<span id="vi.i-p59.1"></span>[Ro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="vi.i-p59.1"></span>) And
elsewhere, “He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.”
(<span id="vi.i-p59.2"></span>[Php
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p59.2"></span>) This
was the reason of his silence at the judgment­seat of Pilate, though he
had a just defense to offer; for, having become answerable for our
guilt, he wished to submit silently to the sentence, that we might
loudly glory in the righteousness of faith obtained through free grace.

<span id="vi.i-p60"></span>*As a lamb shall he be led to the slaughter.*
We are here exhorted to patience and meekness, that, following the
example of Christ, we may be ready to endure reproaches and cruel
assaults, distress and torture. In this sense Peter quotes this passage,
showing that we ought to become like Christ our Head, that we may
imitate his patience and submissiveness. (<span
id="vi.i-p60.1"></span>[1Pe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)<span
id="vi.i-p60.1"></span>) In the word *lamb* there is probably an
allusion to the sacrifices under the Law; and in this sense he is
elsewhere called “the Lamb of God.” (<span id="vi.i-p60.2"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036)<span id="vi.i-p60.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p61"></span><span id="vi.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p62"></span>**8.** *From prison and judgment.* There are
various ways in which this passage is expounded. Some think that the
Prophet continues the argument which he had already begun to treat,
namely, that Christ was smitten by the hand of God, and afflicted, on
account of our sins. The Greek translators render it, <span
id="vi.i-p62.1"></span>ἐν τὣ ταπεινώσει αὐτοῦ ἡ κρίσις αὐτοῦ ᾔρθη. “In
his humiliation his judgment was taken away.” Others, “He was taken away
without delay.” Others explain it, “He was taken away to the cross;“
that is, as soon as Christ was seized, he was dragged to “judgment.” I
rather agree with those who think that the Prophet, after having spoken
of death, passes to the glory of the resurrection. He intended to meet
the thoughts by which the minds of many persons might have been troubled
and distressed; for when we see nothing but wounds and shame, we are
struck with amazement, because human nature shrinks from such a
spectacle.

<span id="vi.i-p63"></span>The Prophet therefore declares that he was
*taken away;* that is, that he was rescued “from prison and judgment” or
condemnation, and afterwards was exalted to the highest rank of honor;
that no one might think that he was overwhelmed or swallowed up by that
terrible and shameful kind of death. For, undoubtedly, he was victorious
even in the midst of death, and triumphed over his enemies; and he was
so judged that now he has been appointed to be judge of all, as was
publicly manifested by his resurrection. (<span
id="vi.i-p63.1"></span>[Ac 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)<span
id="vi.i-p63.1"></span>) The same order is followed by the Prophet as by
Paul, who, after having declared that Christ was abased even to the
cross, adds that, on this account, he was exalted to the very highest
honor, and that there was given him a: name to which all things both in
heaven and in earth must render obedience and bend the knee. (<span
id="vi.i-p63.2"></span>[Php 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.i-p63.2"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p64"></span>*Who shall relate his generation?* This
exclamation has been stretched and (I may say) tortured into various
meanings. The ancients abused this passage in reasoning against the
Arians, when they wished to prove by it Christ’s eternal generation. But
they ought to have been satisfied with clearer testimonies of Scripture,
that they might not expose themselves to the mockery of heretics, who
sometimes take occasion from this to become more obstinate; for it might
easily have been objected that the Prophet was not thinking about that
subject. Chrysostom views it as relating to the human nature of Christ,
that he was miraculously, and not by ordinary generation, conceived in
the womb of the virgin; but that is a wide departure from the Prophet’s
meaning. Others think that Isaiah kindles into rage against the men of
that age who crucified Christ. Others refer it to the posterity which
should be born; namely, that Christ’s posterity will be numerous though
he die.

<span id="vi.i-p65"></span>But, as <span id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>דור
*(dor)* signifies “age” or “duration,” I have no doubt that he speaks of
the “age” of Christ, and that his meaning is, that Christ, though almost
overwhelmed by sicknesses, shall not only be taken from them, but that
even his age shall be permanent and eternal; or, in other words, that he
shall be unlike those who are indeed rescued from death, but shall
afterwards die; for Christ rose from the dead, to live for ever, and, as
Paul says, “cannot now die; death shall no longer have dominion over
him.” (<span id="vi.i-p65.2"></span>[Ro
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="vi.i-p65.2"></span>) Yet
let us remember that the Prophet does not speak of Christ’s person
alone, but includes the whole body of the Church, which ought never to
be separated from him. We have therefore a striking proof of the
perpetuity of the Church. As Christ liveth for ever, so he will not
permit his kingdom to perish. The same immortality shall at length be
bestowed on each of the members.

<span id="vi.i-p66"></span>*For he was cut off.* This might indeed, at
first sight, appear to be absurd, that the death of Christ is the cause
and source of our life; but, because he bore the punishment of our sins,
we ought therefore to apply to ourselves all the shame that appears in
the cross. Yet in Christ the wonderful love of God shines forth, which
renders his glory visible to us; so that we ought to be excited to
rapturous admiration.

<span id="vi.i-p67"></span>*For the transgression of my people.* He
again repeats that the wound was inflicted on him “for the sins of the
people;“ and the object is, that we may diligently consider that it was
for our sake, and not for his own, that he suffered; for he bore the
punishment which we must have endured, if he had not offered this
atonement. We ought to perceive in ourselves that guilt of which he bore
the accusation and punishment, having offered himself in our name to the
Father,  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) that by his condemnation
we may be set free.

<span id="vi.i-p69"></span><span id="vi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p70"></span>**9.** *And he laid open to wicked men his
grave.* Jerome renders it, “And he gave wicked men for burial;” as if
the Prophet spake of the punishment by which the Lord took vengeance for
the sin of wicked men, who crucified Christ. But he rather speaks of the
death of Christ, and of the fruit of it, and says nothing about that
revenge. Others think that the particle <span id="vi.i-p70.1"></span>את
*(eth)* denotes comparison, in the same manner as the particle <span
id="vi.i-p70.2"></span>כ *(caph).* “He gave his grave as of wicked men.”
Others interpret <span id="vi.i-p70.3"></span>את *(eth)* to mean *with,*
and explain “the rich man” to be Joseph of Arimathea, in whose sepulcher
Christ was buried. (<span id="vi.i-p70.4"></span>[Mt
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)<span id="vi.i-p70.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p70.5"></span>[Joh
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)<span id="vi.i-p70.5"></span>)
But such an interpretation is too unnatural. I rather think that the
real meaning is, that God the Father delivered Christ into the hands of
wicked men.

<span id="vi.i-p71"></span>*And to the rich man his death.* I consider
the singular <span id="vi.i-p71.1"></span>עשיר *(gnashir,)* “the rich
man,” to be put for the plural <span id="vi.i-p71.2"></span>עשרים
*(gnashirim)*, as is frequently done by Hebrew writers. I see no reason
why Oecolampadius rendered it “high places.”  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) By “rich men” he means “violent men;” for
men grow haughty and disdainful on account of their riches, and abuse
their wealth to savage cruelty. And thus by the terms “wicked men” and
“rich men” the same thing, in my opinion, is denoted. He means,
therefore, that Christ was exposed to the reproaches, and insolence, and
lawless passions of wicked men. For, on the one hand, the Pharisees and
priests (<span id="vi.i-p72.2"></span>[Mt
26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066)<span id="vi.i-p72.2"></span>)
rush upon him with unbridled rage and foul slander; on the other hand,
Pilate, though well aware of his innocence, (<span
id="vi.i-p72.3"></span>[Mr 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#014)<span
id="vi.i-p72.3"></span>) condemns him in opposition to law and justice;
and again, on another hand, the Roman soldiers, ready for every kind of
barbarity, cruelly and wickedly execute the cruel and wicked sentence.
(<span id="vi.i-p72.4"></span>[Joh
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p72.4"></span>)
Who would not conclude that Christ was crushed and “buried” amidst those
impious and bloody hands?

<span id="vi.i-p73"></span>I consider the word *grave* to be here used
metaphorically, because wicked and violent men might be said to have
overwhelmed him. If it be objected that Christ had an honorable burial,
I reply, that burial was the commencement of a glorious resurrection;
but at present the Prophet speaks of death, which is often denoted by
“the grave.” I consider this, therefore, to be the real meaning, though
I wish to leave every person free to form his own opinion.

<span id="vi.i-p74"></span>*Though he did no iniquity.* <span
id="vi.i-p74.1"></span>על *(gnal)* signifies “because;” but sometimes it
is used in the sense of “though,” as in this passage.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) Here the Prophet applauds the innocence
of Christ, not only in order to defend him from slander, but to speak
highly of the benefit of his death, that we may not think that he
suffered by chance. Though innocent, he suffered by the decree of God;
and therefore it was for our sake, and not for his own, that he
suffered. He bore the punishment which was due to us.

<span id="vi.i-p76"></span>*Neither was there deceit in his mouth.* In
two words he describes the perfect innocence of Christ; namely, that he
never offended either in deed or in word. That this cannot be said of
any mortal man is universally acknowledged, and hence it follows that it
applies to Christ alone.

<span id="vi.i-p77"></span><span id="vi.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p78"></span>**10.** *Yet Jehovah was pleased to bruise
him.* This illustrates more fully what I formerly stated in few words,
that the Prophet, in asserting Christ’s innocence, aims at something
more than to defend him from all reproach. The object therefore is, that
we should consider the cause, in order to have experience of the effect;
for God appoints nothing at random, and hence it follows that the cause
of his death is lawful. We must also keep in view the contrast. In
Christ there was no fault; why, then, was the Lord pleased that he
should suffer? Because he stood in our room, and in no other way than by
his death could the justice of God be satisfied.

<span id="vi.i-p79"></span>*When he shall have offered his soul as a
sacrifice.* <span id="vi.i-p79.1"></span>אשם *(asham)*  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) denotes both sin and the sacrifice which
is offered for sin, and is often used in the latter sense in the
Scriptures. (<span id="vi.i-p80.7"></span>[Ex
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p80.7"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p80.8"></span>[Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p80.8"></span>)
 <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) The sacrifice was offered in such
a manner as to expiate sin by enduring its punishment and curse. This
was expressed by the priests by means of the laying on of hands, as if
they threw on the sacrifice the sins of the whole nation. (<span
id="vi.i-p81.3"></span>[Ex 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#015)<span
id="vi.i-p81.3"></span>) And if a private individual offered a
sacrifice, he also laid his hand upon it, as if he threw upon it his own
sin. Our sins were thrown upon Christ in such a manner that he alone
bore the curse.

<span id="vi.i-p82"></span>On this account Paul also calls him a “curse”
or “execration:” “Christ hath redeemed us from the execration of the
law, having been made an execration for us.” (<span
id="vi.i-p82.1"></span>[Ga 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="vi.i-p82.1"></span>) He likewise calls him “Sin;” “For him who knew
no sin hath he made to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.” (<span id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>) And
in another passage, “For what was impossible for the law, inasmuch as it
was weak on account of the flesh, God did, by sending his own Son in the
likeness of flesh liable to sin, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us.” (<span
id="vi.i-p82.3"></span>[Rom. 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p82.3"></span>) What
Paul meant by the words “curse” and “sin” in these passages is the same
as what the Prophet meant by the word <span id="vi.i-p82.4"></span>אשם,
*(asham.)* In short, <span id="vi.i-p82.5"></span>אשם *(asham)* is
equivalent to the Latin word *piaculum,*  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) an expiatory sacrifice.

<span id="vi.i-p84"></span>Here we have a description of the benefit of
Christ’s death, that by his sacrifice sins were expiated, and God was
reconciled towards men; for such is the import of this word <span
id="vi.i-p84.1"></span>אשם, *(asham.)* Hence it follows that nowhere but
in Christ is found expiation and satisfaction for sin. In order to
understand this better, we must first know that we are guilty before
God, so that we may be accursed and detestable in his presence. Now, if
we wish to return to a state of favor with him, sin must be taken away.
This cannot be accomplished by sacrifices contrived according to the
fancy of men. Consequently, we must come to the death of Christ; for in
no other way can satisfaction be given to God. In short, Isaiah teaches
that sins cannot be pardoned in any other way than by betaking ourselves
to the death of Christ. If any person think that this language is harsh
and disrespectful to Christ, let him descend into himself, and, after a
close examination, let him ponder how dreadful is the judgment of God,
which could not be pacified but by this price; and thus the inestimable
grace which shines forth in making Christ accursed will easily remove
every ground of offense.

<span id="vi.i-p85"></span>*He shall see his seed.* Isaiah means that
the death of Christ not only can be no hinderance to his having a seed,
but will be the cause of his having offspring; that is, because, by
quickening the dead, he will procure a people for himself, whom he will
afterwards multiply more and more; and there is no absurdity in giving
the appellation of Christ’s seed to all believers, who are also
brethren, because they are descended from Christ.

<span id="vi.i-p86"></span>*He shall prolong his days.* To this clause
some supply the relative <span id="vi.i-p86.1"></span>אשר *(asher,)*
“which:” “A seed which shall be long lived.” But I expound it in a more
simple manner, “Christ shall not be hindered by his death from
prolonging his days, that is, from living eternally.” Some persons, when
departing from life, leave children, but children who shall survive
them, and who shall live so as to obtain a name only when their fathers
are dead. But Christ shall ell joy the society of his children; for he
shall not die like other men, but shall obtain eternal life in himself
and his children. Thus Isaiah declares that in the head and the members
there shall be immortal life.

<span id="vi.i-p87"></span>*And the will of Jehovah shall prosper in his
hand.* The word “hand” often denotes “ministry,” as the Lord proclaimed
the law “by the hand of Moses.” (<span id="vi.i-p87.1"></span>[Nu
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#013)<span id="vi.i-p87.1"></span>)
Again, the Lord did this “by the hands of David;“ that is, he made use
of David as his minister in that matter. (<span
id="vi.i-p87.2"></span>[Ezr 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010)<span
id="vi.i-p87.2"></span>) So also “in the hand of Christ shall prosper
the will of God;” that is, the Lord will cause the ministry of Christ to
yield its fruit, that it may not be thought that he exposed himself
fruitlessly to such terrible sufferings.

<span id="vi.i-p88"></span>These few words contain a very rich doctrine,
which every reader may draw from them; but we are satisfied with giving
a simple exposition of the text. “Will” is taken in the same acceptation
as before; for he makes use of the word <span id="vi.i-p88.1"></span>חפף
*(chaphetz)* by which he means a kind and generous disposition. Two
views of God’s kindness are held up for our admiration in this passage;
first, that he spared not his only­begotten Son, but delivered him for
us, that he might deliver us from death; and secondly, that he does not
suffer his death to be useless and unprofitable, but causes it to yield
very abundant, fruit; for the death of Christ would be of no avail to
us, if we did not experience its fruit and efficacy.

<span id="vi.i-p89"></span><span id="vi.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p90"></span>**11.** *From the labor of his soul he shall
see.* Isaiah continues the same subject. He declares that Christ, after
having suffered, shall obtain the fruit of his death in the salvation of
men. When he says, “He shall see,” we must supply the words, “Fruit and
Efficacy.” This is full of the sweetest consolation; for Isaiah could
not have better expressed the infinite love of Christ toward us than by
declaring that he takes the highest delight in our salvation, and that
he rests in it as the fruit of his labors, as he who has obtained his
wish rests in that which he most ardently desired; for no person can be
said to be satisfied but he who has obtained what he wished so earnestly
as to disregard everything else and be satisfied with this alone.

<span id="vi.i-p91"></span>*By his doctrine, or by the knowledge of
him.* He now points out the way and method by which we experience the
power and efficacy of the death of Christ, and obtain the benefit of it.
That method is “the knowledge of him.” I acknowledge that the word <span
id="vi.i-p91.1"></span>דעת *(dagnath)* may be taken either in an active
or a passive sense, as denoting either “the knowledge of him” or “his
knowledge.” In whichsoever of these senses it is taken, we shall easily
understand the Prophet’s meaning; and the Jews will not be able to
practice such impudent sophistry as to prevent us from extorting from
them a reluctant acknowledgment of what is here asserted, that Christ.
is the only teacher and author of righteousness.

<span id="vi.i-p92"></span>*Shall justify many.* By the word “justify”
he points out the effect of this teaching. Thus, men are not only taught
righteousness in the school of Christ, but are actually justified. And
this is the difference between the righteousness of faith and the
righteousness of the Law; for although the Law shows what it is to be
righteous, yet Paul affirms that it is impossible that righteousness
should be obtained by it, and experience proves the same thing; for the
Law is a mirror in which we behold our own unrighteousness. (<span
id="vi.i-p92.1"></span>[Rom. 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020),
[Gal. 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021), [Gal.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span id="vi.i-p92.1"></span>.)
Now, the doctrine which Christ teaches, as to obtaining righteousness,
is nothing else than “the knowledge of him;” and this is faith, when we
embrace the benefit of his death and fully rely on him.

<span id="vi.i-p93"></span>Philosophers have laid down many excellent
precepts, which, as they imagine, contain righteousness; but they never
could bestow it on any man;  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) for
who ever obtained by their rules the power of living uprightly? And it
is of no advantage to know what is true righteousness, if we are
destitute of it. To say nothing about philosophers, the Law itself,
which contains the most perfect rule of life, could not (as we have
said) bestow this; not that there was any defect in it, for Moses
testified (<span id="vi.i-p94.2"></span>[De
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span id="vi.i-p94.2"></span>)
that “he had set before them good and evil, life and death;” but that
the corruption of our nature is such that the Law could not suffice for
procuring righteousness. In like manner Paul teaches (<span
id="vi.i-p94.3"></span>[Ro 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="vi.i-p94.3"></span>) that this weakness proceeds “from our flesh,”
and not from the Law; for nature prompts us in another direction, and
our lusts burst forth with greater violence, like wild and furious
beasts, against the command of God. The consequence is, that “the law
worketh wrath,” instead of righteousness. (<span
id="vi.i-p94.4"></span>[Ro 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="vi.i-p94.4"></span>) The law therefore holds all men as convicted,
and, after having made known their sin, renders men utterly inexcusable.

<span id="vi.i-p95"></span>We must therefore seek another way of
righteousness, namely, in Christ, whom the law also pointed out as its
end. (<span id="vi.i-p95.1"></span>[Ro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="vi.i-p95.1"></span>.)
“The righteousness of the law was of this nature: He who doeth these
things shall live by them.” (<span id="vi.i-p95.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="vi.i-p95.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p95.3"></span>[Ga
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span id="vi.i-p95.3"></span>.)
But nobody has done them, and therefore another righteousness is
necessary, which Paul also proves (<span id="vi.i-p95.4"></span>[Ro
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p95.4"></span>) by
a quotation from Moses himself, “The word is nigh, in thy mouth and in
thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we preach.” (<span
id="vi.i-p95.5"></span>[De 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)<span
id="vi.i-p95.5"></span>) By this doctrine, therefore, we are justified;
not by the bare and simple doctrine, but inasmuch as it exhibits the
benefit of the death of Christ, by which atonement is made for our sins,
and we are reconciled to God. (<span id="vi.i-p95.6"></span>[Ro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p95.6"></span>.)
For, if we embrace this benefit by faith, we are reckoned righteous
before God.

<span id="vi.i-p96"></span>*For he shall bear their iniquities.* The
Prophet explains his meaning by pointing out what this doctrine
contains; for these two clauses agree well: “he shall justify by his
doctrine,” or “by the knowledge of him,” inasmuch as “he shall bear
their iniquities.” Having been once made a sacrifice for us, he now
invites us by the doctrine of the Gospel, to receive the fruit of his
death; and thus the death of Christ is the substance of the doctrine, in
order that he may justify us. To this saying of the Prophet Paul fully
subscribes; for, after having taught that “Christ was an expiatory
sacrifice for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him,” he at the same time adds, “We are ambassadors for Christ, and
beseech you, be ye reconciled to God.” (<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>[2
Cor. 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p97"></span>*My righteous servant.* He shows that Christ
justifies us, not only as he is God, but also as he is man; for in our
flesh he procured righteousness for us. He does not say, “The Son,” but
“My servant,” that we may not only view him as God, but may contemplate
his human nature, in which he performed that obedience by which we are
acquitted before God. The foundation of our salvation is this, that he
offered himself as a sacrifice; and, in like manner, he himself
declares,

<span id="vi.i-p98"></span>“For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they
also may be holy.” (<span id="vi.i-p98.1"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span id="vi.i-p98.1"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p99"></span><span id="vi.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p100"></span>**12.** *Therefore will I divide to him a
portion.* Isaiah again declares what will be the result of the death of
Christ. It was necessary that he should add this doctrine as to the
victory which Christ obtained by his death; for what was formerly
stated, that by his death we are reconciled to the Father, would not
have sufficiently confirmed our hearts. Here he borrows a comparison
from the ordinary form of a triumphal procession held by those who,
after having obtained a signal victory, are commonly received and
adorned with great pomp and splendor. Thus also Christ, as a valiant and
illustrious general, triumphed over the enemies whom he had vanquished.

<span id="vi.i-p101"></span>*And he shall divide the spoil with the
strong.* This statement is the same as the preceding, and it is a
customary repetition among Hebrew writers. Those whom he formerly called
“great” he now calls mighty or “strong.” Those who translate <span
id="vi.i-p101.1"></span>רבים *(rabbim)* by the word “many,”  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) torture, in my opinion, the Prophet’s
meaning. In these two clauses there is only this difference, that in the
former God testifies what he gave to Christ, and in the latter he adds
that Christ enjoys that benefit, he enjoys it not on his own account,
but on ours;  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) for the fruit of this
victory comes to us. For us Christ subdued death, the world, and the
devil. In a word, the Prophet here applauds the victory which followed
the death of Christ; for “although he was crucified through the weakness
of the flesh, yet by the power of the Spirit” he rose from the dead, and
triumphed over his enemies. (<span id="vi.i-p103.2"></span>[2Co
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p103.2"></span>)
Such is the import of the metaphor of “Spoil,” which the Prophet used;
for “he ascended on high, that he might lead captivity captive and give
gifts to men.” (<span id="vi.i-p103.3"></span>[Ps
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p103.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p103.4"></span>[Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p103.4"></span>)

<span id="vi.i-p104"></span>*For he poured out his soul to death.* He
now adds that Christ’s humiliation was the beginning of this supreme
dominion; as Paul also declares that Christ, “after having blotted out
the handwriting which was opposed to us, triumphed on the cross.” (<span
id="vi.i-p104.1"></span>[Col 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.i-p104.1"></span>) So far, then, is the shame of the death which
Christ died from making any diminution of his glory, that it is the
reason why God the Father exalted him to the highest honor.

<span id="vi.i-p105"></span>*And was ranked with transgressors.* He
describes also the kind of death; as Paul, when he magnifies “the
obedience” of Christ, and says that “he abased himself even to death,”
likewise adds, that it was no ordinary death, but the death “of the
cross,” that is, accursed and shameful. (<span
id="vi.i-p105.1"></span>[Php 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="vi.i-p105.1"></span>) So in this passage Isaiah, in order to express
deeper shame, says that he was ranked among malefactors. But the deeper
the shame before men, the greater was the glory of his resurrection by
which it was followed.

<span id="vi.i-p106"></span>Mark quotes this passage, when he relates
that Christ was crucified between two robbers; for at that time the
prediction was most fully accomplished. (<span
id="vi.i-p106.1"></span>[Mr 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028)<span
id="vi.i-p106.1"></span>) But the Prophet spoke in general terms, in
order to show that Christ did not die an ordinary death. For the purpose
of disgracing him the more, those two robbers were added; that Christ,
as the most wicked of all, might be placed in the midst of them. This
passage is, therefore, most appropriately quoted by Mark as relating to
that circumstance.

<span id="vi.i-p107"></span>*He bore the sin of many.* This is added by
way of correction, that, when we hear of the shame of Christ’s death, we
may not think that it was a blot on the character of Christ, and that
our minds may not, by being prejudiced in that manner, be prevented from
receiving the victory which he obtained for us, that is, the fruit of
his death. He shows, therefore, that this was done in order that he
might take our sins upon him; and his object is, that, whenever the
death of Christ shall be mentioned, we may at the same time remember the
atonement made for us. And this fruit swallows up all the shame of the
death of Christ, that his majesty and glory may be more clearly seen
than if we only beheld him sitting in heaven; for we have in him a
striking and memorable proof of the love of God, when he is so insulted,
degraded, and loaded with the utmost disgrace, in order that we, on whom
had been pronounced a sentence of everlasting destruction, may enjoy
along with him immortal glory.

<span id="vi.i-p108"></span>I have followed the ordinary interpretation,
that “he bore the sin of many,” though we might without impropriety
consider the Hebrew word <span id="vi.i-p108.1"></span>רבים *(rabbim,)*
to denote “Great and Noble.” And thus the contrast would be more
complete, that Christ, while “he was ranked among transgressors,” became
surety for every one of the most excellent of the earth, and suffered in
the room of those who hold the highest rank in the world. I leave this
to the judgment of my readers. Yet I approve of the ordinary reading,
that he alone bore the punishment of many, because on him was laid the
guilt of the whole world. It is evident from other passages, and
especially from the fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) that “many” sometimes denotes “all.”

<span id="vi.i-p110"></span>*And prayed for the transgressors.* Because
the ratification of the atonement, with which Christ has washed us by
his death, implies that he pleaded with the Father on our behalf, it was
proper that this should be added. For, as in the ancient Law the priest,
who “never entered without blood,” at the same time interceded for the
people; so what was there shadowed out is fulfilled in Christ. (<span
id="vi.i-p110.1"></span>[Ex 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010)<span
id="vi.i-p110.1"></span>; <span id="vi.i-p110.2"></span>[Heb
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p110.2"></span>)
First, he offered the sacrifice of his body, and shed his blood, that he
might endure the punishment which was due to us; and secondly, in order
that the atonement might take effect, he performed the office of an
advocate, and interceded for all who embraced this sacrifice by faith;
as is evident from that prayer which he left to us, written by the hand
of John, “I pray not for these only, but for all who shall believe on me
through their word.” (<span id="vi.i-p110.3"></span>[Joh
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p110.3"></span>)
If we then belong to their number, let us be fully persuaded that Christ
hath suffered for us, that we may now enjoy the benefit of his death.

<span id="vi.i-p111"></span>He expressly mentions “transgressors,” that
we may know that we ought to betake ourselves with assured confidence to
the cross of Christ, when we are horror­struck by the dread of sin. Yea,
for this reason he is held out as our intercessor and advocate; for
without his intercession our sins would deter us from approaching to
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc16005.htm#fr_49) <span
id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span> “While most modern writers detach the three
preceding verses and prefix them to this chapter, Hitzig goes to the
opposite extreme of saying that the writer here begins afresh, without
any visible connection with the previous context. Ewald more reasonably
makes this a direct continuation, but observes a change of tone, from
that of joyous confidence to that of penitent confession, on the part of
the believing Jews, in reference to their former incredulity.” ­
*Alexander*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc16005.htm#fr_50) <span
id="vi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p68"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p68.1"></span>Au pere
celeste.” “To the heavenly Father.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc16005.htm#fr_51) <span
id="vi.i-p71.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p72"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p72.1"></span>Je ne voy
point de raison pourquoy OEcolampade a traduit, II a expose ses hants
lieux au riche.” “I see no reason why OEcolampadius translated it, ‘He
laid open his high places to the rich man.’”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc16005.htm#fr_52) <span
id="vi.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p75"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p75.1"></span>על(*gnal*),
for <span id="vi.i-p75.2"></span>על אשר (*gnal asher*), is properly a
causative particle, equivalent to ‘for that’ or ‘because;’ but most
interpreters regard it as equivalent to ‘although,’ which is more
agreeable to our idiom in this connection. Knobel observes, with great
naivete, that the reference of this verse to the burial of Christ has
found its way into the exposition of the passage in connection with its
general application to that subject; to which we may add, that it can
only find its way out in connection with a wish to get rid of that
unwelcome application. At the same time it must be observed, that even
if <span id="vi.i-p75.3"></span>עשיר (*gnashir*) be taken in the sense
of ‘wicked,’ although we lose the striking allusion to the burial of
Christ in the sepulcher of Joseph, the verse is still applicable to his
burial, as the last clause then means, like the first, that they
appointed him his grave with malefactors.” ­ *Alexander*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc16005.htm#fr_53) <span
id="vi.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p80"></span> <span id="vi.i-p80.1"></span>אשם (*asham*)
primarily signifies a trespass or offense, and secondarily a
trespass­offering. In the law of Moses it is technically used to
designate a certain kind of sacrifice, nearly allied to the <span
id="vi.i-p80.2"></span>הטאת (*hattath*) or sin­offering, and yet very
carefully distinguished from it, although etymologists have never yet
been able to determine the precise distinction, and a learned modern
Rabbi, Samuel Luzzatto, expresses his conviction that they differed only
in the mode of offering the blood. The word is here used not with
spedfie reference to this kind of oblation, but as a generic term for
expiatory sacrifice. The use of analogous expressions in the New
Testament will be dear, from a comparison of <span
id="vi.i-p80.3"></span>[Rom. 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025),
[Rom. 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="vi.i-p80.3"></span>; <span id="vi.i-p80.4"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="vi.i-p80.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p80.5"></span>[1 John
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002), [1 John
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span id="vi.i-p80.5"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p80.6"></span>[Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p80.6"></span> In
the case last quoted, as in that before us, Christ is represented as
offering himself to God.” ­ *Alexander*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc16005.htm#fr_54) <span
id="vi.i-p80.9"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p81"></span> In both of the passages quoted by our
author, the word is not <span id="vi.i-p81.1"></span>אשם (*asham*) but
<span id="vi.i-p81.2"></span>הטאת (*hattath*), which, as appears from
the preceding note, is closely analogous. ­ *Ed*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc16005.htm#fr_55) <span
id="vi.i-p82.6"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p83"></span> This Latin word, which bore the primary
meaning of “an atonement for a transgression,” and the secondary meaning
of “any wickedness that requires expiation,” is strikingly analogous to
the Hebrew word in question, though the transference of the senses is
exactly opposite. “<span id="vi.i-p83.1"></span>Distulit in seram
commissa piacula mortem, *Virg*. id est, <span
id="vi.i-p83.2"></span>Piacula commissa propter quae expiatio debetur.”
­ *Serv*. “<span id="vi.i-p83.3"></span>Piaculum committere“ means
literally to “commit a sacrifice,” that is, “to commit a crime for which
a sacrifice is required.” ­ *Ed*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc16005.htm#fr_56) <span
id="vi.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p94"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p94.1"></span>Mais ils n’ont
jamais peu faire un seul hornroe juste.” “But they never could make one
man righteous.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc16005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="vi.i-p101.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p102"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p102.1"></span>Ceux qui
traduisent, Je luy distribueray portion avec plusieurs.” “Those who
translate, I will divide to him a portion with many.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc16005.htm#fr_58) <span
id="vi.i-p102.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p103"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p103.1"></span>Non point
pour soy, mais pour nous.” “Not for himself, but for us.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc16005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="vi.i-p108.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p109"></span> <span id="vi.i-p109.1"></span>[Rom.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p109.1"></span>. ­
*fj*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](cc16006)
