[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16014)  [Next](cc16016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 63.

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
63:1-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Who *is* this that cometh from Edom,
with dyed garments from Bozrah? this *that is* glorious in his apparel,
travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quis est iste qui venit ab Edom,
rubicundus in vestibus, a Bosra; iste decorus in vestitu suo, gradiens
in multitudine virtutis suae? Ego qui loquor in justitia (*vel,
validus*), multus ad servandum.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Wherefore *art thou* red in thine
apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quare ruber est vestitus tuns, et
indumenta tun sicut prementis in torculari?

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** I have trodden the winepress alone;
and of the people *there was* none with me: for I will tread them in
mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Torcular pressi solus; neque ex
populis quisquam fuit mecum. Calcabo enim cos in ira mea, et conculcabo
cos in furore meo; et spargetur sanguis eorum super vestes mens, et
omnia indumenta mea inquinabo.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** For the day of vengeance *is* in mine
heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quia dies ultionis in corde meo, et
annus redemptorum meorum venit.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And I looked, and *there was* none to
help; and I wondered that *there was* none to uphold: therefore mine own
arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Itaque aspexi, nec erat auxiliator;
et admiratus sum, nec erat qui fulciret; itaque salutem mihi fecit
brachium meum, et ira mea fulsit me.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And I will tread down the people in
mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their
strength to the earth.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et conculcabo populos in ira mea, et
inebriabo cos furore meo, et prosternam fortitudinem eorum in terram.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** I will mention the lovingkindnesses
of the LORD, *and* the praises of the LORD, according to all that the
LORD hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of
Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and
according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Misericordias Iehovae memoria
repetam; laudes Iehovae tanquam super omnibus quae contulit nobis
Iehova, et multitudine beneficentiae erga domum Israel, quam contulit
illis secundum misericordias suas, et secundum multitudinem miserationum
suarum.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** For he said, Surely they *are* my
people, children *that* will not lie: so he was their Saviour.

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Nam dixit, Certe populus meus sunt,
filii qui non mentiuntur; itaque factus est illis servator.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** In all their affliction he was
afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in
his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the
days of old.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** In omni angustia eorum illi fuit
(vel, Non fuit); et Angelus faciei ejus servavit eos; in dilectione sua
et clementia sua ipse redemit eos; portavit eos et extulit, omnibus
diebus seculi.

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** But they rebelled, and vexed his
Holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, *and* he fought
against them.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Verum illi rebelles fuerunt, et
irritaverunt Spiritum Sanctum ejus. Ideo conversus illis in hostem
pugnavit ipse contra eos.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Then he remembered the days of old,
Moses *and* his people, *saying,* Where *is* he that brought them up out
of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where *is* he that put his
Holy Spirit within him?

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et recordatus est dierum priscorum,
quibus Moses fuit cum populo ejus. Ubi est qui ascendere fecit eos e
mari, cure pastore gregis sui? Ubi est qui posuit in medio ejus Spiritum
suum Sanctum?

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** That led *them* by the right hand of
Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make
himself an everlasting name?

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Qui duxit ad dexteram Mosis brachio
magnificentiae suae, qui divisit aquas coram ipsis, ad comparandum sibi
nomen perpetuum?

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** That led them through the deep, as
an horse in the wilderness, *that* they should not stumble?

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Qui fecit eos ingredi per abyssos,
tanquam equum in deserto, ut non impegerint.

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span>**14.** As a beast goeth down into the
valley, the Spirit of the LORD caused him to rest: so didst thou lead
thy people, to make, thyself a glorious name.

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tanquam jumentum in planitiem
descendit, Spiritus Iehovae requiem illi praestitit; sic duxisti populum
tuum, ut faceres tibi nomen gloriosum.

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span>**15.** Look down from heaven, and behold
from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where *is* thy
zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies
toward me? are they restrained?

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Aspice e coelo; vide ex habitaculo
sanctitatis et gloriae tuae. Ubi zelus tuus, et fortitudo tua? Multitudo
viscerum tuorum et misericordiarum tuarum erga me cohibuerunt se.

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span>**16.** Doubtless thou *art* our father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O
LORD, *art* our Father, our Redeemer; thy name *is* from everlasting.

<span id="xvi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Certe tu pater noster es, etiam si
Abraham nesciat nos, et Israel nos non agnoscat; tu tamen pater noster
es, redemptor noster; a seculo nomen tuum.

<span id="xvi.i-p34"></span>**17.** O LORD, why hast thou made us to err
from thy ways, *and* hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy
servants’ sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.

<span id="xvi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Quare fecisti nos errare, Iehova, a
viis tuis? Recedere fecisti cor nostrum a timore tuo? Convertere propter
servos tuos, ad tribus haereditatis tuae.

<span id="xvi.i-p36"></span>**18.** The people of thy holiness have
possessed *it* but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy
sanctuary.

<span id="xvi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Ad exiguum tempus possederunt
populus sanctitatis tuae; adversarii nostri conculcarunt sanctuarium
tuum.

<span id="xvi.i-p38"></span>**19.** We are *thine*: thou never barest
rule over them; they were not called by thy name.

<span id="xvi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Fuimus a seculo, quibus tu non
dominatus es, super quos non est invocatum nomen tuum.

<span id="xvi.i-p40"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p41"></span><span id="xvi.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p42"></span>**1.** *Who is this that cometh from Edom?*
This chapter has been violently distorted by Christians, as if what is
said here related to Christ, whereas the Prophet speaks simply of God
himself; and they have imagined that here Christ is red, because he was
wet with his own blood which he shed on the cross. But the Prophet meant
nothing of that sort. The obvious meaning is, that the Lord comes forth
with red garments in the view of his people, that all may know that he
is their protector and avenger; for when the people were weighed down by
innumerable evils, and at the same time the Edomites and other enemies,
as if they had been placed beyond the reach of all danger, freely
indulged in wickedness, which remained unpunished, a dangerous
temptation might arise, as if these things happened by chance, or as if
God did not care for his people, or chastised them too severely. If the
Jews were punished for despising God, much more the Edomites, and other
avowed enemies of the name of God, ought to have been punished.

<span id="xvi.i-p43"></span>The Prophet meets this very serious
temptation by representing God the avenger as returning from the
slaughter of the Edomites, as if he were drenched with their blood.
There is great liveliness and energy in a description of this sort, Who
is this? for that question raises the hearts of the hearers into a state
of astonishment, and strikes them more forcibly than a plain narrative.
On this account the Prophet employed it, in order to arouse the hearts
of the Jews from their slumbering and stupefaction.

<span id="xvi.i-p44"></span>We know that the Edomites were somewhat
related to the Jews by blood; for they were descended from the same
ancestors, and derived their name from Esau, who was also called Edom.
(<span id="xvi.i-p44.1"></span>[Gen.
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)<span id="xvi.i-p44.1"></span>.)
Having corrupted the pure worship of God, though they bore the same mark
of circumcision, they persecuted the Jews with deadly hatred. They
likewise inflamed the rage of other enemies against the Jews, and shewed
that they took great pleasure in the ruin of that people, as is evident;
from the encouraging words addressed by them to its destroyers.

<span id="xvi.i-p45"></span>“Remember, O Lord, (says the Psalmist,) the
children of Edom, who, in the day of the destruction of Jerusalem, said,
Raze, raze it even to the foundations.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>[Ps 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p46"></span>The Prophet, therefore, threatens that
judgment shall be passed on the Edomites, that none may imagine that
they shall escape punishment for that savage cruelty with which they
burned towards their brethren; for God will punish all wicked men and
enemies of the Church in such a manner as to shew that the Church is the
object of his care.

<span id="xvi.i-p47"></span>*Beautiful in his raiment.* Because spots of
blood pollute and stain the conquerors, Isaiah affirms that God will
nevertheless be “beautiful in his raiment,” after having taken vengeance
on the enemies. In like manner, we have seen in other passages (<span
id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>[Isa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)<span
id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>) that the slaughter of the wicked is compared
to sacrifices, because the glory of God shines brightly in them; for can
we conceive of any ornament more lovely than judgment? Thus, in order to
impress men with reverence for God’s righteous vengeance, he pronounces
the blood with which he was sprinkled, by slaying and destroying the
wicked, to be highly beautiful and ornamental. As if he had said, “Think
not that God will resemble a person of mean rank. Though he be drenched
with blood, yet this will not prevent his glory and majesty from shining
brightly.”

<span id="xvi.i-p48"></span>*Marching in the greatness of his strength.*
Various expositions of the word <span id="xvi.i-p48.1"></span>צעה
(*tzogneh*) are given by the Jews. Some view it in a transitive sense,
as referring to the people whom the Lord brought back from captivity.
Others refer it to the nations whom the Lord will remove to another
country, though they appear to have a settled habitation. But I consider
it to he more agreeable to the context to give to it an absolute sense
as a noun. The Prophet, therefore, describes God’s majestic march and
heroic firmness, by which he displays vast power.

<span id="xvi.i-p49"></span>*I who speak.* The Lord himself replies; and
this carries much more authority than if the Prophet spoke in his own
person. Believers are reminded by him of former predictions, that they
may know that in the judgments of God not only his justice and goodness,
but likewise his faithfulness is manifested. As if he had said, “Behold,
ye now see fulfilled what I have already and frequently testified to you
by my servants. This effect of my promises clearly shews that I am true,
and that I speak justly and sincerely, and not for the purpose of
deceiving you.” The vision would have been little fitted to strike their
minds, if the Jews had not remembered those promises which they formerly
heard; but since the design of it was, that they should rely on God’s
salvation, he at the same time claims for himself no ordinary power to
save.

<span id="xvi.i-p50"></span><span id="xvi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p51"></span>**2.** *Wherefore is thy raiment red?* He
proceeds with the same subject; but, as it would have impaired the force
of the narrative, he does not immediately explain whence came the red
color of God’s garments, but continues to put questions, that he may
arouse their minds to the consideration of what is strange and uncommon.
He means that this sprinkling of blood is something remarkable and
extraordinary. The comparison drawn from a “wine-press” is highly
appropriate; for the town Bozrah, which he mentioned a little before,
lay in a vine-bearing district. As if he had said, “There will be other
vintages than those which are customary; for blood shall be shed instead
of the juice of the grapes.”

<span id="xvi.i-p52"></span><span id="xvi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p53"></span>**3.** *Alone have I pressed the
wine-press.* The Prophet now explains the vision, and the reason why the
Lord was stained with blood. It is because he will take vengeance on the
Edomites and other enemies who treated his people cruelly. It would be
absurd to say that these things relate to Christ, because he alone and
without human aid redeemed us; for it means that God will punish the
Edomites in such a manner that he will have no need of the assistance of
men, because he will be sufficiently able to destroy them. The Jews
might have objected that the Edomites are powerful, and are not harassed
by any wars, but are in a flourishing and tranquil condition. The
Prophet shews that this does not prevent the Lord from inflicting
punishment on them whenever he shall think proper. Human means were,
indeed, employed by him when he took vengeance on the Edomites, but in
such a manner that it was made evident to all that it was entirely
directed by his hand, and that no part of it could be ascribed to human
forces or counsels. They were overwhelmed by sudden and unlooked-for
destruction, of which the people ought not to have doubted that God, who
had so often warned them of it, was the author.

<span id="xvi.i-p54"></span>*And of the peoples there was none with me.*
 <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) This is added in order to
intimate that, although “peoples” will arise out of the earth in order
to destroy the nation of Edom, yet the work of God shall be separate
from them, because nothing was farther from the design of heathen
nations than to inflict punishment on the Edomites for their unjust
cruelty. For this reason the Lord wishes his judgment to be known and to
be illustriously displayed amidst the din of arms and tempestuous
commotions.

<span id="xvi.i-p56"></span>*For I will tread them.* I willingly retain
the future tense; for the Prophet speaks of events that are future and
not yet accomplished; and although the Edomites were living in
prosperity and at their ease, yet God would severely punish them on
account of their cruelty. Why the Prophet makes use of the metaphor of a
bloody wine-press, which is a shocking and melancholy sight, we have
already in part explained; but it ought likewise to be added, that the
punishments and vengeance which God inflicts on enemies are
appropriately called his vintage, as if he gathered them when he ruins
or destroys them. In like manner, such punishment is called in another
passage (<span id="xvi.i-p56.1"></span>[Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)<span id="xvi.i-p56.1"></span>) a
solemn sacrifice; that we may learn that glory ought to be ascribed to
God, not less when he executes his judgments than when he exhibits
tokens of compassion.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="xvi.i-p58"></span>*And I will stain all my raiment.* He
nevertheless describes his amazing love toward the Jews, in deigning to
sprinkle himself with the blood of enemies on their account; and that is
the reason why he makes use of the word stain.

<span id="xvi.i-p59"></span>*In my wrath.* He shews that this is of
itself sufficient for destroying the Edomites, that the Lord is angry
with them; as if he had said that there will be none to rescue them,
when the Lord shall be pleased to chastise, Hence we may infer that the
destruction of men proceeds from nothing else than the wrath of God; as,
on the other hand, on his graco alone depends our salvation. In a word,
God intended here to testify that the Edomites shall not remain
unpunished for having persecuted the Church of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p60"></span><span id="xvi.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p61"></span>**4.** *For the day of vengeance is in my
heart.* In the former clause of this verse Isaiah intimates that God
does not cease to discharge his office, though he does not instantly
execute his judgments, but, on the contrary, delays till a seasonable
time, which he knows well; and that it does not belong to us to
prescribe to him when or how he ought to do this or that, but we ought
to bow submissively to his decree, that he may administer all things
according to his pleasure. Let us not, therefore, imagine that he is
asleep, or that he is idle, when he delays.

<span id="xvi.i-p62"></span>*And the year of my redeemed is come.* In
this latter clause he shews that all these things are done for the sake
of believers. “Day” and “year” are here used by him in the same sense;
but by the word “year” is denoted the long duration of the captivity,
that the Jews may not despair or grow faint and weary, if the redemption
be long delayed. The Lord therefore punishes and destroys wicked men for
the purpose of delivering the godly and of redeeming his Church, for
which he has a special regard.

<span id="xvi.i-p63"></span>Finally, by the slaughter and destruction of
them he opens up a way for his grace. And this tends to our consolation,
that whenever we see tokens of God’s wrath toward the wicked, we may
know that the fruit of the punishment which they endure will come to us;
for in this way it is clearly seen that our groans are heard, and that
God, when he wishes to relieve the afflicted, is armed with strength to
put to flight all the enemies of his Church. Wherefore, although the
cross be heavy to us, yet by hearing patiently let us learn to lift up
our minds by hope to that “year” which God hath appointed for executing
his vengeance.

<span id="xvi.i-p64"></span><span id="xvi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p65"></span>**5.** *I looked, and there was none to
help.* Although the Jews were destitute of all assistance, and no one
aided them by word or deed, yet he shews that the arm of the Lord is
alone sufficient to punish enemies, and to set his people at liberty. He
shews, therefore, that from God alone they ought to expect salvation,
that they may not gaze around in every direction, but may have their
eyes wholly fixed on God, who has no need of the assistance of others.

<span id="xvi.i-p66"></span>*And I wondered.* He represents God as
amazed that there is none to stretch out a hand to him, when he wishes
to execute his judgments, that he may impress more deeply on the minds
of believers this doctrine, that God has no need of human aid, and that
he is sufficient of himself for procuring salvation to his people. By
this circumstance he magnifies still more the assistance which he had
determined to render to his people, partly to correct their distrust,
and partly to exhort them to gratitude in future; for God assumes a
different character, when he says that he stood like one astonished;
because this stupidity belonged literally to the Jews, who scarcely
believed what could not be done by the power of men. With every
assistance, therefore, he contrasts his own arm, with the invincible
power of which he says that he will be satisfied, both that he may be
seen to be their Savior, and that he may scatter and lay low all the
wicked.

<span id="xvi.i-p67"></span><span id="xvi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p68"></span>**6.** *And I will tread down the peoples.*
From the preceding statement he draws the conclusion, that God’s wrath
is sufficiently powerful to destroy the wicked, without calling for the
assistance of others; and he does so in order that the Jews may not be
deterred from cherishing favorable hopes by the strength that is arrayed
against them.

<span id="xvi.i-p69"></span>*And will make them drunk.* The expression,
“make drunk,” must here be taken in a different sense from what it
formerly had in some passages. We have seen that sometimes we are made
drunk, when God strikes us with fury or madness, (<span
id="xvi.i-p69.1"></span>[Isa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009)<span
id="xvi.i-p69.1"></span>,) or with a spirit of giddiness, (<span
id="xvi.i-p69.2"></span>[Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p69.2"></span>,)
or, in a word, “gives us up to a reprobate mind.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p69.3"></span>[Ro 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.i-p69.3"></span>.) But here it means nothing else than “to
fill,” and to strike even to satiety, or, as we commonly say, (<span
id="xvi.i-p69.4"></span>*tout leur saoul*,) “to their heart’s content;”
a metaphor which the prophets frequently employ.

<span id="xvi.i-p70"></span>*And will cast down their strength to the
earth*. That is, though they think that they are invincible, yet I will
cast down and destroy them. The meaning may be thus summed up. “The
Jews, when they are afflicted, must not call in question their
salvation, as if God hated them, and must not be amazed at the
chastisements which they endure, as if they happened by chance; for
other nations, by whom they are now oppressed, shall be punished, there
shall be a revolution of affairs, and they shall not escape who chant a
triumph before the time. He produces as an example the Edomites, because
they were nearer and better known than others, and were also the most
injurious.

<span id="xvi.i-p71"></span><span id="xvi.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p72"></span>**7.** *I will keep in remembrance the
compassions of Jehovah.* Isaiah brings consolation to his people in
distressed and calamitous circumstances, and by his example bids the
Jews, when they were oppressed by afflictions, call to remembrance God’s
ancient benefits, and betake themselves to prayer; that they may not be
like hypocrites, who only in prosperity feel the goodness of God, and
are so much cast down by adversity as to remember no benefit. But when
the Lord chastises us, we ought to mention and celebrate his benefits,
and to cherish better hopes for the future; for the Lord is always the
same, and does not change his purpose or his inclination; and therefore
if we leave room for his compassion, we shall never be left destitute.

<span id="xvi.i-p73"></span>Such appears to me to be the scope of the
context, though others view it in a different light, namely, that the
Prophet, having hitherto spoken of the destruction of the people,
comforts himself by this confident hope of compassion, that God wishes
to save some of them. But they are mistaken in supposing that Isaiah has
hitherto spoken of the Jews, as if God punished them only, whereas he
testified that he would likewise punish other nations, that they might
not think that they alone were hated by God; and accordingly, he now
exhorts them to celebrate the remembrance of those benefits which God
had formerly bestowed on the fathers, that by their example they may
know better the love of God toward them. From the context it will also
appear clearly, that the Jews are joined with their fathers, that the
covenant which belongs to them in common with their fathers, may
encourage them to hope well.

<span id="xvi.i-p74"></span>*As upon all that Jehovah hath bestowed on
us.* He employs the particle of comparison, As, in order to shew that in
adversity we ought instantly to remember those benefits which the Lord
bestowed on his people, as if they were placed before our eyes, though
they appear to be buried by extreme old age; for if they do not belong
to us, the remembrance of them would be idle and unprofitable.

<span id="xvi.i-p75"></span>He confirms this also by saying *on us.*
Because the Jews were members of the same body, he justly reckons them
the descendants of their grandfathers and other ancestors. Isaiah did
not, indeed, experience those benefits which he mentions; but because
they had been bestowed on the Church, the fruit of them came partly to
himself, because he was a member of the Church. And undoubtedly that
communion of saints which we profess to believe, ought to be so highly
valued by us, as to lead us to think that what the Church has received
from the hand of God has been given to us; for the Church of God is one,
and that which now is has nothing separate from that which formerly was.
 <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="xvi.i-p77"></span>*In the multitude of kindness toward the
house of Israel.* By these words Isaiah more fully explains his meaning.
Since therefore the Lord shewed himself to be kind and bountiful toward
his people, we ought to hope for the same thing in the present day,
because we are “fellow-citizens,” and members of the very same Church.
(<span id="xvi.i-p77.1"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="xvi.i-p77.1"></span>.)
Although we feel that God is angry with us on account of our sins, yet
our hearts ought to be encouraged by hope and armed by confidence;
because he cannot forsake his Church. Yet it ought to be carefully
observed, that the Prophet extols and magnifies in lofty terms the mercy
of God, that we may know that the foundation of our salvation and of all
blessings is laid on it; for this excludes the merits of men, that
nothing may in any way be ascribed to them.

<span id="xvi.i-p78"></span>That this doctrine may be better understood,
we must take into account the time of which Isaiah speaks. At that time
righteousness and godliness chiefly flourished; for although the people
were exceedingly corrupted, yet Moses, Aaron, and other good men, gave
illustrious examples of unblamable and holy lives. Yet the Prophet shews
that all the blessings which the Lord. bestowed on Moses and others
ought to be ascribed, not to their merits, but to the mercy of God. But
what are we in comparison of Moses, that we should deserve anything from
God? This repetition, therefore, of kindness, mercies, and compassions,
as it raises feeble minds on high, that they may rise above stupendous
and formidable temptations, ought also to remove and swallow up all
thought of human merits.

<span id="xvi.i-p79"></span><span id="xvi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p80"></span>**8.** *For he said, Surely they are my
people.* He mentions the election of the people, and represents God as
speaking of it, that we may keep in view the end of our calling., that
he wished to have a peculiar people, who should call upon him. And yet
he accuses the people of ingratitude, in having disappointed God of his
expectation; not that the Lord can be deceived, for he dearly foresaw
what they would become, and also declared it (<span
id="xvi.i-p80.1"></span>[De 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.i-p80.1"></span>) by Moses; but Scripture speaks in this manner,
when it is altogether owing to the ingratitude of men that they,
disappoint God, as we formerly saw,

<span id="xvi.i-p81"></span>“I looked that it should yield grapes, and
it hath yielded wild grapes.” (<span id="xvi.i-p81.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="xvi.i-p81.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p82"></span>Nor does he treat of God’s secret decree,
but speaks after the manner of men about the mutual consent between God
and believers, that all to whom he deigns to offer himself as their
Father, may answer to God when he calls; “for the foundation standeth
sure, that none of the elect shall perish, because the Lord knoweth who
are truly his. (<span id="xvi.i-p82.1"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="xvi.i-p82.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p83"></span>*Children that do not lie.* We know that the
end of our calling is, that we may lead a holy and blameless life, as
the whole of Scripture testifies, and as we have often stated at former
passages. (<span id="xvi.i-p83.1"></span>[Isa.
43:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#021), [Isa.
55:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#005)<span id="xvi.i-p83.1"></span>.)
Justly, therefore, does the Lord say that he elected the people, that
they might be holy and true, that he might have children who were averse
to falsehood and vanity. But the people did not keep their promise, and
were far removed from that simplicity which they ought to have followed;
for everything was full of deceit and hypocrisy. Yet nevertheless he
holds out the hope of pardon, provided that they fly to God and humble
themselves by sincere repentance.

<span id="xvi.i-p84"></span>*Therefore he became their Savior.* The
Prophet shews what is the chief part of the service of God; namely, to
have a pure and upright heart. Hence it follows that God forsakes us,
because we are treacherous and are covenant-breakers. Seeing therefore
that this people took pleasure in their vices, it was proper first to
convict them of their unbelief, that being afterwards converted to God,
they might find him to be their Savior.

<span id="xvi.i-p85"></span><span id="xvi.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p86"></span>**9.** *In all their affliction he was
afflicted.* He enlarges on the goodness of God toward his people, and
shews that he was kind to the fathers, so long as they permitted
themselves to be governed by him, and was so careful about them that he
himself bore their distresses and afflictions. By speaking in this
mainner, he declares the incomparable love which God bears toward his
people. In order to move us more powerfully and draw us to himself, the
Lord accommodates himself to the manner of men, by attributing to
himself all the affection, love, and (<span
id="xvi.i-p86.1"></span>συμπαθεία) compassion which a father can have.
And yet in human affairs it is impossible to conceive of any sort of
kindness or benevolence which he does not immeasurably surpass.

<span id="xvi.i-p87"></span>I acknowledge that <span
id="xvi.i-p87.1"></span> לא(*lo*) with <span id="xvi.i-p87.2"></span>א
(*aleph*) literally signifies not; and therefore I do not altogether
reject a different interpretation, that the people in their afflictions
were not afflicted, because God always applied some remedy to alleviate
their sorrows. But since <span id="xvi.i-p87.3"></span>א, (*aleph*,)in
many passages, is manifestly changed into <span
id="xvi.i-p87.4"></span>ו, (*vau*,) learned commentators justly, in my
opinion, view it as equivalent to the pronoun <span
id="xvi.i-p87.5"></span>לו, (*lo*,) to him. In this sense the Prophet
testifies that God, in order to alleviate the distresses and afflictions
of his people, himself bore their burdens; not that he can in any way
endure anguish, but, by a very customary figure of speech, he assumes
and applies to himself human passions.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="xvi.i-p89"></span>*And the angel of his face saved them.* Of
the care which he took of them he next explains the effect, by saying
that he always delivered them by the hand of his angel, whom he calls
“the angel of his face,” because he was the witness of the presence of
God, and, as it were, his herald to execute his commands; that we may
not think that angels come forth of their own accord, or move at their
own suggestion, to render assistance to us; for the Lord makes use of
their agency, and makes known to us his presence by means of them.
Angels can do nothing of themselves, and give no assistance, except so
far as the Lord commissions them

<span id="xvi.i-p90"></span>“to be ministers of our salvation.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p90.1"></span>[Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.i-p90.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p91"></span>Let us not, therefore, fix our whole
attention on them, for they lead us straight to God.

<span id="xvi.i-p92"></span>If it be thought preferable to interpret
this phrase as describing the lively image of God, because that angel,
being the leader and guardian of the people, shewed the face of God as
in a mirror, that meaning will be highly appropriate. And indeed I have
no doubt that the office of Savior is ascribed to Christ, as we know
that he was the angel of highest rank, by whose guidance, safeguard, and
protection, the Church has been preserved and upheld.

<span id="xvi.i-p93"></span>*In his love*. He shews what was the cause
of so great benefits; namely, his love and undeserved kindness, as Moses
also teaches. “How came it that God adopted thy fathers, but because he
loved them, and because his heart clave to them?” (<span
id="xvi.i-p93.1"></span>[Deut. 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037),
[Deut. 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)<span id="xvi.i-p93.1"></span>.)
Moses wishes to set aside entirely the lofty opinion which they might
entertain of themselves, because they were proud and haughty, and
claimed more for themselves than they had a right to claim; and
therefore he shews that there was no other cause for so great benefits
than the absolute and undeserved goodness of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p94"></span>*He bore them and carried them*. He next
makes use of the same metaphor which Moses employs in his song, when he
says that God

<span id="xvi.i-p95"></span>“carried his people in the same manner as an
eagle bears her young on her wings.” (<span id="xvi.i-p95.1"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p95.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p96"></span>Or perhaps some may choose to refer it to
sheep, as we have seen elsewhere, “He will lead those that are with
young.” (<span id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>[Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>.)
Yet it is more natural to view this as a comparison to a mother, who not
only carries the child in the womb, but rears it till it arrive at full
strength. The meaning may be thus summed up. “The people experienced the
grace of God, not only once, when they were redeemed, but during the
whole course of their life, so that to him alone ought to be ascribed
all the benefits which they have received.” And therefore he adds —

<span id="xvi.i-p97"></span>*All the days of the age*; that is, in an
uninterrupted succession of many years; for God is not wearied in doing
good, nor is it only to a single age that he shews his kindness; for he
has never ceased to adorn and enrich his Church with various gifts.

<span id="xvi.i-p98"></span><span id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p99"></span>**10.** *But they were rebellious.* The
Prophet now comes down to the second clause, in which he states that the
Lord ceased to shew kindness to his people, because they revolted, and
turned aside from him. The question turns on this point: “God exercised
his kindness towards our fathers for a long time; why do not we
experience the same kindness? Is he unlike himself?” By no means; but we
ourselves, by our rebellion, refuse and even drive away his goodness.
Yet the Prophet not only accuses the men of his own age, but likewise
condemns former ages. We see how, even when they had Moses for their
leader, they murmured against God and rebelled. (<span
id="xvi.i-p99.1"></span>[Ex 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.i-p99.1"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p99.2"></span>[Num.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), [Num.
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p99.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p100"></span>*Therefore he became an enemy to them.* He
shews that the effect of their rebellion was, that God, who had loved
them tenderly, yet, in consequence of their obstinacy, “became an enemy
to them.” Let them accuse themselves, therefore, for suffering the
punishment of their transgressions; for God is by nature disposed to
shew kindness, and nothing is more agreeable to him than to bestow his
favors.

<span id="xvi.i-p101"></span>*And they provoked his Holy Spirit.* We are
said to irritate “the Holy Spirit” by our wickedness; and this form of
expression, after the manner of men, is intended to produce in us
stronger abhorrence against sin, which provokes God’s wrath and hatred.
Now, since it is the same Spirit that performs the work of our
salvation, the Prophet suggests that God is alienated from us by our
sins, which break asunder the bond of union. To this belongs the
exhortation of Paul,

<span id="xvi.i-p102"></span>“Grieve not; the Spirit of God, by whom ye
have been sealed to the day of redemption.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p102.1"></span>[Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="xvi.i-p102.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p103"></span>It ought also to be observed here, that we
have no reason for blaming men, who hate and persecute us, seeing that
the Lord makes war with us, and punishes our transgressions by their
hand. We ought therefore to accuse and condemn our transgressions; for
they are the cause of all the evils which we endure.

<span id="xvi.i-p104"></span><span id="xvi.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p105"></span>**11.** *And he remembered the days of
old.* This is the design of the chastisement, that the people may be
roused from their lethargy, and may call to remembrance those things
which they had formerly forgotten; for we are so intoxicated by
prosperity that we altogether forget God. And therefore chastisements
bring back this thought, which had been defaced in us, “Where is God who
bestowed so many benefits on our fathers?” For I refer these things to
the past time; and therefore I have translated <span
id="xvi.i-p105.1"></span>עולם (*gnolam*) “of old.” and not “of the age,”
which would be unsuitable to this passage, seeing that he mentions those
times in which Moses governed the people of God. Wherefore, the true
meaning is, that the Jews, being wretchedly oppressed, thought of “the
times of old,” in which the Lord displayed his power for defending his
people. As to the opinion of some commentators, who refer it to God, as
if he contended with the wickedness of the people, because he chose
rather to bestow his favors improperly on ungrateful persons, than not
to complete what he had begun, it appears to be too harsh and unnatural;
and therefore the Prophet rather utters the groans and complaints of a
wretched people, when they have learned from chastisements how miserable
it is to lose God’s protection.

<span id="xvi.i-p106"></span>*With the shepherd of his flock*. By “the
shepherd” he means Moses, and I see no good reason for translating it in
the plural rather than the singular number.  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="xvi.i-p108"></span>*That put his Holy Spirit in the midst of
him.* He describes also the manner; namely, that he endowed him with a
remarkable grace of the Holy Spirit; for “to put the Spirit in the midst
of him” means nothing else than to display the power of his Spirit.
Others prefer to view it as referring to the people; and I do not object
to that opinion. But when the Lord chose Moses, and appointed him to be
the leader of the whole people, in him especially the Lord is said to
have “put his Spirit.” Now, he gave his Spirit to him for the benefit of
the whole people, that he might be a distinguished minister of his
grace, and might restore them to liberty. At the same time, the power of
the Spirit of God was seen in the midst of the whole people.

<span id="xvi.i-p109"></span><span id="xvi.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p110"></span>**12.** *Who led them.* Here he goes on to
describe the miraculous deliverance of the people, who were led out of
Egypt under the guidance of Moses; and he goes on to relate the
complaints which might occur to the minds of the afflicted Jews. Here we
see two things connected; namely, the right hand of Moses and the arm of
God’s majesty. The Lord employs the labors and ministry of men in such a
manner that his praise and glory must not be in any degree diminished or
obscured; for, while these things are transacted under Moses as the
leader, everything is ascribed to God. Just as, when the ministers of
the Gospel are said to “forgive sins,” (<span
id="xvi.i-p110.1"></span>[Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span id="xvi.i-p110.1"></span>,)
which nevertheless belongs to God alone, does this detract from his
authority and majesty? Not at all; for they are only his instruments,
and lend their labor to God, to whom the undivided praise ought to be
rendered. And indeed, what could the hand of a single man have
accomplished, if it had not been wielded by the arm of God?

<span id="xvi.i-p111"></span>Accordingly, he expressly adds the design,
that God performed miracles at that time, in order that he might gain
for himself an everlasting name; and if we are not at liberty to deprive
him of this, it will not be lawful to transfer to man even the smallest
portion of praise.

<span id="xvi.i-p112"></span><span id="xvi.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p113"></span>**13.** *Who made them walk through the
depths.* These things are added for the purpose of setting that benefit
in a stronger light. He likewise brings forward comparisons, in order to
describe that extraordinary power of God: “As a horse in the desert, As
a beast into a plain;” that is, he led out his people as gently as if
one were leading a horse into a plain. By the word “desert” is not meant
the wilderness of Paran in which the people dwelt forty years; but, in
accordance with the ordinary usage of the Hebrew tongue, it denotes
pasture, in which herds and flocks wander at large. This is still more
evident from the following verse, —

<span id="xvi.i-p114"></span><span id="xvi.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p115"></span>**14.** *As a beast into a plain.* Here,
instead of “desert,” he makes use of the word “plain;” and the same
meaning is drawn from what he says, that “the people walked through the
depths without stumbling, as horses are wont to do in the desert.” In a
word, he informs them that the Red Sea was no obstacle to the people
marching through the midst of the depths, as if they were walking on
level ground.  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)

<span id="xvi.i-p117"></span>*A glorious name.* This is in the same
sense that he called it a little before “an everlasting name.” The
people now argue with God, that if he once wished to obtain “a glorious
name,” he must not now throw away all care about it; otherwise the
remembrance of the benefits which he formerly bestowed on the fathers
will be entirely blotted out.

<span id="xvi.i-p118"></span><span id="xvi.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p119"></span>**15.** *Look down from heaven.* After
having, in the name of the whole people, related the benefits of former
times, he now applies this to the present subject, and entreats the Lord
to pay regard to his people.

<span id="xvi.i-p120"></span>*Behold from the habitation of thy
holiness.* By these words he means that the power of God is not
diminished, though this does not always appear; for we must supply a
contrast, that God at that time might be said to be concealed, and did
not shew himself to them as he had shewn himself to the fathers.
“Although, therefore, we do not see thee, O Lord, and although thou hast
withdrawn from us as if thou wert shut up in heaven, so that thou mayest
seem to have altogether ceased to care about us, yet ‘look down from
heaven, and from thy habitation’ behold our distresses.” Believers must
differ from unbelievers in acknowledging a powerful and kind God, even
when they perceive no tokens of his power or kindness; and thus, even
when he is at a great distance, they nevertheless call on him; for God
never ceases to care about his people, (<span
id="xvi.i-p120.1"></span>[1Pe 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p120.1"></span>,) since he governs unceasingly every part of
the world.

<span id="xvi.i-p121"></span>*Where is thy zeal?* By these questions
believers appear in some measure to reproach God, as if he were not now
moved by any affection toward them, or as if his power were diminished;
but the Prophet’s meaning is different; for in thus extolling those
benefits, his object is, as I have already remarked, to confirm the hope
of believers for the future, that they may know that God is always like
himself, and will never lay aside his care about his people. This will
appear more clearly from what follows.

<span id="xvi.i-p122"></span>*The multitude of bowels and of
compassions* denotes God’s vast goodness; for God displays and opens up
his bowels, so to speak, when he exercises toward us bounty and
kindness, which truly is so great that we cannot praise it in adequate
language. Nor is it a new thing that believers, when oppressed by grief,
expostulated familiarly with God for shutting up his bowels. They do
indeed hold by this principle, that God is always compassionate, because
he does not change his nature; and though they impute it to their sins
that they do not experience him to be compassionate, yet, that they may
not sink into despair, they ask how it is possible that God should treat
them with severity, and, as if he had forgotten his natural disposition,
should shew nothing but tokens of absolute displeasure?  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178)

<span id="xvi.i-p124"></span><span id="xvi.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p125"></span>**16.** *Surely thou art our Father.* God
permits us to reveal our hearts familiarly before him; for prayer is
nothing else than the opening up of our heart before God; as the
greatest alleviation is, to pour our cares, distresses, and anxieties
into his bosom. “Roll thy cares on the Lord,” says David. (<span
id="xvi.i-p125.1"></span>[Ps 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.i-p125.1"></span>.) After having enumerated God’s benefits, from
which his goodness and power are clearly seen, so that it is evident
that it is nothing else than the sins of men that hinder them from
feeling it as formerly, he returns to this consideration, that the
goodness of God is nevertheless so great as to exceed the wickedness of
men. He calls God a Father in the name of the Church; for all cannot
call him thus, but it is the peculiar privilege of the Church to address
him by a father’s name. Hence it ought to be inferred that Christ, as
the first-born, or rather the only-begotten Son of God, always governed
his Church; for in no other way than through him can God be called
Father. And here we again see that believers do not contend with God,
but draw an argument from his nature, that, by conquering temptation,
they may strive to cherish good hope.

<span id="xvi.i-p126"></span>*Though Abraham do not know us.* Here a
question arises, Why does he say that the patriarch does not know the
people? Jerome thinks that this is done because they were degenerated,
and therefore were unworthy of so high an honor; but that interpretation
appears to me to be exceedingly unnatural. The true meaning is, “Though
our fathers deny us, yet God will reckon us as children, and will act
toward us as a Father.”

<span id="xvi.i-p127"></span>They who say that Abraham and other
believers care no more about the affairs of men, torture by excessive
ingenuity the words of the Prophet. I do not speak of the fact itself,
but I say that those words do not prove that the saints have no care
about us. The natural and true meaning is, “O Lord, that thou art our
Father will be so sure and so firmly established, that even though all
parentage and all relationship should cease among men, yet thou wilt not
fail to be our Father. Sooner shall the rights of nature perish than
thou shalt not act toward us as a Father, or the sacred adoption shall
be infringed, which was founded on thy unchangeable decree, and ratified
by the death of thine only-begotten Son.”  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)

<span id="xvi.i-p129"></span>Yet we may infer from this that holy men
present themselves before God, and pray to him, in such a manner as not
to look at any intercessions of others; for they are commanded to pray
so as to rely on God’s fatherly kindness, and to lay aside every other
confidence. And if the Prophet did not instruct the Jews, in order that
God might listen to them, to turn their mind to Abraham and Jacob, to
whom promises so numerous and so great had been given, assuredly much
less ought we to resort, to Peter, and Paul, and others; for this is not
a private prayer offered by a single individual or by a few persons, but
the public and universal prayer of the whole Church, as if the Prophet
laid down a general form. Besides, our confidence ought to be founded on
God’s favor and kindness as a Father, so as to shut our eyes on all the
intercessions of men, whether living or dead. In a word, believers
profess that they do not gaze around in all directions, but rely on God
alone.

<span id="xvi.i-p130"></span>It comes now to a question, Why did he pass
by Isaac and mention in a special manner Abraham and Jacob? The reason
is, that with those two persons the covenant was more solemnly ratified.
Isaac was, indeed, a partaker of the covenant, but did not receive
promises so large and so numerous.

<span id="xvi.i-p131"></span>*Our Redeemer.* Redemption is here
described as a testimony of that adoption; for by this proof God
manifested himself to be the Father of the people; and therefore boldly
and confidently do believers call on God as their Father, because he
gave a remarkable testimony of his fatherly kindness toward them, which
encouraged them to confidence. But redemption alone would, not have been
enough, if a promise had not likewise been added; and therefore, as he
once redeemed them, he promised that he would always be their Father.

<span id="xvi.i-p132"></span>*From everlasting is thy name.* By the word
“everlasting”  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) is pointed out
the stability and continuance of his fatherly name, for we did not
deserve the name of children; but his will, by which he once adopted us
to be children, is unchangeable. Since, therefore, the Lord has an
eternal name, it follows that the title and favor which are connected
with that eternity and flow from it, shall be durable and eternal.
 <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)

<span id="xvi.i-p135"></span><span id="xvi.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p136"></span>**17.** *Why didst thou cause as to wander,
O Jehovah, from thy ways?* Because these modes of expression appear to
be rough and harsh, some think that unbelievers are here introduced as
murmuring against God and uttering blasphemies, with the rage and
obstinacy of men who are in a state of despair. But the connection in
which these words occur does not at all admit of that interpretation;
for the Prophet points out the fruit that would result from the
calamities and afflictions of the Jews, because, having been subdued and
tamed, they no longer are fierce or indulge in their vices. They are
therefore ashamed that in time past they departed so far from the right
way, and they acknowledge their own fault.

<span id="xvi.i-p137"></span>And indeed when they trace their sins to
the wrath of God, they do not intend to free themselves from blame, or
to set aside their guilt. But the Prophet employs a mode of expression
which is of frequent occurrence; for in the Scriptures it is frequently
said that God drives men into error, (<span
id="xvi.i-p137.1"></span>[2Th
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)<span id="xvi.i-p137.1"></span>;)
“gives them up to a reprobate mind,” (<span id="xvi.i-p137.2"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="xvi.i-p137.2"></span>;)
and “hardens them.” (<span id="xvi.i-p137.3"></span>[Ro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p137.3"></span>.)
When believers speak in this manner, they do not intend to make God the
author of error or of sin, as if they were innocent, or to free
themselves from blame; but they look higher, and rather acknowledge that
it is by their own fault that they are estranged from God and deprived
of his Spirit, and that this is the reason why they are plunged into
every kind of evils.

<span id="xvi.i-p138"></span>Those who say that God leads us into error
by privation, that is, by depriving us of his Spirit, do not perceive
the actual design; for God himself is said to harden and to blind, when
he gives up men to be blinded by Satan, who is the minister and
executioner of his wrath. Without this we would be exposed to the rage
of Satan; but, since he can do nothing without the command of God, to
whose dominion he is subject, there will be no impropriety in saying
that God is the author of blinding and hardening, as Scripture also
affirms in many passages. (<span id="xvi.i-p138.1"></span>[Ro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p138.1"></span>.)
And yet it cannot be said or declared that God is the author of sin,
because he punishes the ingratitude of men by blinding them in this
manner.

<span id="xvi.i-p139"></span>Thus believers here acknowledge that God
has forsaken them, but that it is by their own fault;  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) and they acknowledge God’s righteous
vengeance against them. In like manner, when Moses says that “God hath
not hitherto given to the people eyes to see and a heart to understand,”
(<span id="xvi.i-p140.2"></span>[De
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="xvi.i-p140.2"></span>,)
he does not lay the blame on God, but reminds the Jews whence they
should seek to obtain a remedy for that stupidity of which they had been
convicted. Yet it may appear as if here they aimed at something else, by
inquiring into the cause and remonstrating with God, that he ought to
have acted differently towards them and treated them less harshly. But I
reply, that believers always look at the goodness of God, even when they
acknowledge that they suffer justly on account of their sins.

<span id="xvi.i-p141"></span>Some refer these words to the captivity; as
if believers complained that God permitted them to languish so long in
captivity. As if he had said, “The chief cause of their obstinacy is,
that the Lord does not permit them to partake of his grace.” Believers
are troubled by a dangerous temptation, when they see wicked men
pursuing their career without being punished, and are almost driven by
it to despair; as it is beautifiully expressed by David. (<span
id="xvi.i-p141.1"></span>[Ps
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p141.1"></span>.)
But I think that the Prophet’s meaning is more general; for believers
acknowledge that they “wandered,” because they were not governed by the
Spirit of God; and they do not; expostulate with God, but desire to have
that Spirit, by whom their fathers were guided, and from whom they
obtained all prosperity.

<span id="xvi.i-p142"></span>*And hast caused our heart to depart from
thy fear.* <span id="xvi.i-p142.1"></span>תקשיח, (*takshiach*,) is
rendered by some, hast hardened; but as that would not agree with the
words, “in thy fear,” I have preferred to translate it, “Hast caused to
depart;” for <span id="xvi.i-p142.2"></span>קשח, (*kashach*,) also
signifies “to remove and place at a distance.”

<span id="xvi.i-p143"></span>*Return on account of thy servants.* Some
think that these words relate to the whole people, as Scripture
frequently gives the appellation of “servants of God” to all the
citizens of the Church. But I think that they relate literally to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that is much more probable; not that the
people relied on their intercession, but because the Lord had made a
covenant with them, which they should transmit from hand to hand to
their posterity. Thus they do not hold out these patriarchs as men, but
as ministers and depositaries or messengers of the covenant which was
the foundation of their confidence. In the same manner, in that psalm,

<span id="xvi.i-p144"></span>“Lord, remember David,” (<span
id="xvi.i-p144.1"></span>[Ps
132:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p144.1"></span>,)

<span id="xvi.i-p145"></span>the name of the dead patriarch is mentioned
to God, not because the saints thought that he would be their
intercessor, but that the promise given to a single individual, as to
establishing the kingdom in his family for ever, belongs to the body of
the people.

<span id="xvi.i-p146"></span>The Papists eagerly seize on these words,
as if they were a proof of the intercessions of the saints. But how easy
it is to reply may be easily seen from the true interpretation; for the
fathers are mentioned, not because they had a right to obtain anything
for them, or because they now intercede, but because with them was
formed a gracious covenant, which belongs not only to themselves, but to
all their posterity.

<span id="xvi.i-p147"></span>*To the tribes of thine inheritance.* I
have added the preposition *To*, which was understood, in order that the
meaning might be more easy and obvious. It is a customary form of
expression among the Hebrews, “Return the tribes,” instead of “Return to
the tribes;” as if he had said, “Return to a state of friendship with
thy people.” Hence it is evident that what was formerly said had no
other object than that the people urged God to the exercise of mercy by
representing to God their distresses and calamities. And in this manner
we must come to God; that is, by recounting former benefits and laying
before him our afflictions, if we desire to be delivered from them.

<span id="xvi.i-p148"></span>He employs the word *Inheritance,* because
God hath chosen that people to be his heritage; as if he had said,
“Where shall thy people be, if we perish?” Not that the Lord was bound
to that people, but that he had given his promise to them.  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) Accordingly, the people venture to
remind God of his promise and to offer earnest prayer, because he had
laid himself under a voluntary obligation both to the fathers and to
posterity. Now, since all the promises are ratified and confirmed in
Christ, (<span id="xvi.i-p149.2"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xvi.i-p149.2"></span>,)
and since we possess the reality of all things, we ought to be fortified
by stronger confidence; for not only was the covenant made in his hand,
but it was ratified and sealed by his blood. To the ancient fathers also
he was indeed the Mediator, but we have everything clearer and plainer;
because they were still kept amidst the darker shadows.

<span id="xvi.i-p150"></span><span id="xvi.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p151"></span>**18.** *For a little time.* It is
wonderful that the people should call it “a little time;” for fourteen
hundred years had elapsed since the people began to possess that land.
But we must take into account the promise by which he said that the seed
of Abraham should have it as an everlasting inheritance; and therefore
that was a short time, when compared with eternity. (<span
id="xvi.i-p151.1"></span>[Gen. 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008),
[Gen. 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.i-p151.1"></span>.) Believers, therefore, represent to God the
shortness of that time; not that they accuse him of insincerity, but
that he may remember the promise and covenant, and may have more regard
to his own goodness than to the chastisements which they justly
deserved. Thus the ancient Church complains that

<span id="xvi.i-p152"></span>“her strength was weakened in the journey,
that her days were shortened, and prays that she may not be cut off in
the middle of her course,” (<span id="xvi.i-p152.1"></span>[Ps.
102:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024)<span id="xvi.i-p152.1"></span>,)

<span id="xvi.i-p153"></span>that is, because the fullness of age
depended on the coming of Christ.

<span id="xvi.i-p154"></span>*Our adversaries have trodden down thy
sanctuary.* This was a much heavier complaint, that wicked men had
profaned the land which the Lord had consecrated to himself. Undoubtedly
this was far more distressing to the people than the rest of their
calamities, and justly; for we ought not to care so much about ourselves
as about religion and the worship of God. And this is also the end of
redemption, that there may be a people that praises the name of the Lord
and worships him in a right manner.

<span id="xvi.i-p155"></span><span id="xvi.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p156"></span>**19.** *We have been of old.* The words of
the Prophet admit of two meanings. Some view this passage in such a
light as if the people argued with God on this ground, that they were
elected at that time when the rest of the nations were rejected, and
that this covenant was ratified “from of old,” that is, for a long
period. Another meaning, which I prefer, is this, that the people argue
with God, and complain that they seem as if they did not differ at all
from unbelievers; that is, because they receive from him no assistance
or relief in adversity, which is unreasonable and improper. This
statement is remarkable and worthy of notice; for, whenever we are
oppressed beyond measure with adversity, we are permitted to complain to
God, and to represent to him our calling, that he may render assistance,
and shew how wide a difference there is between us and strangers.

<span id="xvi.i-p157"></span>*On whom thy name hath not been called.*
This is of the same import with what goes before; for it means that the
calling of God must not be made void. And indeed the Lord does not wish
that we should call upon him in vain; for prayers would be unprofitable
and useless, if the Lord took no care of us. Now, the Church is
distinguished by this mark, that “his name is called upon her.”
Unbelievers cannot call upon him; for there is no access to him but
through the word, of which they have no knowledge; and therefore,
wherever there is faith, there is also calling on him; and if there be
no faith, it is certain that there is no hope or confidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc16015.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xvi.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p55"></span> “Yet he punished the Moabites by means of
the Assyrians. How, then, was there none with him? I reply, — 1. God
distinguishes his work from the work of instruments. He says that he had
quite a different end in view from what the instruments had, and
therefore that he alone righteously executed this chastisement. 2. He
means that this chastisement was of such a nature, so sudden and
distressing, that all might see that it did not proceed merely from
human counsels and secondary causes, but chiefly from God himself; and
consequently that he is the first cause, and the Assyrians are the
instrumental cause of the chastisement.” — *Pareus.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc16015.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xvi.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p57"></span> “The treading of the wine-press alone is an
expression often applied in sermons, and in religious books and
conversation, to our Savior’s sufferings. This application is described
as customary in his own time by Vitringa, who considers it as having led
to the forced exposition of the whole passage by the fathers and
Cocceius as a description of Christ’s passion. While the impossibility
of such a sense in the original passage cannot be too strongly stated,
there is no need of denying that the figure may be happily accommodated
in the way suggested; as many expressions of the Old Testament may be
applied to different objects with good effect, provided we are careful
to avoid confounding such accommodations with the strict and primary
import of the passage.” — *Alexander.  
*It may be proper to add that “the exposition of the whole passage” is
still the subject of much controversy, and that a full and candid
discussion of it by some person of competent learning and ability would
do incalculable good. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc16015.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xvi.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p76"></span> “Here the Prophet, in the person of a
captive Jew, makes a grateful acknowledgment of the manifold mercies
bestowed on their nation from the time that he first took them into
favor, the thoughts of which served to keep up their spirits, and made
them hope that some time or other he would be mindful of them, and
redeem them, as he did their forefathers.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc16015.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xvi.i-p87.6"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p88"></span> “In all their distress there was distress
to him, or, as the English Version renders it, ‘In all their affliction
he was afflicted.’ This explanation, with the text on which it is
founded, and which is exhibited by a number of manuscripts and editions,
is approved by Luther, Vitringa, Clericus, Hitzig, Ewald, Umbreit,
Hendewerk, and Knobel. It is favored, not only by the strong and
affecting sense which it yields but by the analogy of <span
id="xvi.i-p88.1"></span>[Judg. 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016),
[Judg. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.i-p88.1"></span>, in one of which places the same phrase is used
to denote human suffering, and in the other God is represented as
sympathizing with it. The objections to it are, that it gratuitously
renders necessary another anthropopathic explanation; that the natural
collocation of the words, if this were the meaning, would be <span
id="xvi.i-p88.2"></span>צר לו, *(tzar lo*) as in <span
id="xvi.i-p88.3"></span>[2Sa 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#026)<span
id="xvi.i-p88.3"></span>; that the negative is expressed by all the
ancient versions; and that the critical presumption: is in favor of the
Kethib, or textual reading, as the more ancient, which the Massorites
merely corrected in the margin, without venturing to change it, and
which ought not to be now abandoned, if a coherent sense can be put on
it, as it can in this case.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc16015.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xvi.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p107"></span> Our author refers to a different reading,
<span id="xvi.i-p107.1"></span>רעי, (*rogne*,) the construct plural,
instead of <span id="xvi.i-p107.2"></span>רעה, *(rogneh,)* the construct
singular of <span id="xvi.i-p107.3"></span>רעה, *(rogneh.)* — *Ed.  
*“Nearly sixty manuscripts and forty editions read, <span
id="xvi.i-p107.5"></span>רעי *(rogne)* in the plural, which may then be
understood as including Aaron, (<span id="xvi.i-p107.6"></span>[Ps
77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)<span id="xvi.i-p107.6"></span>,)
and, as Vitringa thinks, Miriam, (<span id="xvi.i-p107.7"></span>[Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004)<span id="xvi.i-p107.7"></span>,)
or perhaps the seventy elders, who are probably referred to in the last
clause as under a special divine influence. (See <span
id="xvi.i-p107.8"></span>[Nu
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017)<span id="xvi.i-p107.8"></span>.
Compare <span id="xvi.i-p107.9"></span>[Exod.
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003), [Exod.
35:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#031)<span id="xvi.i-p107.9"></span>”
— *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc16015.htm#fr_177) <span
id="xvi.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p116"></span> “In these three verses the Prophet sets
forth the care he had of his people, leading them as it were by his
hand, that they might not fall and hurt themselves, dividing the Red Sea
before them, and conducting them as safely through the dangerous
passage, as a horse which treads on plain even ground is in no danger of
falling, or as a beast heavy laden goes down a steep precipice warily,
with a great deal of caution every step it takes; so the Lord led his
people gently through the wilderness, and caused them at last to rest in
the pleasant valleys of Canaan.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc16015.htm#fr_178) <span
id="xvi.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p123"></span> Luther’s version runs thus, <span
id="xvi.i-p123.1"></span>Deine grofe herliche Barmherzigfeit halt eich
hart gegen mich. “Thy great compassionate loving-kindness deals hardly
with me.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc16015.htm#fr_179) <span
id="xvi.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p128"></span> “The meaning cannot be that Abraham and
Israel are ashamed of us as unworthy and degenerate descendants, as
Piscator understands it; or that Abraham and Israel cannot save us by
their merits, as Cocceius understands it; or that Abraham and Israel did
not deliver us from Egypt, as the Targum understands it; or that Abraham
and Israel, being now dead, can do nothing for us, as Vitringa and the
later writers understand it. The true sense of the verse, as it appears
to me, is that the Church or chosen people, although once, for temporary
reasons, co-extensive and coincident with a single race, is not
essentially a national organization but a spiritual body. Its father is
not Abraham or Israel, but Jehovah, who is and always has been its
Redeemer, who has borne that name from everlasting.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc16015.htm#fr_180) <span
id="xvi.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p133"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p133.1"></span>De tout
temps.” “Of all time.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc16015.htm#fr_181) <span
id="xvi.i-p133.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p134"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p134.1"></span>Dureront a
jamais.” “Shall endure for ever.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc16015.htm#fr_182) <span
id="xvi.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p140"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p140.1"></span>Mais leur
peche en est cause.” “But their sin is the cause of it.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc16015.htm#fr_183) <span
id="xvi.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p149"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p149.1"></span>Mais
d’autant qu’il leur avoit jure fidelite.” “But because he had sworn to
be faithful to them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 64](cc16016)
