[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16018)  [Next](cc16020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xx-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xx-p3"></span>THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH.

<span id="xx-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 49—66

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 49

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1** Hear me, O islands! And hearken, ye
peoples from afar. Jehovah hath called me from the womb; From my mothers
belly he hath had my name in remembrance.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2** And he hath placed nay mouth like a
sharp sword; In the shadow of his hand he hath protected me, And hath
placed me as a polished arrow; in his quiver hath he hid me;

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**3** And said to me, Thou art my servant, O
Israel! In thee will I he glorified.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**4** But I said, In vain have I toiled;
Uselessly And unprofitably have I exhausted my strength; and my judgment
is before Jehovah; And my work before my God.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**5** And now saith Jehovah, Who formed me
from the womb to be his servant, That I may bring back Jacob to him: And
though Israel be not gathered, Yet I shall be glorious in the eyes of
Jehovah, And my God shall be my strength.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**6** And he saith, It is a light thing that
thou shouldst be my servant, To raise up the tribes of Jacob, And that
thou shouldst restore the desolations of Israel; Therefore have I
appointed thee to be a light of the Gentiles, That thou mayest be my
salvation to the end of the earth.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**7** Thus saith Jehovah, The Redeemer of
Israel, His Holy One, To the contemptible in the soul, To the abhorred
nation, To the servant of rulers; Kings shall see, And princes shall
arise, And shall worship for the sake of Jehovah; For faithful is the
Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**8** Thus saith Jehovah, In a time of
good-pleasure have I listened to thee; In the day of salvation have I
assisted thee; And I will preserve thee. And give thee for a covenant of
the people, That thou mayest raise up the earth, That thou mayest
possess by inheritance the desolate heritages;

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**9** That thou mayest say to them that are
bound, Go forth! To them that are in darkness, Show yourselves. On the
ways they shall feed; On all the high places shall be their pastures.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**10** They shall not hunger nor thirst; The
heat And the sun shall not smite them; For he that hath compassion on
them shall guide them; And by the fountains of waters shall he lead
them.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**11** And I will place all my mountains for
a way; And my paths shall be elevated.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**12** Behold! those from afar shall come;
And, behold! those from the North, And from the sea; And those from the
land of Sinis.  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**13** Praise ye, O heavens! And rejoice,
thou earth; And break forth into praise, ye mountains; For Jehovah hath
comforted his people, And will have compassion on his poor.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**14** Yet Zion hath said, Jehovah hath
forsaken me, And my Lord hath forgotten me.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**15** Shall a woman forget her infant, So as
not to have compassion oil the soil of her womb? Even though they have
forgotten, Yet will not I forget thee.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**16** Behold! on the palms of my hands have
I engraven thee; Thy walls are continually before me.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**17** Thy builders hasten; Thy destroyers
And demolishers shall depart far from thee.

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**18** Lift up thine eyes round about, And
see. All are assembled, And have come to thee. I live, saith Jehovah,
That thou shalt be clothed with them all, as with an ornament, And shalt
be bound with them round about as a bride.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**19** For thy desolations, And thy wastes,
And thy ruined land, Shall now be too narrow for the multitude of its
inhabitants; And thy destroyers shall depart far away.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**20** The children of thy bereavement shall
yet say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me; Make room for me.
that I may dwell.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**21** And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who
hath begotten me those? For I am bereaved  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) And solitary, A wanderer And an exile;
Who then hath brought up those? Behold! I was left alone; Whence are
they?

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**22** Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold! I
will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, And will erect my banner to the
people; And they shall bring thy sons in their bosom, And thy daughters
shall be carried on their shoulders.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>**23** And kings shall be thy
nursing-fathers, And their queens thy nurses; With their faces on the
ground they shall worship thee, And shall lick the dust of thy feet; And
thou shalt know that I am Jehovah, For they who wait for me shall not be
ashamed.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**24** Shall the prey be taken from the
mighty? And shall the captivity of the righteous  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) be delivered?

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>**25** Yet thus saith Jehovah; Even the
captivity of the mighty shall be taken away, And the prey of the tyrant
shall be delivered; For I will contend with him who contendeth with
thee, And I will save thy children.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>**26** And I will feed thy spoilers with
their own flesh, And they shall be made drunk with their own blood as
with new wine; And all flesh shall know that I am Jehovah, Thy Savior
And thy Redeemer, The Mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 50

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah: Where is that bill
of your mothers divorcement Whom I have dismissed? Or who is the
creditor To whom I sold you? Behold! for your iniquities ye have been
sold, And to your transgressions was Your mother dismissed.

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**2** Why came I, And no mall (met me)?
Called I, And no man answered? By shortening hath my hand been
shortened, So that it cannot redeem? Is there not in me power to
deliver? Behold! by my rebuke I dry up the sea; I put rivers in the
wilderness, So that their fishes purify for want of water, And die for
thirst.

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**3** I clothe the heavens with blackness,
And make their covering like sackcloth.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**4** The Lord Jehovah hath given me the
tongue of the learned, That I may know a word in season to the weary. In
the morning will he awaken, In the morning will he awaken mine ear, That
I may hear as the learned.

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**5** The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear,
And I was not rebellious: I did not turn back.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**6** I exposed my body to the smiters, And
my cheeks to them that tore me; My face I did not hide from shame And
spitting.

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**7** For the Lord Jehovah will assist me;
Therefore I was not ashamed; Therefore have I set my time as a flint;
And I know that I shall not be confounded.

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**8** He is near that justifieth me: Who
will contend with me? Let us stand up together: Who is the opponent of
my cause? Let him draw near to me.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**9** Behold! the Lord Jehovah will assist
me; Who is he that shall condemn me? Behold! all shall wax old as a
garment; The moth shall consume them.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>**10** Who is there among you that feareth
Jehovah? Let him hear the voice of his servant. He who hath walked in
darkness, And hath had no light; Let him trust in the name of Jehovah,
And rely on his God.

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>**11** Behold! ye all kindle a fire, And are
surrounded with sparks. Walk ye in the light of your fire, And in the
sparks which ye have kindled. From my hand hath this been to you; Ill
sorrow shall ye lie down.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 51

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span>**1** Hearken to me, ye that follow
righteousness, Ye that seek Jehovah; Look ye to the rock of your hewing,
And to the hole of the pit whence ye were digged.

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span>**2** Look ye to Abraham your father; And to
Sarah, who bore you; For I called him alone, And blessed And multiplied
him.

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**3** Surely Jehovah will comfort Zion; He
will comfort all her desolations; And he will make her desert like a
place of delights, And her wilderness like the garden of Jehovah:
Gladness And joy shall be found in her; Confession And the voice of a
song.

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**4** Attend to me, my people; And listen to
me, my nation; For the law shall go forth from me; And I will reveal my
judgment for a light of the peoples.

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**5** My righteousness is near; My salvation
hath gone forth; And my arms shall judge the peoples: For me shall the
islands wait, And in my arm shall they hope.

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>**6** Lift up your eyes toward heaven, And
look upon the earth beneath; For the heavens shall vanish away like
smoke, And the earth shall wax old like a garment, And its inhabitants
shall perish in the same manner; But my salvation shall endure for ever.
And my righteousness shall not perish.

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**7** Hearken to me, ye that know
righteousness; A people in whose heart is my law. Fear ye not the
reproach of men, And be not discouraged by their slander.

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>**8** For the moth shall consume them like
a garment; The worm shall consume them like wool; But my righteousness
shall continually endure, And my salvation for ever And ever.

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**9** Awake, O arm of Jehovah! Awake, be
clothed with strength! Awake as in ancient days, As in generations long
ago past. Art thou not that arm which crushed the proud one, Which slew
the dragon?

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>**10** Art thou not that arm which dried up
the sea, The water of the vast gulf; Which turned the depth of the sea
into a path, For the passage of the redeemed?

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span>**11** Therefore the redeemed by Jehovah
shall return; They shall come to Zion with a song; And everlasting joy
shall be upon their head; They shall obtain gladness And joy, And sorrow
And groaning shall flee away.

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>**12** I, I am he that comforteth you. Who
art thou that thou shouldst be afraid of man that shall die, Of the son
of man, that shall be accounted grass?

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span>**13** And hast forgotten Jehovah thy
Maker, Who stretched out the heavens, And founded the earth; And hast
dreaded continually every day The rage of the destroyer, When he
prepareth to lay waste? And where is the rage of the destroyer?

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>**14** The exile hasteneth to be loosed,
That he may not die in a pit, And that his bread may not fail.

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span>**15** And I am Jehovah thy God, Who divide
the sea, And its waves shall roar; Jehovah of hosts is his name.

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span>**16** And I have put my words in thy
mouth; And in the shadow of my hand have I protected thee; That I may
plant the heavens And found the earth; That I may say to Zion, Thou art
my people.

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span>**17** Awake, awake, O Jerusalem! Arise,
thou who hast drunk from the hand of Jehovah the cup of his fury;
Pressing out, thou hast drunk the dregs of the cup of distress.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235)

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span>**18** Of all the sons whom she bore, There
is no one to guide her; Of all the sons whom she brought up, There is no
one to take her by the hand.

<span id="xx.iii-p22"></span>**19** These two things have happened to
thee; Who shall bewail thee? Desolation And destruction, And the famine
And the sword; Who shall comfort thee?

<span id="xx.iii-p23"></span>**20** Thy sons have fainted; They lay down
at the head of all the streets, As a wild bull in a net, Full of the
indignation of Jehovah, Of the rebuke of thy God.

<span id="xx.iii-p24"></span>**21** Therefore now hear this, thou
afflicted, And drunken, but not with wine

<span id="xx.iii-p25"></span>**22** Thus saith thy Lord, Jehovah, And
thy God, the avenger of his people; Behold! I have taken out of thy hand
The cup of affliction  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) The dregs
of the cup of my fury; Thou shalt not drink of it any more.

<span id="xx.iii-p27"></span>**23** And I will put it into the hand of
thy oppressors, Who said to thy soul, Bow down, And we shall pass over;
And thou didst lay thy body as the ground, And as the street to them
that pass over.

<span id="xx.iv"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 52

<span id="xx.iv-p3"></span>**1** Awake, awake, O Zion! Be clothed with
thy strength, Be clothed with the garments of thy beauty, O Jerusalem!
the holy city; For there shall no longer come into thee, The
uncircumcised And unclean.

<span id="xx.iv-p4"></span>**2** Shake thyself from the dust; Arise,
sit, O Jerusalem! Loose thyself from the chains of thy neck, O captive
daughter of Zion!

<span id="xx.iv-p5"></span>**3** For rims saith Jehovah for naught were
ye sold; Therefore shall ye be redeemed without money.

<span id="xx.iv-p6"></span>**4** For thus saith the Lord Jehovah Into
Egypt my people went down aforetime, That they might sojourn there; But
Assyria hath oppressed them without cause.

<span id="xx.iv-p7"></span>**5** And now, What have I here, saith
Jehovah, That my people should be carried away for naught, And that they
who rule over them should cause them to howl, Saith Jehovah, And that
every day continually: My name should be exposed to reproach?

<span id="xx.iv-p8"></span>**6** Therefore shall my people know my name;
Therefore shall they know in that day That it is I who speak; Behold! I
shall be present.

<span id="xx.iv-p9"></span>**7** How beautiful upon the mountains Are
the feet of him that bringeth tidings, That proclaimeth peace, That
bringeth good tidings, That proclaimeth salvation, That saith to Zion,
Thy God reigneth!

<span id="xx.iv-p10"></span>**8** The voice of thy watchmen! They have
lifted up the voice; They shall shout for joy together; For they shall
see eye to eye, When Jehovah shall restore Zion.

<span id="xx.iv-p11"></span>**9** Praise ye, And rejoice together, Ye
wildernesses of Jerusalem; For Jehovah hath comforted his people; He
hath redeemed Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.iv-p12"></span>**10** Before the eyes of all the nations
Jehovah hath made bare the arm of his holiness; And all the ends of the
earth Shall see the salvation of our God.

<span id="xx.iv-p13"></span>**11** Depart ye, depart ye; Go ye out
thence; Touch not the unclean thing; Go ye out of the midst of her; Be
clean, ye that bear the vessels of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iv-p14"></span>**12** For not in haste shall ye go out, And
not in flight shall be your journey; For Jehovah shall go before you,
And the God of Israel shall assemble you.

<span id="xx.iv-p15"></span>**13** Behold! my servant shall have
prosperous success, Shall be exalted, Shall be lifted up, And shall be
very high.

<span id="xx.iv-p16"></span>**14** As many were shocked at thee; (So
much was his face disfigured by men,  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) And his form by the sons of men;)
 <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)

<span id="xx.iv-p19"></span>**15** So shall he sprinkle many nations;
Kings shall shut their mouths on him; For what had not been declared to
them they shall see, And what they had not heard they shall understand.

<span id="xx.v"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 53

<span id="xx.v-p3"></span>**1** Who will believe our report? And to whom
hath the arm of Jehovah been revealed?

<span id="xx.v-p4"></span>**2** Yet he shall grow up before him as a
twig, And as a root out of a desert land; He hath no form nor beauty; We
will see him; And his countenance is not such that we should desire him.

<span id="xx.v-p5"></span>**3** Despised And rejected among men; A man
of sorrows; Acquainted with infirmity; We hid, as it were, the face from
him; And we did not at all esteem him.

<span id="xx.v-p6"></span>**4** Surely our sicknesses he bare; And our
sorrows he carried; And we thought him to be smitten, Wounded by God And
afflicted.

<span id="xx.v-p7"></span>**5** But he was wounded for our iniquities;
He was bruised for our sins; The chastisement of our peace was upon him;
And in his wound  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) we have
healing.

<span id="xx.v-p9"></span>**6** We all, like sheep, have gone astray;
Every one hath turned to his own way; And Jehovah hath laid upon him the
iniquities of us all.

<span id="xx.v-p10"></span>**7** He was condemned And afflicted;  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) And he opened not his mouth. As a lamb
shall he be led to the slaughter; And as a sheep before her shearers
shall he be dumb, And shall not open his mouth.

<span id="xx.v-p12"></span>**8** From prison And judgment was he taken;
And who shall relate his generation? For he was cut off out of the land
of the living; For the transgression of my people was he wounded.

<span id="xx.v-p13"></span>**9** And he laid open to wicked men his
grave, And to the rich man his death. Although he did no iniquity, And
there was no deceit in his mouth.

<span id="xx.v-p14"></span>**10** Yet Jehovah was pleased to bruise him,
And to subject him to infirmity. When he shall have offered his soul as
a sacrifice, He shall see a seed;  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) He shall prolong his days; And the
will of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand.

<span id="xx.v-p16"></span>**11** Of the labor of his soul he shall see,
And shall be satisfied; And by his doctrine  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) shall my righteous servant justify
many; For he shall bear their iniquities.

<span id="xx.v-p18"></span>**12** Therefore will I divide to him a
portion with the great; And he shall divide the spoil with the strong;
Because he poured out his soul unto death, And was ranked with the
transgressors; He bare the sin of many, And prayed for the
transgressors.

<span id="xx.vi"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 54

<span id="xx.vi-p3"></span>**1** Shout, O barrens that didst not bear;
Shout And sing, thou that didst not conceive; For more are the children
of the widow, Than the children of the married woman, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.vi-p4"></span>**2** Widen the place of thy tabernacles; And
let them stretch out the curtains of thy tents; Spare not; Lengthen thy
cords; And strengthen thy stakes.

<span id="xx.vi-p5"></span>**3** For on the right hand And on the left
thou shalt be multiplied; And thy seed shall possess the Gentiles; And
they shall inhabit the desolate cities.

<span id="xx.vi-p6"></span>**4** Fear not, for thou shalt not be
ashamed; And blush not, for thou shalt not be exposed to disgrace; Yea,
the shame of thy youth thou shalt forget; And the reproach of thy
widowhood thou shalt no longer remember.

<span id="xx.vi-p7"></span>**5** For thy husband is thy Make, Whose name
is Jehovah of hosts; And thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; The God
of the whole earth shall he be called.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243)

<span id="xx.vi-p9"></span>**6** For as a woman forsaken And broken in
spirit Jehovah hath called thee; And a wife of youth, Who hadst been
dismissed, Saith thy God.

<span id="xx.vi-p10"></span>**7** For a little moment have I forsaken
thee, And with great mercies will I gather thee.

<span id="xx.vi-p11"></span>**8** In a moment of wrath I hid my face for
a little from thee; But with everlasting kindness have I had compassion
on thee, Saith Jehovah thy Redeemer.

<span id="xx.vi-p12"></span>**9** For the waters of Noah  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) this is to me; As I have sworn that
the waters of Noah Shall no more pass over the earth; So have I sworn
that I will not be wroth with thee, To rebuke thee.

<span id="xx.vi-p14"></span>**10** For the mountains shall indeed be
shaken, And the hills shall tremble; But my mercy shall not depart from
thee, And the covenant of my peace shall not waver, Saith Jehovah, who
hath compassion on thee.

<span id="xx.vi-p15"></span>**11** O thou wretched, tossed by a tempest,
Destitute of consolation; Behold! I will build thy stones on carbuncles,
And will found thee on sapphires.

<span id="xx.vi-p16"></span>**12** And I will lay thy windows with
pearls, And thy gates with shilling stone, And all thy borders with
precious stone.

<span id="xx.vi-p17"></span>**13** For all thy children shall be taught
by Jehovah, And thy children shall have great peace.

<span id="xx.vi-p18"></span>**14** In righteousness shalt thou be
equipped; Thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear it;
And from terror, for it shall not come near thee.

<span id="xx.vi-p19"></span>**15** And he who assembleth shall assemble
against thee without me; He who assembleth in thee shall fall against
thee.

<span id="xx.vi-p20"></span>**16** Behold! I have created the smith,
That bloweth the coals in the fire, And bringeth out the instrument for
his work; I have created the waster to destroy.

<span id="xx.vi-p21"></span>**17** No instrument that hath been formed
against thee shall prosper; And every tongue that hath risen against
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the inheritance of the
servants of Jehovah; And their righteousness is from me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.vii"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 55

<span id="xx.vii-p3"></span>**1** Ho! all that are thirsty, Come ye to
the waters; And ye who have not money, Come ye, buy, And eat. Come ye,
buy without money, And wine And milk without any price.

<span id="xx.vii-p4"></span>**2** Wherefore do ye spend  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) money, not for bread? And your labor,
not so as to be satisfied, Hear ye by hearing me; And eat ye that which
is good; And let your soul delight itself in fatness.

<span id="xx.vii-p6"></span>**3** Incline your ear, And come to me;
Hear, And your soul shall live; And I will strike a covenant of eternity
with you, The faithful mercies of David.

<span id="xx.vii-p7"></span>**4** Behold I have given him a witness to
the peoples, A leader And instructor to the peoples.

<span id="xx.vii-p8"></span>**5** Behold! thou shalt call a nation which
thou knowest not; And a nation that knew not thee shall run to thee; For
the sake of Jehovah thy God, And of the Holy One of Israel; For he hath
glorified thee.

<span id="xx.vii-p9"></span>**6** Seek ye Jehovah, while he is found;
Call upon him, while he is near.

<span id="xx.vii-p10"></span>**7** Let the wicked man forsake his way,
And the unrighteous man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, And he
will have compassion on him; To our God; for he aboundeth in pardoning.

<span id="xx.vii-p11"></span>**8** For my thoughts are not your
thoughts, And my ways are not your ways, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.vii-p12"></span>**9** For as the heavens are higher than
the earth, So far do my ways exceed your ways, And my thoughts your
thoughts.

<span id="xx.vii-p13"></span>**10** Surely, as the rain cometh down, And
the snow from heaven, And returneth not thither. But watereth the earth,
And causeth it to bring forth And bud. That it may give seed to the
sower And bread to the eater;

<span id="xx.vii-p14"></span>**11** So shall be my word which shall go
out of nay mouth It shall not return to me empty; Till it do what I
wish, And accomplish that to which I sent it.

<span id="xx.vii-p15"></span>**12** Therefore with peace shall ye go
out, And with peace shall ye be led forth; The mountains And hills shall
break out before you into joy, And all the trees of the fields shall
clap their hands.

<span id="xx.vii-p16"></span>**13** Instead of the bramble shall grow up
the fir-tree; And instead of the nettle  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) shall grow up the myrtle;  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) And it shall be to Jehovah for a name;
For an everlasting covenant, that shall not be cut off.

<span id="xx.viii"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 56

<span id="xx.viii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah; Keep ye judgment,
And do righteousness; For my salvation is near, that it may come; And my
righteousness, that it may be revealed.

<span id="xx.viii-p4"></span>**2** Happy is the man who shall do this,
And the son of man who shall take hold of this; Keeping the Sabbath, so
that he may not profane it; And keeping his hand, that he may abstain
from all that is evil.

<span id="xx.viii-p5"></span>**3** And let not the son, that is a
foreigner, speak, That is joined to Jehovah, saying, By separating hath
Jehovah separated me from his people; And let not the eunuch say, I am a
dry tree.

<span id="xx.viii-p6"></span>**4** For thus saith Jehovah to the
eunuchs, Who keep my Sabbaths, And choose the things that please me, And
take hold of my covenant;

<span id="xx.viii-p7"></span>**5** In my house And within my walls, I
will give to them a place And a name Better than of sons And of
daughters; I will give to them an everlasting name, Which shall not be
cut off.

<span id="xx.viii-p8"></span>**6** The children, I say, of the
foreigner, Who shall be joined to Jehovah? That they may minister to
him, And may love the name of Jehovah; That they may be his servants;
Whosoever shall keep the Sabbath, so that he may not profane it, And
shall embrace my covenant:

<span id="xx.viii-p9"></span>**7** Them will I bring into the mountain
of my holiness, And will make them joyful in my house of prayer; Their
burnt-offerings And sacrifices Shall be acceptable on mine altar; For my
house shall be called A house of prayer to all peoples,

<span id="xx.viii-p10"></span>**8** Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Who
gathereth the outcasts of Israel: Still more will I gather upon him his
gathered.

<span id="xx.viii-p11"></span>**9** O all ye beasts of the field! Come
to devour; O all ye beasts of the forest!

<span id="xx.viii-p12"></span>**10** His watchmen are blind; All are
ignorant; All are dumb dogs, that cannot bark; They lie down And sleep;
They love slumber.

<span id="xx.viii-p13"></span>**11** And those dogs, strong of appetite,
know not to be satisfied; The shepherds themselves know not? nor
understand; All of them look to their own ways; Every one to his gain
from his end.

<span id="xx.viii-p14"></span>**12** Come ye, I will fletch wine; We
shall drink strong liquor; As today, so shall be tomorrow, Or better,
And more abundant.

<span id="xx.ix"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 57

<span id="xx.ix-p3"></span>**1** The righteous man hath perished, And
there is no man that layeth it to heart: Men of mercy are gathered, And
there is none that considereth, That the righteous man is gathered from
the face of the evil.

<span id="xx.ix-p4"></span>**2** Peace shall come; They shall rest in
their beds, Whosoever walketh before him.

<span id="xx.ix-p5"></span>**3** And draw near, ye sons of the
sorceress; The seed of the adulterer And the whore.

<span id="xx.ix-p6"></span>**4** On whom have ye made sport? On whom
have ye opened the mouth? On whom have ye stretched out the tongue? Are
ye not rebellious children? A lying seed?

<span id="xx.ix-p7"></span>**5** Warming themselves among the oaks
 <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) under every green tree;
Sacrificing children in the valleys, Under the cliffs of the rocks,

<span id="xx.ix-p9"></span>**6** Among the smooth stones of the valley
 <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) is thy portion; They, they are
thy lot; Even to them hast thou poured out a drink-offering, And offered
a sacrifice. Shall I take pleasure in these things?  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)

<span id="xx.ix-p12"></span>**7** On a lofty And high mountain hast thou
set thy bed; Yea, thou art gone up to it to offer a sacrifice.

<span id="xx.ix-p13"></span>**8** Behind the door And behind the
door-post Hast thou set thy memorial; Thou hast been discovered to
another than me; Thou art gone up; Thou hast enlarged thy bed; Thou hast
made a covenant with them; Thou lovedst their bed in the place which
thou sawest.

<span id="xx.ix-p14"></span>**9** And thou wentest to the king with
ointment; Thou multipliedst thy disguises; Thou sentest thy ambassadors
to a distant place; Thou art humbled even to hell.

<span id="xx.ix-p15"></span>**10** Thou art wearied with thy manifold
journeying; And hast not said, There is no hope: Thou hast found the
life of thine hand; Therefore thou hast not grieved.

<span id="xx.ix-p16"></span>**11** And whom hast thou worshipped, And of
whom hast thou been afraid, That thou hast dealt falsely, And hast not
remembered me, Blot laid it on thy heart? Is it not because I have held
my peace, And therefore thou never fearest me?

<span id="xx.ix-p17"></span>**12** I will declare thy righteousness, And
thy deeds; And they shall not profit thee.

<span id="xx.ix-p18"></span>**13** When thou shalt cry, let thy troops
deliver thee; Yet the wind shall carry them all away; Vanity shall seize
them. But he who hopeth in me shall obtain the land by inheritance, And
shall possess the mountain of my holiness.

<span id="xx.ix-p19"></span>**14** And he shall say, Prepare, prepare;
Level the road; Remove the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.

<span id="xx.ix-p20"></span>**15** For thus hath spoken the high And
Lofty One, Who dwelleth in eternity, Whose name is Holy; I inhabit the
high And holy, And with the afflicted, And with him who is lowly in
spirit; That I may revive the spirit of the lowly, That I may revive the
heart of the afflicted.

<span id="xx.ix-p21"></span>**16** For I will not contend for ever, Nor
will I be always wroth; For the spirit shall be clothed  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) before me, And the wind have I made.

<span id="xx.ix-p23"></span>**17** For the iniquity of his lust I was
wroth, And smote him; I have concealed myself, And will be wroth; But he
turned And departed in the way of his heart.

<span id="xx.ix-p24"></span>**18** I have seen his ways, And will heal
him, And will lead him, restoring consolations To him And to his
mourners.

<span id="xx.ix-p25"></span>**19** I create the fruit of the lips;
Peace, peace to them that are afar off, And to them that are near, saith
Jehovah, And I heal him.

<span id="xx.ix-p26"></span>**20** But the wicked are as the troubled
sea, Which cannot rest; And its waters will east out filth And mud.

<span id="xx.ix-p27"></span>**21** There is no peace to the wicked,
saith my God.

<span id="xx.x"></span>

<span id="xx.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 58

<span id="xx.x-p3"></span>**1** Cry with the throat, spare not; Raise
thy voice as with a trumpet; And proclaim to my people their sin, And to
the house of Jacob their iniquity.

<span id="xx.x-p4"></span>**2** Yet they seek me daily, And wish to know
my ways, As a nation that did righteousness, And neglected not the
judgment of her God; They inquire at me about the judgments of
righteousness: They wish to approach to God.

<span id="xx.x-p5"></span>**3** Wherefore have we fasted, And thou didst
not take notice of it? Wherefore have we humbled our souls, And thou
knewest not? Behold! on the day that ye fast, ye find pleasure, And
exact all your demands.

<span id="xx.x-p6"></span>**4** Behold! for strife And contention ye
fast, And that ye may smite with the wicked fist. Fast not, as ye do
this day, That ye may cause your voice to be heard on high.

<span id="xx.x-p7"></span>**5** Is it such a fast as I have chosen? That
a man may afflict his soul for a day, And may hang down his head as a
bulrush, And may spread sackcloth And ashes? Wilt thou call this a fast,
And a day acceptable to Jehovah?

<span id="xx.x-p8"></span>**6** Is not this the fast that I have chosen?
To loose wicked bonds, To undo heavy burdens, To let the oppressed go
free, And that ye may burst asunder every yoke?

<span id="xx.x-p9"></span>**7** Is it not that thou shalt break thy
bread to the hungry, And shalt bring the wandering poor to thy house? If
thou shalt see the naked, that thou shalt cover him; And that thou shalt
not hide thyself from thine own flesh?

<span id="xx.x-p10"></span>**8** Then shall break forth as the dawn thy
light; And thy health shall quickly spring up; Righteousness shall go
before thy face, And the glory of Jehovah shall gather thee.

<span id="xx.x-p11"></span>**9** Then shalt thou call, And Jehovah will
listen; Thou shalt cry, And he shall say, Behold! I am here. If thou
shalt take away from the midst of thee the burden, And the pointing of
the finger, And the speech of vanity;  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="xx.x-p13"></span>**10** If thou shalt pour out thy soul to the
hungry man, And shalt satisfy the afflicted soul, Thy light shall arise
in darkness, And thy obscurity as noon-day;

<span id="xx.x-p14"></span>**11** And Jehovah shall always conduct thee,
And shall satisfy thy soul in drought, And shall make fit thy bones; And
thou shalt be as a well-watered garden, And as a fountain of waters,
Whose waters fail not.

<span id="xx.x-p15"></span>**12** And from thee shall be those who shall
restore the deserts of the age; Thou shalt raise up the foundations of
generation And generation; And thou shalt be called, The repairer of the
breach, The restorer of paths for inhabiting.

<span id="xx.x-p16"></span>**13** If thou shalt turn away thy foot from
the Sabbath, And shalt not do thy pleasure on my holy day, And shalt
call the Sabbath a delight, To consecrate it to Jehovah, because it is
honorable, And shall give honor to it, So as not to follow thine own
ways, Nor to find thine own pleasure, Nor to speak thine own words;

<span id="xx.x-p17"></span>**14** Then shalt thou delight thyself in
Jehovah; And I will cause thee to ride on the high places of the earth,
And will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father; For the mouth
of Jehovah hath spoken it.

<span id="xx.xi"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 59

<span id="xx.xi-p3"></span>**1** Behold! the hand of Jehovah is not
shortened, That it cannot, save; Nor is his ear heavy, That it cannot
hear.

<span id="xx.xi-p4"></span>**2** But your sins have made a separation
Between you And your God; And your sins have hidden his face from you,
That he may not heal.

<span id="xx.xi-p5"></span>**3** For your hands are polluted with blood,
And your fingers with iniquity; Your lips have uttered falsehood; Your
tongue hath spoken wickedness.

<span id="xx.xi-p6"></span>**4** There is none that crieth for justice,
None that contendeth for truth; They trust in vain things, And talk
icily; They conceive mischief, arid bring forth iniquity.

<span id="xx.xi-p7"></span>**5** They hatch the eggs of the basilisk,
And weave the webs of spiders; He that eateth of their eggs shall die;
If they be crushed, there shall come forth a viper.

<span id="xx.xi-p8"></span>**6** Their webs shall not become clothing,
And they shall not cover themselves with their works; For their works
are works of iniquity;  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) And the
work of violence is in their hands.

<span id="xx.xi-p10"></span>**7** Their bet run to evil, And hasten to
shed innocent blood; Their thoughts are vain thoughts;  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) Wasting And destruction are in their
paths.

<span id="xx.xi-p12"></span>**8** The way of peace they know not; And
there is no judgment in their steps: They have corrupted their paths;
Whosoever walketh by them shall not know peace.

<span id="xx.xi-p13"></span>**9** Therefore judgment hath departed far
from us; And justice doth not overtake us. We looked for light, And,
behold! obscurity; For brightness, And, behold! we walk amidst thick
darkness.

<span id="xx.xi-p14"></span>**10** We grope for the wall like the blind;
We grope like those who have been deprived of sight; We stumble at
noon-day as in the night; Ill solitary places like dead men.

<span id="xx.xi-p15"></span>**11** We all roar like bears; And moaning,
we moan like doves We looked for judgment, And it is not visible; For
salvation, And it is far off from us.

<span id="xx.xi-p16"></span>**12** For our iniquities are multiplied
before thee; And our sins have testified against us;  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) for our iniquities are with us, And we
know our sins.

<span id="xx.xi-p18"></span>**13** We have done wickedly, And have lied
to Jehovah, And have turned back from our God; Speaking slander And
revolt; Conceiving And uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

<span id="xx.xi-p19"></span>**14** And judgment is driven back, And
justice is far off; For truth is fallen in the street, And equity cannot
come forth.

<span id="xx.xi-p20"></span>**15** Yea, truth faileth; And he who hath
withdrawn from evil hath become a prey. And Jehovah saw it; And it
displeased his eyes, that there was no judgment.

<span id="xx.xi-p21"></span>**16** He saw that there was no man, And
wondered that none came forward;  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) Therefore his arm brought  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) salvation to him; And his
righteousness, it upheld him.

<span id="xx.xi-p24"></span>**17** And he put on righteousness as a coat
of mail, And the helmet of salvation on his head; He put on vengeance as
a robe, And was clothed with indignation as a cloak.

<span id="xx.xi-p25"></span>**18** As if for the sake of recompenses, As
if for rendering vengeance, For rendering indignation to his
adversaries, Recompense to his enemies, He will render recompense to the
islands.

<span id="xx.xi-p26"></span>**19** Therefore they shall fear the name of
Jehovah from the west, And his glory from the rising of the sun; For the
enemy shall come as a river; And the Spirit of Jehovah shall drive him.
 <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258)

<span id="xx.xi-p28"></span>**20** And a Redeemer shall come to Zion,
And to them who have returned from iniquity in Jacob, Saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xi-p29"></span>**21** And this my covenant I make with
them, saith Jehovah; My Spirit that is upon thee, And my words which I
have put in thy mouth, Shall not depart out of thy mouth, Nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, Nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith
Jehovah, From this time even for ever.

<span id="xx.xii"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 60

<span id="xx.xii-p3"></span>**1** Arise, be bright; For thy brightness
is come; And the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee.

<span id="xx.xii-p4"></span>**2** For, behold! darkness shall cover the
earth, And thick darkness the peoples; But Jehovah shall arise upon
thee; And his glory shall be seen upon thee.

<span id="xx.xii-p5"></span>**3** And the Gentiles shall walk to thy
brightness, And kings to the luster of thy rising.

<span id="xx.xii-p6"></span>**4** Lift up thine eyes round about, And
see. They all are assembled that they may come to thee; Thy sons shall
come from afar; Thy daughters shall be nursed at the side.

<span id="xx.xii-p7"></span>**5** Then thou shalt see, And shalt be
bright; Thou shalt tremble, And thy heart shall be enlarged; Because the
abundance of the sea  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) shall be
converted to thee; The riches  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)
of the Gentiles shall come to thee.

<span id="xx.xii-p10"></span>**6** A multitude of camels shall cover
thee, Of the dromedaries of Midian And Ephah; All they from Sheba shall
come; They shall bring gold And incense, And shall declare the praises
of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xii-p11"></span>**7** All the sheep of Kedar shall be
gathered together to thee; The rams of Nebaioth shall minister to thee;
They shall ascend to the good-pleasure of mine altar; And I will glorify
the house of my glory.

<span id="xx.xii-p12"></span>**8** Who are those that fly as a cloud,
And as doves to their windows?

<span id="xx.xii-p13"></span>**9** Surely the islands shall wait for me,
And the ships of Tarshish; That they may bring thy sons from afar, Their
silver And their gold with them, To the name of Jehovah thy God, And to
the Holy One of Israel; For he hath glorified thee.

<span id="xx.xii-p14"></span>**10** And the sons of the foreigner shall
build thy walls, And their kings shall minister to thee; For in my wrath
I smote thee; And in my loving-kindness have I had compassion on thee.

<span id="xx.xii-p15"></span>**11** And thy gates shall be open
continually; They shall not be shut by day nor by night; That the riches
 <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) of the Gentiles may be carried
to thee, And that their kings may be led.

<span id="xx.xii-p17"></span>**12** For the nation And kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish; The nations, Is, shall be utterly
destroyed.

<span id="xx.xii-p18"></span>**13** The glory of Lebanon shall come to
thee; The fir-tree, the pine, And the box together; To the beauty  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) of the place of my holiness; For I
will glorify the place of my feet.

<span id="xx.xii-p20"></span>**14** And the sons of them that afflict
thee Shall come bending to thee; And all who despised thee, Shall bow
themselves down at the soles of thy feet; And they shall call thee the
City of Jehovah, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xx.xii-p21"></span>**15** Instead of thy having been forsaken
And hated, So that no man passed through thee, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, The joy of generation And generation.

<span id="xx.xii-p22"></span>**16** And thou shalt suck the milk of the
Gentiles; Thou shalt suck the breast of kings; And thou shalt know that
Jehovah Am thy Savior And thy Redeemer, The Mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="xx.xii-p23"></span>**17** For brass I will bring gold; And for
iron I will bring silver; And for wood, brass; And for stones, iron; And
I will make thy magistracy peace, And thine exactors, righteousness.

<span id="xx.xii-p24"></span>**18** Oppression shall no longer be heard
in thy hind; Wasting or destruction within thy borders; And thou shalt
call thy walls Salvation, And thy gates, Praise.

<span id="xx.xii-p25"></span>**19** And thou shalt no longer have the
sun for the light of days, Nor shall the brightness of the moon give
light to thee; For Jehovah shall be to thee an everlasting light, And
thy God shall be thy glory.

<span id="xx.xii-p26"></span>**20** Thy sun shall no longer set; And thy
moon shall no longer wane; For Jehovah shall be to thee an everlasting
light; And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

<span id="xx.xii-p27"></span>**21** Thy people also shall all be
righteous; They shall inherit the land for ever; The branch of his
planting shall be the work of my hands, That I may be glorified.

<span id="xx.xii-p28"></span>**22** A little one shall become a
thousand; A small one, a strong nation; Jehovah will hasten this in her
time.

<span id="xx.xiii"></span>

<span id="xx.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 61

<span id="xx.xiii-p3"></span>**1** The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is
upon me; On that account Jehovah hath anointed me; He hath sent me to
preach to the afflicted;  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) To
bind up the broken in heart; To proclaim liberty to the captives, The
opening of the prison to them that are bound.

<span id="xx.xiii-p5"></span>**2** To proclaim the year of the
good-pleasure of Jehovah, And the day of vengeance to our God; To
comfort all that mourn.

<span id="xx.xiii-p6"></span>**3** To appoint to the mourners in Zion;
That I may give to them beauty instead of ashes, The oil of joy instead
of mourning, The garment of gladness instead of an afflicted spirit; To
call them trees of righteousness, The plantation of Jehovah, To glorify
him.

<span id="xx.xiii-p7"></span>**4** And they shall build the deserts of
the age; They shall raise up the ancient wildernesses; And they shall
restore the cities of desolation, The wildernesses of many ages.

<span id="xx.xiii-p8"></span>**5** And strangers shall stand And feed
your sheep; And the sons of the foreigner shall be Your husbandmen And
vine-dressers.

<span id="xx.xiii-p9"></span>**6** But ye shall be called the Priests of
Jehovah; Men shall call you the Ministers of our God; Ye shall eat the
substance of the Gentiles; And ye shall rise by their glory.

<span id="xx.xiii-p10"></span>**7** Instead of your shame there shall be
a double reward; And instead of disgrace they shall rejoice in their
portion; For in their land they shall possess the double, And they shall
have everlasting joy.

<span id="xx.xiii-p11"></span>**8** For I Jehovah love judgment; I hate
robbery in the burnt-offering; And I will establish their work in truth,
And will make an everlasting covenant with them.

<span id="xx.xiii-p12"></span>**9** And their seed shall be known among
the Gentiles; And their offspring in the midst of the peoples; All who
see them shall acknowledge them That they are the seed blessed by
Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xiii-p13"></span>**10** Rejoicing I will rejoice in
Jehovah; My soul shall be joyful in my God; Nor he hath clothed me with
the garments of salvation; He hath covered me with the robe of
righteousness; As a bridegroom hath he adorned me, And as a bride
decorated with her jewels.

<span id="xx.xiii-p14"></span>**11** For, as the earth putteth forth her
bud, And as the garden causeth her seed to spring up, So the Lord
Jehovah will cause righteousness to spring up, And praise before all the
nations.

<span id="xx.xiv"></span>

<span id="xx.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 62

<span id="xx.xiv-p3"></span>**1** On account of Zion I will not be
silent; And on account of Jerusalem I will not rest; Till her
righteousness go forth as brightness, And till her salvation burn like a
lamp.

<span id="xx.xiv-p4"></span>**2** And the Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness, And all the kings of the earth thy glory; And thou shalt
be called by a new name, Which the mouth of Jehovah shall name.

<span id="xx.xiv-p5"></span>**3** And thou shalt be a crown of glory in
the hand of Jehovah; And the diadem of the kingdom in the hand of thy
God.

<span id="xx.xiv-p6"></span>**4** Thou shalt no more be called forsaken;
Nor shall thy land be any more called desolate; For they shall call
thee, My good-pleasure in her; And they shall call thy land, Married;
For the good-pleasure of Jehovah is in thee, And thy land shall be
married.

<span id="xx.xiv-p7"></span>**5** For, as a young man marrieth a virgin,
So shall thy sons marry thee; And with the joy of the bridegroom over
the bride Thy God will rejoice over thee.

<span id="xx.xiv-p8"></span>**6** On thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have
appointed watchmen, Who, during the whole day And the whole night
together, Shall not keep silence. Ye that are mindful  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) of Jehovah, Be ye not silent;

<span id="xx.xiv-p10"></span>**7** And give him not silence, Till he
establish, And till he make Jerusalem, A praise in the earth.

<span id="xx.xiv-p11"></span>**8** Jehovah hath sworn by his right hand,
And by the arm of his strength; If I shall any more give thy corn For
food to thine enemies, And if the sons of the foreigner shall drink thy
wine, For which thou hast labored.

<span id="xx.xiv-p12"></span>**9** For they who have gathered it shall
eat it, And shall praise Jehovah; And they that collect it shall drink
wine, In my holy courts.

<span id="xx.xiv-p13"></span>**10** Pass through, pass through the
gates; Clear the way for the people; Level, level the road; Pave it with
stones; Lift up a standard to the peoples.

<span id="xx.xiv-p14"></span>**11** Behold! Jehovah hath proclaimed to
the end of the earth; Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold! thy Savior
cometh; Behold! his reward is with him, And the effect of his work is
before him.

<span id="xx.xiv-p15"></span>**12** And they shall call thee, A holy
people, Redeemed by Jehovah; And they shall call thee The City sought
out, Not forsaken.

<span id="xx.xv"></span>

<span id="xx.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 63

<span id="xx.xv-p3"></span>**1** Who is this that cometh from Edom? With
red garments from Bozrah? This that is beautiful in his raiment,
Marching in the greatness of his strength? I, who speak in
righteousness, Mighty to save.

<span id="xx.xv-p4"></span>**2** Wherefore is thy raiment red? And thy
garments like one that treadeth in the wine-press?

<span id="xx.xv-p5"></span>**3** Alone have I pressed the wine-press;
And of the peoples there was none with me; For I will tread them in my
wrath, And will trample them down in my fury; And their blood shall be
sprinkled on my garments, And I will stain all my raiment.

<span id="xx.xv-p6"></span>**4** For the day of vengeance is in my
heart; And the year of my redeemed is come.

<span id="xx.xv-p7"></span>**5** Therefore I looked, And there was none
to help; And I wondered that there was none to uphold; Therefore mine
arm brought salvation to me And my wrath upheld me.

<span id="xx.xv-p8"></span>**6** And I will tread down the peoples in my
wrath, And will make them drunk in my fury, And will east down their
strength to the earth.

<span id="xx.xv-p9"></span>**7** The mercies of Jehovah will I keep in
remembrance, The praises of Jehovah; According to all that Jehovah hath
bestowed on us, And in the abundance of kindness toward the house of
Israel, Which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, And
according to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses.

<span id="xx.xv-p10"></span>**8** For he said, Surely they are my
people; Children that do not lie; Therefore he became their Savior.

<span id="xx.xv-p11"></span>**9** In all their affliction he was
afflicted;  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) And the angel of his
presence saved them; In his love And in his compassion he redeemed them;
And he bare them And carried them all the days of the age.

<span id="xx.xv-p13"></span>**10** But they were rebellious, And
provoked his Holy Spirit; Therefore he was turned to be their enemy, And
fought against them.

<span id="xx.xv-p14"></span>**11** And he remembered the days of old, In
which Moses was with his people. Where is he that made them to come up
out of the sea, With the shepherd of his flock? Where is he that put his
Holy Spirit in the midst of them?

<span id="xx.xv-p15"></span>**12** That led them by the right hand of
Moses, By the arm of his glory; That divided the waters before them,
That he might gain for himself all everlasting name?

<span id="xx.xv-p16"></span>**13** That made them walk through the
depths, As a horse ill the desert, So that they did not stumble?

<span id="xx.xv-p17"></span>**14** He went down, as a beast into a
plain; The Spirit of Jehovah gave him rest; So didst thou lead thy
people, That thou mightst make for thyself a glorious name.

<span id="xx.xv-p18"></span>**15** Look down from heaven; Behold from
the habitation, Of thy holiness And of thy glory. Where is thy zeal And
thy strength? The multitude of thy bowels, And of thy compassions toward
me, Have been restrained.

<span id="xx.xv-p19"></span>**16** Surely thou art our Father, Though
Abraham do not know us, And Israel do not acknowledge us; Yet thou art
our Fattier And out Redeemer; From everlasting is thy name.

<span id="xx.xv-p20"></span>**17** Why didst thou cause us, O Jehovah,
To wander from thy ways? Why didst thou cause our heart To depart from
thy fear? Return, on account of thy servants, To the tribes of thine
inheritance.

<span id="xx.xv-p21"></span>**18** For a little time the people of thy
holiness possessed it; Our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

<span id="xx.xv-p22"></span>**19** For a long period have we been They
over whom thou hast not ruled, On whom thy name hath not been called.

<span id="xx.xvi"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 64

<span id="xx.xvi-p3"></span>**1** O that thou wouldst rend the heavens!
That thou wouldst come down! That the mountains would flow down at thy
presence!

<span id="xx.xvi-p4"></span>**2** As by the burning of a melting fire,
 <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) The fire hath made the waters
to boil, That thou mightst make thy name known to thine adversaries; The
nations trembled at thy presence.

<span id="xx.xvi-p6"></span>**3** When thou didst terrible things, Which
we looked not for, Thou camest down; The mountains flowed down at thy
presence.

<span id="xx.xvi-p7"></span>**4** From of old they have not heard, Nor
perceived by the ears; Eye hath not seen a God besides thee, That doeth
such things to him that waiteth for him.

<span id="xx.xvi-p8"></span>**5** Thou hast met him that rejoiceth And
worketh righteousness; In thy ways they remembered thee; Behold! thou
wast angry, And we have sinned; In them is perpetuity, And we shall be
saved.  <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267)

<span id="xx.xvi-p10"></span>**6** And we have all been as the unclean;
And all our righteousnesses as a defiled garment; And we all fade as a
leaf; And our iniquities, as the wind, Have carried us away.

<span id="xx.xvi-p11"></span>**7** There is none that calleth on thy
name, Nor that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee; For thou hast
hidden thy face from us, And hast made us to languish In the hand of our
iniquity.

<span id="xx.xvi-p12"></span>**8** And now, O Jehovah, thou art our
Father; We are the clay, And thou our potter; We all are the work of thy
hands.

<span id="xx.xvi-p13"></span>**9** Be not angry, O Jehovah, beyond
measure; Neither remember iniquity for ever. Behold! see, we beseech
thee, We all are thy people.

<span id="xx.xvi-p14"></span>**10** The cities of thy holiness have been
a desert; Zion hath been a desert; Jerusalem hath been a wilderness.

<span id="xx.xvi-p15"></span>**11** The house of our sanctuary And of
our glory, In which our fathers praised thee, Hath been burnt with fire;
And all our desirable things are laid waste.

<span id="xx.xvi-p16"></span>**12** Wilt thou restrain thyself for these
things, O Jehovah! Wilt thou be silent? And wilt thou afflict us beyond
measure?

<span id="xx.xvii"></span>

<span id="xx.xvii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 65

<span id="xx.xvii-p3"></span>**1** I have manifested myself to them that
asked not; I have been found by them that sought me not; I said, Behold
me, behold me, To a nation that called not on my name.

<span id="xx.xvii-p4"></span>**2** I have stretched out my hands every
day To a rebellious people, Walking in a way not good, After their own
thoughts.

<span id="xx.xvii-p5"></span>**3** A people that provoketh me always to
my face, That sacrifieth in gardens, And offereth incense on bricks:

<span id="xx.xvii-p6"></span>**4** Who dwell in the graves; Who pass the
night in the deserts; Who eat swines flesh; And broth of unclean things
is in their vessels:

<span id="xx.xvii-p7"></span>**5** Who say, Remain by thyself; Approach
not to me; For I would sanctify thee;  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) Those shall be smoke in my fury, A
fire that burneth all the day.

<span id="xx.xvii-p9"></span>**6** Behold! it is written before me; I
will not be silent from rendering And recompensing into their bosom,

<span id="xx.xvii-p10"></span>**7** Your iniquities, And the iniquities
of your fathers together, saith Jehovah. Because they have offered
incense on the mountains, And have dishonored me on the hills, Therefore
I will measure back their ancient work, Into their bosom.

<span id="xx.xvii-p11"></span>**8** Thus saith Jehovah: As if one should
find a grape in a cluster, And should say, Destroy it not, For a
blessing is in it; So will I do for the sake of my servants, That I may
not destroy the whole.

<span id="xx.xvii-p12"></span>**9** And I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob, And out of Judah the heir of my mountains; And mine elect shall
possess it by inheritance; And my servants shall dwell there.

<span id="xx.xvii-p13"></span>**10** And Sharon shall be an abode of
flocks, And the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in, To my
people who have sought me.

<span id="xx.xvii-p14"></span>**11** But ye are forsakers of Jehovah,
Who forget the mountain of my holiness, Who prepare a table for the
army, And fill an oblation to the number.

<span id="xx.xvii-p15"></span>**12** Therefore I will number you to the
sword, And ye all shall be cut down by slaughter; Because I called, And
ye answered not; I spoke, And ye heard not; And ye did evil before mine
eyes, And chose the things in which I took no pleasure.

<span id="xx.xvii-p16"></span>**13** Therefore thus saith the Lord
Jehovah: Behold! my servants shall eat, And ye shall be hungry; Behold!
my servants shall drink, And ye shall be thirsty; Behold! my servants
shall rejoice, And ye shall be covered with shame.

<span id="xx.xvii-p17"></span>**14** Behold! my servants shall shout for
gladness of heart; And ye shall cry aloud for grief of heart, And shall
howl for anguish of spirit.

<span id="xx.xvii-p18"></span>**15** And ye shall leave your name for a
curse to mine elect; The Lord Jehovah shall slay you, And shall call his
servants by another name.

<span id="xx.xvii-p19"></span>**16** He who blesseth himself in the
earth Shall bless himself in the faithful God; And he who sweareth in
the earth Shall swear by the faithful God; For the former afflictions,
Are surrendered to forgetfulness, And hidden from mine eyes.

<span id="xx.xvii-p20"></span>**17** For, behold! I will create, New
heavens And a new earth; The former shall not be remembered, Igor come
into mind.

<span id="xx.xvii-p21"></span>**18** But rejoice And be glad for ever,
In the things which I create; For, behold! I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, And her people a joy.

<span id="xx.xvii-p22"></span>**19** And I will be glad in Jerusalem,
And will rejoice in my people; And the voice of weeping shall no more be
heard in her, Nor the voice of crying.

<span id="xx.xvii-p23"></span>**20** There shall be no more there an
infant of days, Nor an old man that fulfilleth not his days; For the son
of a hundred years shall die young; And the sinner who is the son of a
hundred years shall be accursed.

<span id="xx.xvii-p24"></span>**21** They shall build houses, And shall
inhabit them; They shall plant vines, And shall eat the fruit of them.

<span id="xx.xvii-p25"></span>**22** They shall not build that another
may inhabit; They shall not plant that another may eat; For according to
the days of a tree Shall be the days of my people; And mine elect shall
perpetually enjoy, The work of their hands.

<span id="xx.xvii-p26"></span>**23** They shall not toil in vain; And
they shall not bring forth in terror; For the seed of the blessed of
Jehovah shall they be, And their offspring with them.

<span id="xx.xvii-p27"></span>**24** And it shall be, before they cry, I
will listen; While they are yet speaking, I will hear.

<span id="xx.xvii-p28"></span>**25** The wolf And the lamb shall feed
together; And the lion shall eat straw like the ox; And the serpent
shall have dust for his food. They shall not destroy, And shall not
hurt, In all my holy mountain, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii"></span>

<span id="xx.xviii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xviii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 66

<span id="xx.xviii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah: Heaven is my
throne, And the earth is my footstool: Where is that house which ye will
build for me? And where is this place of my rest?

<span id="xx.xviii-p4"></span>**2** Yet all these things hath my hand
made, And all these things began to be, saith Jehovah; And I look to him
who is humble And contrite in spirit, And who trembleth at my word.

<span id="xx.xviii-p5"></span>**3** He that killeth an ox is as if he
slew a man; He that sacrificeth a sheep, as if he stabbed a dog; He that
offereth an oblation, as if he offered swines flesh; He that burneth
incense, as if he blessed an idol; And truly they have chosen their own
ways; And their soul hath delighted in their abominations.

<span id="xx.xviii-p6"></span>**4** I also will choose their delusions,
And will bring upon them their terror; Because I called, And no man
answered; I spoke, And they heard not; And they did evil before mine
eyes, And chose those things in which I take no delight.

<span id="xx.xviii-p7"></span>**5** Hear the word of Jehovah, Ye that
tremble at his word. Your brethren that hate you. And that cast you out
for my names sake, Have said, Let Jehovah be glorified.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) But he shall be seen to your joy, And
they shall be ashamed.

<span id="xx.xviii-p10"></span>**6** A voice of tumult from the city! A
voice from the temple! The voice of Jehovah Rendering recompense to his
adversaries.

<span id="xx.xviii-p11"></span>**7** Before she was in labor, she
brought forth; Before her pain came upon her she was delivered of a
male.

<span id="xx.xviii-p12"></span>**8** Who hath heard such a thing? Who
hath seen such thing? Shall the earth bring forth in one day? Shall a
nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion had the pains of
child-bearing? Immediately she brought forth.

<span id="xx.xviii-p13"></span>**9** Shall I bring to the birth, And not
bring forth? saith Jehovah. Shall I cause to bear. And yet restrain?
saith thy God.

<span id="xx.xviii-p14"></span>**10** Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, And be
glad with her, All ye that love her; Rejoice for joy with her, All ye
that mourn for her;

<span id="xx.xviii-p15"></span>**11** That ye may suck And be satisfied
From the breast of her consolations; That ye may milk And be delighted,
With the brightness of her glory.

<span id="xx.xviii-p16"></span>**12** For thus saith Jehovah: Behold! I
cause peace to flow on her like a river, And the glory of the Gentiles
as an overflowing torrent; Thus ye shall suck; Ye shall be carried on
the shoulder, And shall be dandled on the knees.

<span id="xx.xviii-p17"></span>**13** As a man whom his mother
comforteth, So will I comfort you; And ye shall have comfort on
Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.xviii-p18"></span>**14** And ye shall see, And your heart
shall rejoice; And your bones shall flourish like the grass; And the
hand of Jehovah shall be known toward his servants, And he shall be
enraged against his enemies.

<span id="xx.xviii-p19"></span>**15** For, behold! Jehovah shall come in
fire; And his chariots, as a whirlwind; That he may utter his wrath in
fury, And his rebuke in a flame of fire.

<span id="xx.xviii-p20"></span>**16** For with fire, And with his sword,
Shall Jehovah judge all flesh; And many shall be the slain of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii-p21"></span>**17** They that sanctify themselves, And
that purify themselves in the gardens behind one in the midst, That eat
swines flesh, And the abomination, And the mouse, Shall be consumed
together, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii-p22"></span>**18** For I (know) their deeds And their
thoughts; Because the time is come, That I should assemble all nations
And languages; And they shall come, And shall see my glory.

<span id="xx.xviii-p23"></span>**19** And I will put a mark upon them,
And will send some of them that are escaped, To the nations of Tarshish,
Pul, And Lud, that draw the bow To Tubal And Jayan; To the distant
islands, Which have not heard my name, And have not seen my glory; And
they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.

<span id="xx.xviii-p24"></span>**20** And they shall bring all your
brethren, Out of all nations, An oblation to Jehovah, On horses, And
chariots, And wagons, On mules And swift animals, To my holy mountain
Jerusalem, saith Jehovah; As the children of Israel bring in a clean
vessel To the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii-p25"></span>**21** And even some of them will I take
For priests And Levites, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii-p26"></span>**22** For, as the new heavens And the
new earth, which I make, Remain before me, saith Jehovah; So shall your
seed And your name remain.

<span id="xx.xviii-p27"></span>**23** And it shall be, That from month
to his month, And from Sabbath to his Sabbath, All flesh shall come, To
worship before me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xviii-p28"></span>**24** And they shall go forth, And shall
see the carcasses of the men who have rebelled against me; For their
worm shall not die, And their fire shall not be quenched; And they shall
be an abhorrence to all flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc16019.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xx.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span> Or, Sinim.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc16019.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xx.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span> Or, Barren.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc16019.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xx.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span> Or, The righteous captivity.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc16019.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xx.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span> Or, Of trembling.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc16019.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xx.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p26"></span> Or, Of trembling.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc16019.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xx.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p17"></span> Or, More than men.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc16019.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xx.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p18"></span> Or, More than the sons of men.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc16019.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xx.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p8"></span> Or, In his medicine.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc16019.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xx.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p11"></span> Or, Oppressed.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc16019.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xx.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p15"></span> Or, He shall see posterity.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc16019.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xx.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p17"></span> Or, By the knowledge of him.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc16019.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xx.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p8"></span> Or, The Holy One of Israel shall be called
the Redeemer And God of the whole earth.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc16019.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xx.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p13"></span> Or, As the days of Noah.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc16019.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xx.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p5"></span> Or, Weigh out.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc16019.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xx.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p17"></span> Or, The thorn.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc16019.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xx.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p18"></span> Or, The Elm.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc16019.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xx.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p8"></span> Or, With the gods.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc16019.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xx.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p10"></span> Or, In parts of the river.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc16019.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xx.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p11"></span> Or, Shall I repent of these things?

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc16019.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xx.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p22"></span> Or, Shall be concealed, or, Shall fail.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc16019.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xx.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.x-p12"></span> Or, The unprofitable speech.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc16019.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xx.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p9"></span> Or, Of vanity. And the work of violence is
in their hands.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc16019.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xx.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p11"></span> Or, Thoughts of iniquity.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc16019.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xx.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p17"></span> Or, Our sins answer to us.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc16019.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xx.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p22"></span> Or, Interceded.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc16019.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xx.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p23"></span> Or, Made.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc16019.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xx.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p27"></span> Or, Shall chase him away.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc16019.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xx.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p8"></span> Or, The multitude of the sea.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc16019.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xx.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p9"></span> Or, Strength.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc16019.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xx.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p16"></span> Or, Strength.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc16019.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xx.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p19"></span> Or, To adorn.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc16019.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xx.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiii-p4"></span> Or, To the meek.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc16019.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xx.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiv-p9"></span> Or, That celebrate the memory.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc16019.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xx.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xv-p12"></span> Or, In all their affliction there was no
affliction.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc16019.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xx.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p5"></span> Or, As by a burning fire that melteth.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc16019.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xx.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p9"></span> Or, We have been saved.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc16019.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xx.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvii-p8"></span> Or, For I am holier than thou.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc16019.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xx.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xviii-p8"></span> Or, Jehovah is severe, or, Jehovah shall
be glorified.

<span id="xx.xviii-p9"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc16020)
