[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16013)  [Next](cc16015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 62.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** For Zion’s sake will I not hold my
peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp
*that* burneth.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Propter Sion non tacebo, et propter
Ierusalem non quiescam, donec egrediatur ut splendor justitia ejus, et
salus ejus sicat lampas ardeat.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a
new name, which the mouth of the LORD shall name.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et videbunt gentes justitiam tuam, et
omnes reges terrae gloriam tuam; et vocabitur tibi nomen novum, quod os
Iehovae nuncupabit.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in
the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et eris corona gloriae in manu Iehovae,
et diadema regni in manu Dei tui.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken;
neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be
called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee,
and thy land shall be married.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Non dicetur tibi amplius Derelicta; nec
terra tua dicetur amplius Desolata; quia vocabunt to Beneplacitum meum
in ea, et terram tuam Maritatam. Quia beneplacitum Iehovae in to, et
terra tua maritabitur.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** For *as* a young man marrieth a
virgin, *so* shall thy sons marry thee: and *as* the bridegroom
rejoiceth over the bride, *so* shall thy God rejoice over thee.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quoniam sicut adoleseens maritat sibi
virginem, ita maritabunt to sibi filii tui; et gaudio sponsi super
sponsa gaudebit super to Deus tuus.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6.** I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, *which* shall never hold their peace day nor night: ye that
make mention of the LORD, keep not silence,

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Super muros tuos, Ierusalem, ordinavi
custodes, qui tota die et tota nocte jugiter non tacebunt. Qui memores
estis (vel, memoriam celebrabitis) Iehovae, ne silentium sit vobis.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et ne detis silentlum illi donec
reparet, et donec ponat Ierusalem laudem in terra.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**8.** The LORD hath sworn by his right hand,
and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn *to
be* meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink
thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured:

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Juravit Iehova per dexteram suam, et
per brachium roboris sui: Si dedero frumentum tuum amplius cibum
inimicis tuis, et si biberint filii alienigenae vinum tuum pro quo
laborasti.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**9.** But they that have gathered it shall
eat it, and praise the LORD; and they that have brought it together
shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Nam qui congregaverunt illud comedent,
et laudabunt Iehovam; et collectores ejus bibent vinum in atriis meis
sanctis.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>**10.** Go through, go through the gates;
prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather
out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Transite, transite per portas;
repurgate viam populo; complanate, complanate iter; sternite lapidibus,
levate signum ad populos.

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**11.** Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto
the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
salvation cometh; behold, his reward *is* with him, and his work before
him.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ecce Iehova publicavit usque ad
extremum terrae; dicite filiae Sion, Ecce servator tuus venit, Ecce
merces ejus cum eo, et effectus ejus coram ipso.

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**12.** And they shall call them, The holy
people, The redeemed of the LORD: and thou shalt be called, Sought out,
A city not forsaken.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et vocabunt vos Populum sanctum,
redemptos Iehovae; et to vocabunt Quaesitam urbem, non relictam.

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span><span id="xv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**1.** *On account of Zion I will not be
silent.* That sad captivity being at hand, which was almost to blot out
the name of the whole nation, it was necessary to confirm and encourage
believers by many words, that with strong and assured confidence they
might rely on these promises under the burden of the cross. Here,
therefore, the Prophet, discharging that office which had been entrusted
to him, openly declares that he will not be slack in the performance of
his duty, and will not cease to speak, till he encourage the hearts of
believers by the hope of future salvation, that they may know and be
fully convinced that God will be the deliverer of his Church. He too
might have been dismayed by the unbelief of that people, and might have
lost courage when he saw that matters were every day growing worse, and
when he foresaw that terrible vengeance. But, notwithstanding so great
difficulties, he will still persist in his duty, that all may know that
neither the massacre of the people nor their unbelief can prevent God
from executing his promises at the proper time.

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span>*And on account of Jerusalem I will not
rest.* It was necessary that these things should be frequently repeated,
because such is the depravity of our mind that we speedily forget God’s
promises. When he says that he will not cease to speak, he likewise
reminds others of their duty, that they may take courage, and expect
with assured confidence their restoration, though it be long delayed,
and even that their unwearied attention may answer to the voice of God
which constantly addresses them. We know by experience every day how
necessary this is, while Satan endeavors by every method to turn us
aside from the right course.

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>At the same time he shews what ought to be
the aim of godly teachers, namely, to spend and devote themselves
entirely for the advantage of the Church; for when he says “on account
of Zion,” he means that our chief care ought to be that the Church may
be preserved, and that none are good and faithful teachers but they who
hold the salvation of the Church so dear as to spare no labors. Some
explain this as relating to prayer, but I choose rather to refer it to
doctrine; and it is more natural to view it as meaning’ that no
inconvenience or annoyance shall wear out his patience, and no
opposition shall retard him from proceeding in the office of teaching
which God has enjoined on him concerning the redemption of the Church.
For if he had survived that very sad calamity, the unbelieving multitude
would undoubtedly have persecuted him, as well as the other Prophets, by
many reproaches; but whatever may happen, he says that he is fortified
by unshaken firmness, never to be dumb through shame, but to proceed
with unremitting eagerness in his course. Besides, by this form of
expression he procures credit to his predictions, and maintains their
authority, so that, even when he is dead, they do not cease to resound
in the ears of believers.

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>*Till her righteousness go forth as
brightness.* By “righteousness” he means the rights of the Church; for
during the period of calamity, she appeared to be condemned. Her
“righteousness,” therefore, “goes forth” when she is perfectly restored,
and regains her former condition; for that righteousness lay concealed
during the captivity.

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>*And her salvation.* To “righteousness” he
adds “salvation,” because they whom God justifies, or to whom he
re-restores their rights, do likewise regain their “salvation.” Hence we
infer that we are wretched and without assistance, so long as God
withholds his grace from us on account of our sins; and therefore in
other passages he frequently gave the appellation of “the righteousness
of God” to that which he here affirms to be the righteousness of the
Church. Thus we are undone while we are destitute of the righteousness
of God; that is, while we slumber in our sins, and God shews himself to
be a severe judge by punishing us for them.

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>The phrase “go forth” means that the
righteousness of the Church was hidden and, as it were, buried for a
time: she deserved in the sight of God no favor; but, on the contrary,
her unspeakable iniquities prevailed to such an extent that there
remained nothing but God’s righteous vengeance. But here the Prophet has
his eye on men who already looked upon the afflicted Church as lost, and
by their pride and reproaches almost cast her down to hell.

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>*May burn like a lamp.* Finally, he compares
her to the world, and says, that with respect to the world she shall be
righteous, when God shall have purged away her sins and undertaken her
cause. By these words the Prophet teaches that we ought always to
entertain favorable hopes of the restoration of the Church, though she
be plunged under thick darkness and in the grave; for although for a
time she is overwhelmed and hidden, yet she has God for her avenger in
heaven, who, after having chastised her moderately, will at length shew
that she was the object of his care. And indeed his righteousness must
be illustrious and manifest, and that for the salvation of those whom he
hath chosen to be his people and heritage.

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span><span id="xv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>**2.** *And the Gentiles shall see.* He now
states more plainly the reason why he formerly said that he would not be
silent, namely, that believers may be fully convinced that salvation is
not promised to them in vain.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>*And all the kings of the earth thy glory.*
Here he employs the word “glory” as meaning “salvation.” We see here the
argument by which prophets must fortify themselves for perseverance,
namely, that the Lord is faithful, and will at length fulfill what he
has once promised, though he delay for a time. The word kings serves for
amplification; as if he had said that not only mean persons and those of
the lowest rank shall behold and admire the glory of God, but even
“kings” themselves, who commonly look down with contempt on all that was
worthy in other respects of being esteemed and honored; for they are
blinded by their splendor, and maddened by their high rank, so that they
do not willingly behold any rank but their own.

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>*And thou shalt be called by a new name.* By
a “new name” he means “a crowded assemblage;” for the people were so
completely scattered, that there was no visible body, and they appeared
to be altogether ruined. Although a vast multitude of persons were led
into captivity, yet, having been scattered among the Babylonians, they
were driven about like the members of a body broken in pieces, and
scarcely retained the name of a people; which had also been foretold to
them. After having been brought back from captivity, they began again to
be united in one body, and thus regained the “name” of which they had
been deprived. Yet “new” denotes what is uncommon; as if the Prophet had
said that the glory of the people shall be extraordinary and such as was
never before heard of. We know that this took place in the progress of
time; for that small band of people, while they dwelt by sufferance in
their native country, could not by any extraordinary distinction arrive
at so great renown; but at length, when the doctrine of the Gospel had
been preached, the Jewish name became known and renowned.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>*Which the mouth of Jehovah shall name.* He
confirms what would otherwise have been hard to be believed, by
promising that God will be the author of this glory; for it was not in
the power of men thus to raise a Church which had sunk low and was
covered with dishonor, but to God, who “lifteth up the poor from the
dunghill,” (<span id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>[Ps
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>,)
it was not difficult to adorn his Church by new celebrity. As there was
no face of a Church for forty years, and, although the Lord had some
seed, yet it was in a state so disordered and so ruinous that there was
no visible people of God, he now restores to the Church its name, when
he has assembled it by the word of the Gospel. This majestic work of
God, therefore, ought to confirm us on this point, that we may know that
he will never forsake his Church; and although wicked men tear us by
their slanders, and beat and spit upon us, and in every way endeavor to
make us universally loathed, let us remember that God is not deprived of
his right to vindicate us in the world, whose names he has deigned to
write in heaven.

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span>Others expound the passage in a more
ingenious manner, namely, that instead of Israelites they shall be
called Christians. But I think that the former meaning is more agreeable
to the context and to the Prophet’s ordinary language; and we ought
carefully to observe those forms of expression which are peculiar to the
prophets, that we may become familiar with their style. In a word, the
people shall be restored, though it appears to be exterminated, and
shall obtain, not from men but from God, a new name.

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span><span id="xv.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>**3.** *And thou shalt be a crown of glory.*
Isaiah proceeds with the same subject, and we need not wonder at this;
for no man, by judging from the flesh, could have formed such vast
conceptions and expectations. Besides, he intended to fix the hearts of
believers on the kingdom of Christ, which it was the more necessary to
adorn and magnify by these illustrious titles, because hitherto it was
not only obscure but at a great distance. It was needful to provide
against a twofold danger, that the Jews, when they saw that they were
still at a very great distance from their former honor, might not, on
the one hand, despise the grace of God, or, on the other hand, rest
satisfied with the mere beginnings, and thus, by disregarding Christ,
devote their whole attention to earthly advantages. The Prophet
therefore reminds them, that the return to their native country was but
the forerunner of that exalted rank which was to be expected at the
manifestation of Christ.

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>So far as relates to the former clause,
exiles and slaves could perceive nothing but ground for despair, when
they beheld the outward condition of things, since, after having
returned and been restored to their country, they made very little
progress in building the temple. Accordingly, he bids them look to God,
that they may expect from him the glory which is concealed from the eyes
of flesh, and, knowing that they are dear and precious in his sight, may
be fully satisfied with this, till he adorn them more bountifully by the
hand of Christ.

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span>*And the diadem of the kingdom.* He calls the
Church God’s crown, because God wishes that his glory should shine in
us; and in this it is proper that we should behold and admire the
inconceivable goodness of God, since, notwithstanding that we are by
nature filthy and corrupted, and more abominable than the mire of the
streets, yet he adorns us in such a manner that he wishes us to be “the
diadem of his kingdom.” Let us therefore be aroused by this goodness of
God to the desire of leading a holy life, that his image may more and
more be formed anew in us.

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span><span id="xv.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span>**4.** *Thou shalt no more be called
forsaken.* He meets a difficulty which might occur to the minds of
believers, seeing that they were forsaken and abandoned, while at the
same time they were called a “diadem” and a “crown.” Seeing that they
were hated and abhorred by all nations, and sometimes even lay prostrate
at the feet of their enemies, and no assistance of any kind was seen, it
might appear ridiculous that they should receive these names, and thus
be elevated to heaven and placed in the hand of God. He therefore means
that the people, though for a time they resemble a divorced and forsaken
woman, shall yet be restored so as to change their condition and name;
as if he had said, “This divorce shall not be perpetual; God will at
length receive thee to himself.” Thus, although the Church seems to be
“forsaken,” and has the appearance of a divorced woman, yet the Lord
will put an end to her afflictions and miseries.

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span>*For they shall call thee,* *My good-pleasure
in her*. He teaches that this proceeds from the “good-pleasure of God;”
that is, from his undeserved favor, that nothing may be ascribed to the
merits or excellence of men; as he says in Hosea,

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span>“I will espouse thee to me in mercy and
compassions.”  
(<span id="xv.i-p48.2"></span>[Ho
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019)<span id="xv.i-p48.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span>And thus he shews that they shall be
prosperous for no other reason than because God, out of his infinite
goodness, will graciously condescend to receive into favor those whom he
had abandoned. Although this relates strictly to the Church, yet let us
learn in general that it is by the favor and bounty of God that cities
and kingdoms are restored to their former condition, which, while he was
angry and offended, appeared to be ruined. The Prophet, therefore, holds
out to the consideration of the Jews the source of all the calamities
which they had suffered, when he testifies that when God is reconciled
to them, they will be happy; for we may gather from it that formerly God
was angry with them, when their condition was wretched and miserable.

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span>*And thy land shall be married.* This
metaphor, by which he denotes the restoration of the people, is highly
beautiful, and conveys twofold instruction. He shews that the state of
variance between God and the Church shall be terminated; first, because
she shall be received as a wife by her appeased husband; and secondly,
because the multitude of people will take away the reproach of
widowhood. The earth is, in some sense, married to its inhabitants, as
trees to vines; and, on the other hand, when it is stripped of its
inhabitants, it is said to be a widow.

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span>*For the good-pleasure of Jehovah is in
thee.* He again repeats and confirms what has been already said, that it
is owing to the undeserved kindness of God that the Church is restored,
that she remains in her condition, that the earth receives its
inhabitants; for when God turns away his face and is angry with us,
nothing can be looked for but destruction, and nothing can be expected
from the aid or strength of men.

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span><span id="xv.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p53"></span>**5.** *For as a young man marrieth a
virgin.* This verse contains nothing more than an explanation and
confirmation of the preceding verse. Now there appears to be a sort of
contradiction in this respect, that in the latter clause he makes God
the only Husband of the Church, while in the former clause he assigns to
her many husbands. But the solution is easy; for, when this marriage of
the Church is spoken of, there is but one Husband, that is, God, who
always claims for himself that title; and that is fulfilled in Christ,
to whom, as Paul says, the pastors “espouse the Church as a chaste
virgin.” (<span id="xv.i-p53.1"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p53.1"></span>.)
Yet this does not prevent the metaphor of marriage from being employed
to describe that unity of faith which all the children of God have with
their mother, the Church. Nay more, it is consistent with God being the
Husband of his Church, that he marries to his Church all the nations
that are assembled to her; for, when she is without children, she may be
said to be widowed and solitary. This is said, therefore, even with
respect to God, who, by ratifying with his guidance the sacred amity
between the members of his Church, extends the effect of marriage to the
whole body.

<span id="xv.i-p54"></span>And hence it ought to be inferred, that the
Church of God shall be truly populous, that is, shall have many
children, when she is united to God her Husband; for we must begin with
God, that he may preside over his Church, and that under his guidance we
may be gathered into her bosom; for then shall the marriage be truly
sacred. But for this a vast multitude of people will not constitute a
church, but rather an abominable brothel; as we see that in Popery there
is boasting of the name of God, and yet the majesty of God is dishonored
in it by frightful sacrilege.

<span id="xv.i-p55"></span><span id="xv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p56"></span>**6.** *On thy walls.* As the Prophet
intended to describe the perfect happiness of the kingdom of Christ, so
he makes an assemblage of all that belongs to the prosperous condition
of any country or city. To other advantages he adds guards and a
garrison; because the greatest abundance of all good things would be of
little avail, if we were not safe from enemies; and therefore he
declares that the Lord will not only supply the Church with all that is
necessary, but will also appoint faithful guards to ward off enemies and
robbers, that he may thus be recognised, both within and without, as the
author of a happy life.

<span id="xv.i-p57"></span>*Who shall not be, silent.* By “being
silent,” he means “being at rest;” as if he had said, “They will be
continually on the watch, so as to foresee at a great distance the
dangers that threaten them.”

<span id="xv.i-p58"></span>*Ye who are mindful of Jehovah.* He next
explains who these guards are, namely, those who “shall be mindful of
the Lord,” that is, shall celebrate the memory of his name. Although
among the guards we might, without impropriety, reckon the angels,
(<span id="xv.i-p58.1"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p58.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p58.2"></span>[Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="xv.i-p58.2"></span>,) to
whom we know that this office is assigned, yet because they willingly
and cheerfully watch over the safety of the Church, and do not need to
be spurred on by exhortations, the Prophet addresses his discourse to
other watchmen.

<span id="xv.i-p59"></span>The word which he employs is of doubtful
meaning.  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) Sometimes it signifies
“to remember,” and sometimes “to bring to remembrance;” and neither of
those significations will be inappropriate. But I think that he simply
means that these guards will be God’s ministers to celebrate his name.
Some render it “Making known the Lord;” but that is unnatural, and
suddenly breaks off the Prophet’s meaning; and such commentators do not
attend to the comparison of the guards of a city, which the Prophet
employs.

<span id="xv.i-p61"></span>Although the Prophet intends simply to teach
that the Church will be safe from all dangers, because she has God to
watch over her safety, yet we ought always to consider what is the
nature of Christ’s kingdom; for it is not defended by the weapons of war
or by arms, but, being spiritual, is protected by spiritual arms and
guards. The Lord will therefore have his ministers, whose agency he will
employ for defending the Church by the sword of the word, that she may
be kept safe; not by earthly guards, but by God’s secret and spiritual
power; and the Prophet explains himself by saying, “Ye who are mindful
of the Lord.” Although this statement relates to all the godly, who are
commanded to celebrate the name of God in all places, as far as lies in
their power, yet it is chiefly addressed to the priests, who,
discharging a public office, should hold out an example to others, and
devote themselves with all their heart to the praises of God.

<span id="xv.i-p62"></span>*During the whole day and the whole night.*
Here pastors are reminded of their duty; for it is not enough to feed
the Lord’s flock, if they do not likewise defend it from the attacks of
robbers and wolves. “Night and day,” therefore, they must guard and keep
watch, if they wish to perform their duty in a proper manner.

<span id="xv.i-p63"></span>*Keep not silence.* The Lord forbids them to
be silent; for he wishes them to be diligent and attentive; and in this
he shews how great is the care which he takes about the safety of the
Church. This passage testifies that it is a remarkable kindness of God,
when we have faithful pastors who take care of us; for we are exposed to
dangers of every kind, and lie open to the snares of Satan, if the Lord
do not protect us by his guards; and therefore we ought always to pray
that he would surround us with those guards which he sees that we need.

<span id="xv.i-p64"></span><span id="xv.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p65"></span>**7.** *And do not give him silence.*
Hitherto the Prophet has spoken of the office and duty of teaching; but
as this would not be enough if prayer were not likewise added, he
exhorts the ministers of the word to prayer; for I think that <span
id="xv.i-p65.1"></span>לו, (*lo*,) “to him,” refers to God. We ought,
therefore, to plead with God, and to entreat by earnest prayer, that he
will give some success to our labors, which would otherwise be
unprofitable. And since we devote ourselves entirely to preaching
doctrine, and vigorously oppose all the machinations of Satan, let us
learn, at the same time, to turn our minds to God, that he may not
permit our labors to be unsuccessful. In the same manner as he applied
the word “silence” to doctrine in the beginning of the chapter, when he
said, “I will not be silent,” so in this passage he applies it to
prayer, by which we obtain from God some fruit of doctrine. Even the
angels move us by their example to this earnestness of prayer, as we
read in Zechariah that the angel prays ardently for the restoration of
the Church. (<span id="xv.i-p65.2"></span>[Zec
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012)<span id="xv.i-p65.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p66"></span>*Till he restore.* Hence infer that there are
two distinct benefits: first, to have faithful pastors who shall watch
over the safety of the Church; secondly, that the Church be upheld and
preserved in her condition by their agency. But God, who speaks here,
claims these benefits as his own; which he also does in many other
passages. “How shall they preach,” says Paul, “unless they be sent?”
(<span id="xv.i-p66.1"></span>[Ro
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p66.1"></span>.)
It belongs to God alone, therefore, to appoint pastors; for no man could
otherwise have been “sufficient” (<span id="xv.i-p66.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p66.2"></span>) for
an office so important and so difficult; and it is he alone who promotes
by their agency the restoration of the Church; for their efforts would
be altogether vain and fruitless, if the Lord did not grant them
prosperous success. And here we see that the external agency of men is
joined with the efficacy of the Holy Spirit; for, although the Lord
alone is the author and finisher of the work, yet he brings forward
instruments which he employs for rearing the building of the Church.
This reminds us that we ought not to lose courage, even when we see
nothing but ruin and wretchedness and desolation; but it is our duty to
pray that the Lord will restore her, which he also promises that he will
do.

<span id="xv.i-p67"></span>*And till he place Jerusalem a praise.* This
means to render the Church glorious, that ground of joy may shine forth
from it; for when we feel nothing but God’s severity, we become dumb,
and are overwhelmed with shame; but when he frees us from our
afflictions, and causes us to recover, he at the same time opens our
mouth; for he supplies us with ground of praise and thanksgiving.

<span id="xv.i-p68"></span><span id="xv.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p69"></span>**8.** *Jehovah hath sworn.* He proceeds with
the metaphors which he formerly used; for since, owing to the corruption
of our nature, the kingdom of Christ cannot be described so as to be
level to our capacity; it was necessary to represent it under figures.
In the same manner as he promised, first, an abundance of all things,
and next, faithful guardianship, that the condition of believers may be
safe; so here he promises tranquillity and repose, that they may
peacefully enjoy their blessings, and may not in future be defrauded of
them. As if he had said, “Whatever thou hadst formerly in thy hands was
exposed to plunder and robbery; but now thou shalt have everything well
secured, and shall freely partake of thy corn and thy wine; and, in a
word, thou shalt enjoy thy prosperity in peace.”

<span id="xv.i-p70"></span>But since the depravity of our nature is such
that we do not place trust in God, though he promise largely and
bountifully, for this reason the Prophet represents him as swearing; for
the Lord condescends to us so far as to make use of an oath, in order to
correct still more our unbelief and obstinacy. Now, the Lord “sweareth
by himself, because” (as an Apostle says) “he hath none greater than
himself.” (<span id="xv.i-p70.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p70.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p71"></span>*By his right hand and by the arm of his
strength.* He mentions his “right arm,” that is, the power of God;
because that was appropriate to the present discourse. As if he had
said, “If I have any power, I will display it in your salvation; and
lest, in an arduous affair, your minds should slumber, I swear by my
hand, which is invincible and victorious over all, that, whatever
difficulties may arise, you shall be safe under my protection.” Whenever
therefore he promises salvation, let us think of his strength and power.

<span id="xv.i-p72"></span>*If I shall give.* This is an elliptical form
of expression; and we are taught by it the sacredness and solemnity of
an oath. The import of this declaration is, as if he had said, that he
wishes that henceforth he may not be believed, if these promises be not
justified by the event. When he promises the peaceful enjoyment of wheat
and wine, he means that it proceeded from his righteous judgment, and
did not happen by chance, that the Church was deprived of corn and wine;
for whenever enemies ravage and plunder, this is unquestionably done by
God’s permission; as he threatens in the Law. (<span
id="xv.i-p72.1"></span>[De 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033)<span
id="xv.i-p72.1"></span>.) On the other hand, it is his special blessing,
that every one eats in safety

<span id="xv.i-p73"></span>“under his vine, and under his fig-tree.”
(<span id="xv.i-p73.1"></span>[1Ki
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025)<span id="xv.i-p73.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p74"></span><span id="xv.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p75"></span>**9.** *For they who have gathered it shall
eat it.* This is an explanation and confirmation of the preceding
statement; for, after having testified that he will no longer permit
that which the Church possesses to be laid open as a prey, he adds that
she shall enjoy her possessions. Yet he shews that “corn and wine” are
justly called our own, when we have obtained them by honest industry;
for they who violently seize the bread of others, or obtain it by
unlawful means, have it not from the Lord, and cannot attribute it to
his blessing, as if they possessed it lawfully; and to this corresponds
what is said in the Psalm,

<span id="xv.i-p76"></span>“Thou shalt eat the labor of thy hands, thou
shalt be happy, and it shall be well with thee.” (<span
id="xv.i-p76.1"></span>[Ps 128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002)<span
id="xv.i-p76.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p77"></span>*And shall praise Jehovah.* But when he
promises that they who cultivate the soil shall have food, why does he
say that they will give thanks to God? And why do men praise God, if by
their own labor they gather the corn and procure the wine? It appears to
be but a pretended thanksgiving, if those things are ascribed to the
toil and industry of men; and God deserves no praise, if men procure
food by their own labor. But it ought to be observed, that the Prophet,
after having shewn what is the lawful method of seeking food, at the
same time adds that our labor will be fruitless, if the Lord do not
supply us with food; for all that we have belongs to God, and to him
alone all that we obtain ought to be ascribed.

<span id="xv.i-p78"></span>*Shall drink wine in my holy courts.* He
alludes to the solemn act of offering sacrifices; for they might drink
in other places, and every one might eat in his own dwelling. But the
allusion is to that ceremony which was observed in consecration, when
the law required that the first-fruits should be an oblation, (<span
id="xv.i-p78.1"></span>[Lev. 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012),
[Lev. 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)<span
id="xv.i-p78.1"></span>,) in order that the produce of the year might be
dedicated to God; and in the writings of Moses we frequently meet with
these words,

<span id="xv.i-p79"></span>“Thou shalt feast, and rejoice in presence of
thy God.” (<span id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>[De
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018)<span id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p80"></span><span id="xv.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p81"></span>**10.** *Pass through, pass through the
gates.* From the preceding statement he draws the conclusion, that there
shall be a free passage through the gates of the city, which formerly
were shut or in a ruinous state; shut when it was besieged by enemies;
in a ruinous state, when the city was thrown down and levelled with the
ground. He means that there shall be such a restoration of the city,
that its inhabitants shall be numerous, and there shall be frequent
passing to and from it.

<span id="xv.i-p82"></span>Some think that these words are addressed to
the pastors, that they may enter in at the gates, and go before others
as their conductors. But it is a general and figurative statement, by
which he compares the Church to a populous city, though for a time it
was ruinous and desolate, as Jerusalem had been. Others pursue more
ingenious speculations, and say that the gates of a Church are opened,
when pardon of sins is proclaimed in it, and by that message God invites
all to come to him. But if we wish to get at the Prophet’s meaning, we
must believe that all these things are spoken figuratively, as we have
already mentioned.

<span id="xv.i-p83"></span>*Clear the way for the people.* This is,
strictly speaking, the duty of teachers; but the Prophet speaks in
general terms, and addresses all whose agency the Lord employed for
preparing the way for the people. At that time, indeed, he spoke to
Medes and Persians, by means of whom he opened up the way for the Jews,
that they might return to their native country; but next he includes all
others by whom the Lord restored his Church.

<span id="xv.i-p84"></span>*Level, level the road.* He authoritatively
commands all men to “clear and level the roads;” that the Jews might
know that every obstacle shall easily be removed, and that all men,
however inveterate their hostility, shall immediately obey the command
of God. In this way he enjoins believers to gird themselves manfully for
the work, as if many workmen were ready to give assistance, and the
emphatic repetition of the word (“Level, level”) deserves notice as
intended to express certainty.

<span id="xv.i-p85"></span>*Pave it with stones.* <span
id="xv.i-p85.1"></span>סקל (*sikkel*) sometimes means to remove stones,
and sometimes to pave with stones; and I think that it ought rather to
be understood here in this latter signification, though commentators are
generally of a different opinion.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)

<span id="xv.i-p87"></span>*Lift up a standard to the peoples.* This is
of the same import with the former clause; for the Prophet means that
the peoples shall obey the command of God, in the same manner as
subjects are wont to obey princes; for they shall assemble and run
together when “the standard is lifted up,” and shall lend their aid to
bring back the people; and thus he extols in lofty terms the power of
God, that the Jews might be fully persuaded that they would one day be
restored.  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="xv.i-p89"></span><span id="xv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p90"></span>**11.** *Behold, Jehovah hath, proclaimed.*
He means that the Lord, by acting miraculously and beyond the judgment
or expectation of the flesh, will cause all the nations to know that
this is done by his command. It might be objected, How shall it be
brought about that the peoples, who now make fierce resistance to God,
shall become obedient to him? He assigns the reason, “Because the Lord
will proclaim your return, so that they shall acknowledge that at his
command you are restored.”

<span id="xv.i-p91"></span>*Say ye to the daughter of Zion.* Undoubtedly
this refers literally to the ministers of the word and to the prophets,
whom the Lord invests with this office of promising deliverance and
salvation to the Church. And hence we conclude that these promises are
not merely limited to a single age, but must be extended to the end of
the world; for, beginning at the return from Babylon into Judea, we must
advance as far as the coming of Christ, by which this prophecy was at
length accomplished, and redemption was brought to a conclusion; for the
Savior came, when the grace of God was proclaimed by the Gospel. In a
word, he foretells that the voice of God shall one day resound from the
rising to the setting of the sun, and shall be heard, not by a single
nation only, but by all nations.

<span id="xv.i-p92"></span>*Behold, the Savior cometh.* This is a word
which, we know, belongs peculiarly to the Gospel; and therefore he bids
the teachers of the Church encourage the hearts of believers, by
confirmed expectation of the coming of the Lord, though he appeared to
be at a great distance from his people. But this promise relates chiefly
to the reign of Christ, by which these things were fully and perfectly
accomplished; for he actually exhibited himself as the “Savior” of his
Church, as we have seen before in the fortieth chapter.

<span id="xv.i-p93"></span>*Behold, his reward is with him, and the
effect of his work is before him.* That they may no longer be distressed
by any doubt, when God the Savior shall appear, he invests him with
power, as in <span id="xv.i-p93.1"></span>[Isa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p93.1"></span>;
for he repeats the same words which we found in that passage. As if he
had said, “As soon as it shall please God to display his hand, the
effect will be rapid and sudden; for so long as he stops or delays, the
judgment of the flesh pronounces him to be idle;” and we see how very
many fanatics imagine some deity that has no existence, as if they were
painting a dead image. Justly, therefore, does the Prophet declare that
God’s “work and reward are before him,” that he may make it evident,
whenever it shall be necessary, that he is the righteous Judge of the
world.

<span id="xv.i-p94"></span><span id="xv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p95"></span>**12.** *And they shall call you a holy
people.* He describes the benefit of the coming of the Lord; that is,
because, by shewing that he takes care of his elect as his heritage, he
will make it evident to the whole world that the covenant of adoption,
which he made with Abraham, was not deceptive. He therefore calls them
“a holy people,” because the Lord hath separated and consecrated them to
himself; for, although he governs all nations, he has deigned to choose
the seed of Abraham, that he might make them the object of his peculiar
care. (<span id="xv.i-p95.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="xv.i-p95.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p96"></span>*The redeemed of Jehovah*. In the sense now
stated, God declares that they shall be a holy people, when he shall
appear as their Savior and Redeemer; for, as the people are said to be
“profaned” when they lie amidst filth, being afflicted and distressed by
the reproaches of the wicked, so they are said to be “sanctified,” when
the Lord actually shews that he presides over their salvation. This was
accomplished by a wonderful redemption; and at that time God also
testified that he remembered his heritage, which, in the eyes of men, he
appeared to have forsaken and disregarded; for in these words, Sought
out,  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) not forsaken, is denoted a
contrast between the time when God made a divorce from his people, and
the time when he again reconciled to himself those whom he had cast off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc16014.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xv.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p60"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p60.1"></span>המזכירים
*(hammazkirim)* admits of three interpretations, all consistent with
Isaiah’s usage. In <span id="xv.i-p60.2"></span>[Isa.
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#003),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#022)<span id="xv.i-p60.2"></span>, it
seems to mean an official recorder or historiographer. In <span
id="xv.i-p60.3"></span>[Isa 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)<span
id="xv.i-p60.3"></span>, it means one burning incense as a memorial
oblation. Hence <span id="xv.i-p60.4"></span>אזכרה, *(uzkarah,)* the
name used in the Law of Moses to denote such an offering. (See <span
id="xv.i-p60.5"></span>[Lev. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002),
[Lev. 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#012), [Lev.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p60.5"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p60.6"></span>[Nu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#026)<span id="xv.i-p60.6"></span>.) In
<span id="xv.i-p60.7"></span>[Isa
43:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)<span id="xv.i-p60.7"></span>,
the verb means to remind God of something which he seems to have
forgotten; and as this is an appropriate description of importunate
intercession, it is here entitled to the preference.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc16014.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xv.i-p85.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p86"></span> “The words <span id="xv.i-p86.1"></span>סקלו
מאבן *(sakkelu meeben)* are used elliptically for <span
id="xv.i-p86.2"></span>סקלו הדרך מאבן*, (sakkelu hadderek meeben,)*
‘remove the stones from the road;’ for <span id="xv.i-p86.3"></span>סקל,
*(sikkel,)* which.in general means ‘to stone, or to throw stones,’ as
<span id="xv.i-p86.4"></span>ויסקל באבנים את דוד, *(vayesakkel baabanim
eth David,)* (<span id="xv.i-p86.5"></span>[2 Sam.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#013)<span id="xv.i-p86.5"></span>,)
here means to take away many stones, as in <span
id="xv.i-p86.6"></span>[Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)<span
id="xv.i-p86.6"></span>; and <span id="xv.i-p86.7"></span>מאבן
*(meeben,)* as Jarchi remarks, is equivalent to <span
id="xv.i-p86.8"></span>מהיות שם אבן, *(mihyoth sham eben,)* ‘that there
may be no stones there,’ at which travellers might stumble. Thus, ‘I
will make them <span id="xv.i-p86.9"></span>מאדם, *(meadam)* from a
man;’ that is, that not a man shall be left. (<span
id="xv.i-p86.10"></span>[Ho 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#012)<span
id="xv.i-p86.10"></span>.)” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc16014.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p88"></span> “Here the style of the Prophet is very
Pindarical. First, he speaks to the captives, as if he saw them near the
gates of Babylon, and bids them go through them, that is, pass out of
the place of their captivity; then, as if he saw workmen in the road, he
bids them level the ground, and make it plain, that they may not be
tired by ascending and descending steep precipices, nor hurt their feet
with sharp stones; then, as if they had not yet received notice of their
deliverance, or were not informed of the place where they were to
rendezvous, in order to return altogether, he commands a standard to be
erected for the people, that is, over their heads, so high that it might
he seen by those at the greatest distance.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc16014.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p97"></span> “The word <span
id="xv.i-p97.1"></span>דרושה, *(derushah,)* the name that shall be given
to Jerusalem, is rendered by some *sought after,* that is, a city to
which, as being very highly celebrated and visited by crowds of
strangers, all shall resort and shall desire to be enrolled among her
citizens. Others render it *cared for,* that is, by Jehovah, who
appeared to have abandoned and given her up to forgetfulness, as her
citizens complained. (<span id="xv.i-p97.2"></span>[Isa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014)<span id="xv.i-p97.2"></span>.)
Both agree with what is here added, ‘A city not forsaken.’ (See <span
id="xv.i-p97.3"></span>[Jer
30:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014)<span
id="xv.i-p97.3"></span>.)” — *Rosenmuller.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 63](cc16015)
