[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16008)  [Next](cc16010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 57.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
57:1-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** The righteous perisheth, and no man
layeth *it* to heart: and merciful men *are* taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil *to come*

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Justus periit, et nemo est qui cor
adjiciat. Viri misericordiae colligantur, nec est qui animadvertat, quod
a facie mali colligatur justus.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** He shall enter into peace: they shall
rest in their beds, *each one* walking *in* his uprightness.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Veniet pax, quiescent in cubilibus suis,
quisquis ambulat coram eo.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** But draw near hither, ye sons of the
sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et vos accedite huc, filii veneficae,
semen adulteri et meretricis.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4.** Against whom do ye sport yourselves?
against whom make ye a wide mouth, *and* draw out the tongue? *are* ye
not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Super quem oblectati estis? Super quo
aperuistis os? Exeruistis linguam? Annon vos filii praevaricatores?
Semen mendax?

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5.** Enflaming yourselves with idols under
every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts
of the rocks?

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Incalescentes in quercubus (*vel, cum
diis*) sub omni arbore frondosa, immolantes pueros in convallibus, sub
prominentiis riparum.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**6.** Among the smooth *stones* of the stream
*is* thy portion; they, they *are* thy lot: even to them hast thou
poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I
receive comfort in these?

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6.** In politis lapidibus (*vel, in partibus
torrentis*) vallis pars tua; ipsi, ipsi sors tua. Etiam ipsis fudisti
libamen, obtulisti sacrificium; an super his oblectationem capiam
(*vel,* *poenitentia ducar*)?

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**7.** Upon a lofty and high mountain hast
thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7.** Super montem excelsum et elevatum
posuisti stratum tuum. Etiam illuc ascendisti ad immolandum victimam.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**8.** Behind the doors also and the posts
hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered *thyself to
another* than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made
thee *a covenant* with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest
*it.*

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8.** Post ostium et postem posuisti
memoriale tuum; discooperta es a me; ascendisti, dilatasti lectum tuum,
fecisti cum iis foedus, dilexisti lectum eorum, loco quem vidisti.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>**9.** And thou wentest to the king with
ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers
far off, and didst debase *thyself even* unto hell.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et profecta es ad regem cum oleo,
multiplicasti pigmenta tua; misisti legatos tuos ad locum remontum
humiliata es usque ad inferos.

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**10.** Thou art wearied in the greatness of
thy way; *yet* saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the
life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span>**10.** Fatigata es in multiplici itinere tuo;
nec dixisti, Desperatum est. Invenisti vitam manus tuae, ideo non
doluisti.

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**11.** And of whom hast thou been afraid or
feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid *it*
to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me
not?

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et quem reverita es, et timuisti, quod
mentita es, et mei non es recordata, nec posuisti super cor tuum? Annon
quia ego dissimulavi, et a seculo ideo me non times?

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>**12.** I will declare thy righteousness, and
thy works; for they shall not profit thee.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ego annuntiabo justitiam tuam et opera
tua, nec proderunt tibi.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**13.** When thou criest, let thy companies
deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take
*them:* but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and
shall inherit my holy mountain;

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**13.** Dum clamaveris, liberent to
collectitii tui. Atqui omnes tollet ventus, rapiet vanitas. Qui autem in
me sperat haereditate obtinebit terram, et possidebit montem sanctitatis
meae.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**14.** And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up,
prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et dicet, Sternite, sternite,
complanate vaim, tollite offendiculum e via populi mei.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**15.** For thus saith the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth eternity, whose name *is* Holy; I dwell in the high and
holy *place,* with him also *that is* of a contrite and humble spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quoniam sic dixit excelsus et
sublimis, habitans in perpetuitate, cui nomen Sanctus: Excelsum et
sanctum incolo, et cum afflicto et qui humilis est spiritu, ut vivificem
spiritum humilium, ut vivificem cot afflictorum.

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>**16.** For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me,
and the souls *which* I have made.

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>**16.** Quia non in perpetuum litigabo, neque
semper irascar. Nam spiritus a facie mea induetur (*vel latebit, aut
deficiet*;) et flatus ego feci.

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>**17.** For the iniquity of his covetousness
was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on
frowardly in the way of his heart.

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>**17.** Propter iniquitatem cupiditatis ejus
iratus fui, et percussi eum; abscondi me, et irascar; ipse autem aversus
abiit in via cordis sui.

<span id="x.i-p36"></span>**18.** I have seen his ways, and will heal
him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his
mourners.

<span id="x.i-p37"></span>**18.** Vias ejus vidi, et sanabo eum, et
ducam eum, reddens ei consolationes et lugentibus ejus.

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**19.** I create the fruit of the lips; Peace,
peace to *him that is* far off, and to *him that is* near, saith the
LORD; and I will heal him.

<span id="x.i-p39"></span>**19.** Creo fructum labiorum. Pax, pax,
longinquis et propinquis, dicit Iehova, et sano eum.

<span id="x.i-p40"></span>**20.** But the wicked *are* like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

<span id="x.i-p41"></span>**20.** Impii autem quasi mare dispulsum, quod
quiescere non poterit; et projicient aquae ejus coenum et lutum.

<span id="x.i-p42"></span>**21.** *There is* no peace, saith my God, to
the wicked.

<span id="x.i-p43"></span>**21.** Non est pax, dixit Deus meus, impiis.

<span id="x.i-p44"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p45"></span><span id="x.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p46"></span>**1.** *The righteous man hath perished.*
Isaiah continues his subject; for, after having shown how fearlessly
hypocrites indulge in their luxuries, and with what impudence they
despise the word of God, he likewise complains that they do not consider
the works of God. We have been placed here, as in a spacious theater, to
behold the works of God; and there is no work of God so small that we
ought to pass by it; lightly, but all ought to be carefully and
diligently observed.

<span id="x.i-p47"></span>*And no man layeth it to heart.* The Lord
holds out as a mirror this event of his providence, more remarkable than
all others, that he takes away good and worthy men out of this life,
when he determines to chastise his people severely. But no man considers
it, or reflects that it is a token of approaching destruction, that God
gathers them, and places them in safety from being distressed by
prevailing afflictions. The general meaning is, that wicked men
grievously deceive themselves by supposing that there is no greater
happiness than to have life continued to a great age, and by thus
pluming themselves on their superiority to the servants of God, who die
early. Being attached to the world, they likewise harden themselves by
this pretense, that, by nothing else than a manifestation of God’s favor
towards them, while others die, they continue to be safe and sound.

<span id="x.i-p48"></span>*Men of mercy are gathered.* If by “men of
mercy” be meant kind or tender-hearted men, this description ought to be
carefully studied, by which the Prophet shows what is the true
righteousness of the children of God; for hypocrites reckon this to be
of no value. But nothing is more acceptable to God than kindness, by
which we give evidence of our righteousness, and manifest that our heart
is free from all hypocrisy. Yet we may with equal propriety take the
phrase “men of mercy” in a passive sense, as meaning those whom the Lord
has embraced by his mercy; for it is a phrase of frequent occurrence in
Hebrew writings. Nor will it be inappropriate to suppose that there is
an implied contrast between the grace of God and the wicked and
unfavorable judgments of men; for they are wont to look on those persons
as condemned who are taken away in the flower of their age. But, since
God, in many passages of Scripture, represents gentleness and kindness
as a distinguishing mark of his children, this may be, as I have said, a
definition of true righteousness.

<span id="x.i-p49"></span>Hence we see that the Lord, at that time,
gathered many good men, whose death portended some dreadful calamity,
and yet that the Jews paid no regard to such forewarnings, and even
proceeded to more daring lengths of wickedness; for they thought that
all went well with them, when they were the survivors of many excellent
men. This doctrine is highly appropriate to every age. It frequently
happens that God takes good men out of this world, when he intends to
punish severely the iniquities of the ungodly; for the Lord, having a
peculiar regard to his own people, takes compassion upon them, and, as
it were, snatches them from the burning, that even survivors may
perceive in it the wrath of God. And yet this is not an invariable rule;
for righteous men are frequently involved, along with the reprobate, in
temporal punishments; but it is so frequent that it rarely happens
otherwise.  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)

<span id="x.i-p51"></span>In our own times a remarkable instance of this
was given in the death of Luther, who was snatched from the world a
short time before that terrible calamity befell Germany, which he had
foretold many years before, when he exclaimed loudly against that
contempt of the Gospel, and that wickedness and licentiousness which
everywhere prevailed. Frequently had he entreated the Lord to call him
out of this life before he beheld that dreadful punishment, the
anticipation of which filled him with trembling and horror. And he
obtained it from the Lord. Soon after his death, lo, a sudden and
unforeseen war sprang up, by which Germany was terribly afflicted, when
nothing was farther from her thoughts than the dread of such a calamity.

<span id="x.i-p52"></span>Instances of this kind occur every day; and if
men observed them, they would not so heedlessly flatter themselves and
their vices. But I thought it right to take special notice of this
event, both because it happened lately,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) and because in so distinguished a
preacher of the Gospel and prophet of God it must be more clearly seen.
We ought, therefore, to consider diligently the worlds of the Lord, both
in the life and in the death of “the righteous,” but especially in their
death, by which the Lord calls them away to a better life, that they may
be rescued from those afflictions in which the wicked must be plunged.

<span id="x.i-p54"></span><span id="x.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p55"></span>**2.** *Peace shall come.* The Prophet
describes what shall be the condition of believers in death; for the
wicked, who think that there is no life but the present, imagine that
good men have perished; because in death they see nothing but ruin. For
this reason he says that “Peace shall come,” which is more desirable
than a thousand lives full of trouble; as if he compared them to
discharged soldiers, who are and allowed to enjoy case and quietness.

<span id="x.i-p56"></span>*They shall rest in their beds.* He adds the
metaphor of sleep, in order to show that they shall be absolutely free
from all the uneasiness of cares, just as if they were safely pleasantly
asleep “on their beds.”

<span id="x.i-p57"></span>*Whosoever walketh before him.*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) I do not think that the verb “walketh”
is connected with <span id="x.i-p58.2"></span>שלום, (*shalom*,) “peace,”
as some do, who suppose the meaning to be this, that peace shall go
before believers, so as to be, as it were, the guide of their life. But
I am of opinion that believers, on the contrary, are described by it; as
if he had said, “Whosoever walketh before God shall enjoy peace.” Thus,
when righteous men die, and their various labors are finished, and their
course is ended, they are called to peace and repose. They “rest in
their beds,” because they do not yet enjoy perfect blessedness and
glory; but they wail; for the last day of the resurrection, when
everything shall be perfectly restored; and that, I think, is what
Isaiah meant.

<span id="x.i-p59"></span>It will be said, “Do not righteous men enjoy
this peace while they live?” for the fruit of faith is, that; “in
patience we may possess our souls.” (<span id="x.i-p59.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span id="x.i-p59.1"></span>)
Although faith produces peace in our hearts, (<span
id="x.i-p59.2"></span>[Ro 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span
id="x.i-p59.2"></span>) yet we are tossed about by various storms and
tempests; and never in life are we so calm and peaceful as when the Lord
takes us to himself. Peaceful and calm, therefore, is the death of the
righteous, (<span id="x.i-p59.3"></span>[Ps
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p59.3"></span>)
for it is “precious in the sight of God;” but stormy is the death of the
wicked.  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) Hence also we may learn
that souls are immortal; for if souls had no feeling, (as some fanatics
have dreamed,) they could not enjoy “peace.” Thus they enjoy peace and
repose, because they live in Christ.

<span id="x.i-p61"></span><span id="x.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p62"></span>**3.** And draw near, ye sons of the
sorceress. After having spoken of the happy and peaceful death of good
men, he breaks out with very great vehemence against the wicked, who did
not cease to lead a base and shameful life, and were not moved by the
death of believers. As he had said that good men enjoy peace, so he
threatens that the wicked shall have ceaseless war. He taught that to
the holy servants of God death shall even be like a hiding-place, to
shelter them from the whirlwind, and storm, and other tempests, that he
might threaten the worst of evils against the obstinate despisers of
God. Here we ought to observe the contrast, between good men who walk
before God, and the wicked, who cease not rebelliously to resist God.
The former shall enjoy peace when they die; the latter shall have no
peace during life, and shall feel dreadful torments in death.

<span id="x.i-p63"></span>He orders them to come forth to the
judgment­seat of God, which they hope that they will be able to escape
by their disguises; and therefore he affirms that they gain nothing by
their refusal, for they shall be dragged against their will. The more
hardened they were, the sharper were the excitements that must be
applied to them; and therefore the harshness of the Prophet could not be
excessive, either in arousing their stupidity, or in casting down their
pride. And indeed it is well known how insolent was the vanity of the
Jews on account of their genealogy; for which reason the prophets
frequently beat down their haughtiness and pride, and affirmed that they
were not the children of Abraham, because they were bastards and
traitors.

<span id="x.i-p64"></span>On this account Isaiah calls them “the seed of
the adulterous and the whore.” In like manner Ezekiel reproaches them,
“Thy father is an Amorite; thy mother a Hittite.” (<span
id="x.i-p64.1"></span>[Eze 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)<span
id="x.i-p64.1"></span>) Similar forms of expression are found ill many
parts of Scripture. Thus he beats down their intolerable hardihood, and
drags them forward unwillingly and reluctantly, that they might not
think that they could escape the judgment­seat of God.

<span id="x.i-p65"></span><span id="x.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p66"></span>**4.** *On whom have ye made sport?* The
Prophet shows that there is no reason why the Jews should boast so
proudly on the pretense of their birth, seeing that they mocked at God
and the prophets. They thought that they had to deal with men, when they
rejected the word; as we see that wicked men in the present day, while
they fearlessly despise the doctrine of God and laugh at ministers,
nevertheless shelter themselves, and falsely glory in the name of God.
This is the reason why the Prophet bears hard upon them and censures
with severity.

<span id="x.i-p67"></span>*On whom have ye opened the mouth?* The
meaning of the words is, “When ye put forth the tongue against God, and
mock his word, do ye think that ye have to deal with a mortal man?” The
question (“On whom?“) means that they resorted to disguises and
concealments, in order to conceal their impiety; for wicked men do not
confess that they are rebels against God, and even complain that they
are very unjustly treated. But they must be dragged to the light and
convicted of their wickedness; for if there be a God in heaven, they
carry on war with him, by attacking and rejecting his word and treating
it as a fable.

<span id="x.i-p68"></span>To “open the mouth” and to “put forth the
tongue” mean the same thing, except that by these expressions he has
more fully described their wickedness, in not only rejecting God, but
also mocking him. The inward contempt of the heart had driven them to
open jeers and blasphemies, so that they were not moved by any fear of
disgrace.

<span id="x.i-p69"></span>*Seed of the adulterer and the whore.* At
length he concludes that they are treacherous children, a lying seed,
and that he has justly reproached them with being “the children of the
whore;” for such contempt of God could not be found in the children of
Abraham. Hence we learn in what manner wicked men ought to be treated,
and with what severity they ought to be reproved, that they may not
flatter themselves; and the more they despise everything that is held
out in the name of God, the more ought their sacrilegious wickedness to
be exposed and dragged forth to public view.

<span id="x.i-p70"></span><span id="x.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p71"></span>**5.** *Inflaming yourselves.* Others render
it, “Taking delight” or “consolation;” but the Prophet makes use of a
metaphor which is often found in Scripture, and which is exceedingly
adapted to the present subject; for the Lord compares the ardor by which
idolaters are hurried along to the love of a harlot, by which poor
wretched men are inflamed so as to be transported with blind eagerness.
(<span id="x.i-p71.1"></span>[Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p71.1"></span>; <span
id="x.i-p71.2"></span>[Hos. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002), [Hos.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#005)<span id="x.i-p71.2"></span>)
Idolaters have no moderation, and do not permit themselves to be
reclaimed from their madness by any arguments. In the sight of God
idolatry is a very base kind of fornication.

<span id="x.i-p72"></span>*Under the oaks,* or, *with the gods.* Some
translate <span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>אלים (*elim*) “gods,” and others
“oaks.”  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) I leave every one at
liberty to adopt either reading; for the meaning will always be the
same, and commentators are agreed that the Prophet condemns idolatry. I
do not dispute, therefore, about the reading; though it is probable that
the same thing is twice repeated, in accordance with the practice of
Hebrew writers, in a particular and in a general form, and yet that the
Prophet, by means of an ambiguous word, alludes to “the gods.”

<span id="x.i-p74"></span>*Sacrificing children.* Here he bears still
harder on the Jews, and shows that they are not the true seed of
Abraham; seeing that they pollute themselves with superstitions of every
kind. In consequence of the delight which the Jews took in such
practices, he exposes their vileness. “You shelter yourselves, indeed,
under the name of religion, but I declare that you commit fornication
with idols.” In this manner it was proper to expose and freely to point
out that wickedness which base and malicious men endeavor to cloak under
various pretenses; and thus the Prophet boldly discharges his duty by
summoning men to the judgment­seat of God, and holding them to be
guilty, though they wish to take every method of excusing themselves. He
shows that they are treacherous, and have departed from the law of God
by abominable idolatry, and mentions one kind of shocking and even
accursed and monstrous worship; namely, the “sacrificing of children,”
from which it is very evident how powerful is the spirit of error, when
men have once turned aside from God. Satan seizes their minds (<span
id="x.i-p74.1"></span>[2Th 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span
id="x.i-p74.1"></span>) in such a manner that he drives them altogether
to madness and rage. They who do not hesitate to slay their children, as
if on the ground of its being a righteous sacrifice, must be in a state
of furious madness.

<span id="x.i-p75"></span>And yet those cruel murderers of their
children did not want some pretense; for they cloaked their crime under
the example of Abraham, who did. not spare (<span
id="x.i-p75.1"></span>[Ge 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)<span
id="x.i-p75.1"></span>) his only­begotten son; and the ancient Hebrew
writers pronounce it to have been (<span
id="x.i-p75.2"></span>κακοζηλία) a wicked imitation “If we are Abraham’s
descendants, we ought not to spare our children.” But Abraham did this
(<span id="x.i-p75.3"></span>[Ge
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)<span id="x.i-p75.3"></span>) by
the command of God; while they did it of their own accord, and without
God’s command. It was an extraordinary example, by which the Lord
intended to try and attest Abraham’s faith. Besides, Isaac was not
sacrificed; for the Lord was satisfied with Abraham’s cheerful and ready
will. (<span id="x.i-p75.4"></span>[Ge
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)<span id="x.i-p75.4"></span>)
They slew their children. It was, therefore, a perverse and damnable
imitation, for they differed widely from their father This should be
carefully observed; for a large portion of superstitions has proceeded
from this source of (<span id="x.i-p75.5"></span>κακοζηλία) wicked
imitation. Men have rashly and without discrimination seized on
everything that was done by the fathers.

<span id="x.i-p76"></span><span id="x.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p77"></span>**6.** *Amidst polished stones,* or, *in parts
of the valley.* He continues the same subject, and reproves in various
ways the superstitions which abounded in Judea; for no place was
altogether free from idolatry. There were no rocks, no rivers, no
valleys, no corner whatever, in which they had not erected a monument of
their superstition. They had their groves and mountains, in which they
sacrificed after the manner of the Gentiles.

<span id="x.i-p78"></span>Whether we here adopt the reading, “Polished
stones,” or “Parts of the river,” the meaning will be the same. The
Prophet means that the Jews chose their own method of worshipping God,
and turned aside from the rule which he had laid down in his Law; and
consequently that every kind of worship which they followed by their own
choice was abominable and wicked; for in religion and in the worship of
God it is only to the voice of God that we ought to listen. If it be
thought preferable to render it “polished stones,” then Isaiah rebukes
the contempt of the Law by which God forbade the use of hammers, (<span
id="x.i-p78.1"></span>[Ex 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025)<span
id="x.i-p78.1"></span>) in hewing or chiselling the stones to be
employed in building the altar; for he did not wish that sacrifices
should be offered on any but one altar. But as it was customary with the
Gentiles to dedicate temples near fountains and rivers, the other
meaning will be equally appropriate.

<span id="x.i-p79"></span>*They, they are thy lot.* The repetition of
“they, they” is highly emphatic. A word may be supplied by way of
permission, as if the Lord permitted the Jews to abide by their
practices, since they had forsaken him and preferred idols and false
worship; as it is said, “Go, sacrifice to idols.” (<span
id="x.i-p79.1"></span>[Eze 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)<span
id="x.i-p79.1"></span>) I am disposed to favor this reading; as if he
had said, “I leave to you your inventions, and willingly permit you to
be entirely devoted to them, and relinquish my right; for I have nothing
to do with traitors and apostates.” And yet he undoubtedly alludes to
that passage in the writings of Moses, by whose mouth God said that he
would be the inheritance of his people, so that they ought to be
satisfied with having him alone. (<span id="x.i-p79.2"></span>[Nu
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020)<span id="x.i-p79.2"></span>)
This was also followed by David, who says, “The Lord is my portion, my
inheritance.” (<span id="x.i-p79.3"></span>[Ps
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span id="x.i-p79.3"></span>)
Since, therefore, the Jews had revolted from God, and had followed
idols, the Lord justly commanded them to keep the idols to themselves,
and intimated that he would have nothing in common with them.

<span id="x.i-p80"></span>*Even to them hast thou poured a
drink-offering.* He proceeds in enumerating superstitions, and confirms
the statement that he has been rejected and cast off by them; for they
alienated to false gods what he wished to belong to himself alone. The
Jews might have replied to every word of the Prophet, that they had no
other intention than to worship God. But the Prophet pays no regard to
such idle and frivolous pretenses; for the wrath of God is provoked by
false worship, and is the more inflamed by it in proportion as it is
more constant and longer continued. Hence we learn what sobriety we
ought to observe in the worship of God, that we may depend on his word
alone; for whosoever shall swerve from it in the smallest degree, will
not only lose his labor, but will kindle the wrath of God, whose majesty
he wickedly insults and does all that is in his power to lessen.

<span id="x.i-p81"></span>*Shall I take pleasure in these things?* It
might also be translated, “Shall I repent?” This interpretation has been
most generally adopted, because he wishes to assign a reason why he
punishes the people. As if he had said, “When I take vengeance for these
transgressions, is it possible that I shall repent?“ Yet the
interpretation which I have followed appears to me preferable, “Shall I
take delight, or consolation, from those sacrifices which thou hast
offered to me?” For idolaters commonly take delight in their own
inventions, and imagine that God also is delighted with everything that
they pursue with mad and furious eagerness. Nor is such a question
superfluous; for men think that God is like themselves, and will approve
of everything that is agreeable to them. On the contrary, he declares
that nothing is approved by him, or is acceptable to him, but what
agrees with his word.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109)

<span id="x.i-p83"></span><span id="x.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p84"></span>**7.** *Upon a lofty and high mountain.* He
again repeats that metaphor at which we have formerly glanced.
Superstitious persons commit fornication with their idols, because, by
forsaking the simplicity of the word, they violate the bond of that holy
marriage into which God has entered with them, and prostitute themselves
to Satan. But now Isaiah intended to express something more; for, when
he says that they set up their bed on a lofty place, he means that they
are not at all ashamed of their shameful conduct. As a harlot, who has
lost all shame, dreads not the sight of men, and cares not about her
reputation, so they openly and shamefully committed fornication in a
lofty and conspicuous place. He compares altars and groves to “beds” on
which that accursed crime is committed, and he compares men who
sacrifice on them to impudent and abandoned harlots. As to the opinion
entertained by some, that this relates to the couches on which they
reclined at their sacrificial feasts, there is no good foundation for
it.

<span id="x.i-p85"></span>*To offer a sacrifice.* Here he describes
without a figure that kind of fornication which he rebukes, namely, that
they offered sacrifices to idols. They imagined, indeed, that in doing
so they were rendering obedience to God; but the Lord rejects all that
men contrive according to their own pleasure, and abhors that
licentiousness.

<span id="x.i-p86"></span><span id="x.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p87"></span>**8.** *Behind the door.* He dwells largely on
the crime of which we have already spoken, that the people may no longer
flatter themselves in their inventions. It is probable that Isaiah
alludes to the words of Moses, by which God commanded them to have the
Law continually placed before them, to attach it to the posts of their
houses, and to keep it written and wrapped around their arms and the
fringes of their garments, that they might be constantly reminded of
their duty. (<span id="x.i-p87.1"></span>[Deut.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#009), [Deut.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#020)<span id="x.i-p87.1"></span>) But
the Jews, on the contrary, polluted the doors and posts of their houses
by tokens of idolatry, and left no corner free or pure from such
pollutions. Thus they came to forget everywhere God and the Law, and
substituted in their room the excitements of their own lust.

<span id="x.i-p88"></span>*Thou hast enlarged thy bed*. He again repeats
what he formerly said, and returns to that clause, that the Jews most
basely commit fornication with idols when they think that they are
worshipping God; because they do not follow the rule of the word. It is
the same as if a woman, having forsaken her husband, should prostitute
herself in a brothel, and freely receive all that came, as if the bed
had been a large plain, and capable of containing a vast multitude.

<span id="x.i-p89"></span>For this reason he says that she was detected
by him, because, having laid aside the modesty of the married state, she
allowed herself to be dishonored and ravished by others; for God holds
the place of a husband, to whom she ought to have been subject, but she
sought new husbands, and broke the bond of marriage, he describes their
aggravated guilt, by saying that the Jews of their own accord devoted
themselves to idols, as if a base woman ran after a man with blind
eagerness.

<span id="x.i-p90"></span>*Thou lovedst their bed in the place which
thou sawest.* By a different figure he accuses them of that hasty love,
because, as if by a single glance, they were suddenly and eagerly
hurried on to any place whatever. Yet he blames the rashness of men, who
think that they are sagacious in worshipping God, and select places
according to their own pleasure. But this sagacity is diabolical; for
God commands us to keep our eyes fixed on himself and his word, so as to
be closed against everything else.

<span id="x.i-p91"></span><span id="x.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p92"></span>**9.** *And thou wentest to the king with
ointment.* Here the Prophet censures another vice closely allied to the
former; for ungodliness begets various errors, and leads into grievous
and intricate distresses those minds which are frivolous and destitute
of the fear of God; for it is proper that they who refuse to rest on God
should be tossed about, or rather driven up and down. He therefore
reproaches the Jews with having labored much and long in seeking the
assistance of the wicked; that is, with having attempted to bring the
Egyptians against the Assyrians, and next, when they had been
disappointed of their hope, with having begun to betake themselves to
the Babylonians. When their hearts have been estranged from God, they
seek assistance from another quarter, and by great labor and expense
bring upon themselves severer distresses. Yet while the Lord grants
repose to his people, that they may perform their work in peace, wicked
men “vex themselves in vain, rise early, go late to rest, eat the bread
of sorrow,” as it is said, (<span id="x.i-p92.1"></span>[Ps
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span id="x.i-p92.1"></span>) and
yet do not gain a farthing, because all that they do is without God’s
authority or guidance. But the Spirit inflicts on them this punishment,
so that they incessantly wander and are tossed about in doubt and
uncertainty, and never can find rest in their minds.

<span id="x.i-p93"></span><span id="x.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p94"></span>**10.** *Thou art wearied.* He means that men
undertake superfluous and useless labors, when they do not follow God.
They vex themselves in vain, as has been already said; for nothing that
is attempted in opposition to God can ever be successful. Besides, he
wittily ridicules the wicked practices of those who choose rather to
waste themselves by incessant toil than to advance calmly wherever God
calls them.

<span id="x.i-p95"></span>*And hast not said, There is no hope;* that
is, “Although thou seest that thy labors are fruitless, yet thou
obstinately perseverest and pursuest thy designs; whereas even fools,
when they are unsuccessful, commonly repent.” Men must therefore be
obstinate and desperate, when an unhappy and unsuccessful issue of their
schemes does not sometimes lead them to ask themselves, What are you
doing? Jeremiah glances at this obstinacy, hut in different words; for
he says that the Jews were so fool­hardy as to say,

<span id="x.i-p96"></span>“We are undone, yet we will follow our own
thoughts. This has been determined by us, and our opinion cannot be
changed.” (<span id="x.i-p96.1"></span>[Jer
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)<span id="x.i-p96.1"></span>)

<span id="x.i-p97"></span>But here he censures that stupidity which
bewildered them so much that they could not acknowledge their folly and
repent, and turn again to the right road.

<span id="x.i-p98"></span>*Thou hast found the life of thine hand.*
“Life” is here supposed by some to mean “food; “as if the Prophet had
said, “Thy labor was as delightful to thee as if thou wert gaining food
for thyself by thy hand.”  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)
Others take “the life of the hand” to mean delight, or the highest
pleasure; and both interpretations amount to the same thing.

<span id="x.i-p100"></span>But there is somewhat greater difficulty in
the question, “Does he speak sincerely or ironically?” If the words be
taken in the literal sense, the meaning will be, “Thou didst not grieve,
because fortune appeared to favor thee for a time.” When unbelievers
succeed to their wish, they encourage themselves the more in their
unbelief, and, as the common saying is, “Men are blinded by prosperity.”
But especially this happens when men have forsaken God, and abide by
their own ways and schemes; for then they fearlessly despise God. But
they may also be viewed as ironical, “How comes it that thou dost not
retrace thy steps and repent? Why dost thou not acknowledge thy folly?
Is it because thou hast life in thy hand, and because everything goes
prosperously with thee?  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)

<span id="x.i-p102"></span>I prefer the latter interpretation, though I
do not reject the former. It is plain enough from history that the Jews
had no good reason for being proud of their prosperity or success; for
the treaty into which they entered, first with the Egyptians, next with
the Assyrians, and lastly with the Babylonians, was destructive and
fatal to them; and they found by experience how rash they had been in
calling allies to their aid; so that the Prophet justly taunts them with
having found “the life of their hand.” Thus he heightens his description
of the foolishness of this people, who willingly rush forward to their
own destruction, and obstinately bring down ruin on themselves, when
they ought, at least, like fools, to have gained wisdom by the misery
which they had experienced.

<span id="x.i-p103"></span><span id="x.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p104"></span>**11.** *And whom hast thou worshipped and
feared?* Here he breaks out more vehemently against the Jews, because
they were destitute of the fear of God, though they boasted of their
holiness and sheltered themselves under an empty title of religion. Not
only do hypocrites flatter themselves in their superstitions, but they
are likewise regarded by the common people as holy and pious; and,
therefore, they act haughtily and insolently towards God and men. But
the Prophet declares that true fear of God cannot exist, where the
worship is not pure and agreeable to his word. All the opinions
entertained by men, as to the plausible forms of worship observed by
superstitious persons, are absolute wickedness and folly, he declares,
therefore, that there is no fear of him and no religion among them,
although they are greatly delighted with their masks.

<span id="x.i-p105"></span>What is more, by their religious ceremonies,
as manifest proofs, they show that they have no reverence or fear of
God; for God testifies, by Moses, that he makes trial whether or not
they love him with all their heart, when he permits superstition and
idolatry to be introduced by the false prophets. (<span
id="x.i-p105.1"></span>[De 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span
id="x.i-p105.1"></span>) All that fly to them, therefore, show that they
are altogether destitute of the fear of God; for, if they considered
that they must one day give an account to him, they would not so
daringly trample under foot his commandments.

<span id="x.i-p106"></span>*And hast not remembered me*. When he
complains of having been forgotten, he shows that it was through
obstinate wickedness that they fought against God, and not through
ignorance that they wandered from him; because, having a sure rule of
leading a holy life, they willingly revolted from him, and broke the
promise which they had made to him. We ought to consider diligently how
dreadful is the thunder launched against hypocrites, who mock at all
threatenings, and cover themselves by vain disguises, when he declares
that they are destitute of the fear of God, and that they are liars and
have forgotten him.

<span id="x.i-p107"></span>*Is it not because I held my peace?*  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) Here I have thought it right to insert
the word “because,” which needs to be supplied, in order to bring out
more fully the Prophet’s meaning; for those who do not supply some word
subject themselves to a vast amount of trouble in bringing out an
exposition; and we know how frequently this mode of expression is
employed by the Hebrew writers. He reproaches the Jews with having
abused God’s forbearance and patience, by which their hearts ought
rather to have been softened. But such is the wickedness of men, that it
renders them bolder in transgression, and leads them to think that they
may do what they please without being punished.

<span id="x.i-p109"></span>Accordingly, in the last clause of the verse
I consider the particle <span id="x.i-p109.1"></span>ו (*vau*) to mean
*therefore.* “And *therefore* thou dost not fear me, because I held my
peace, whereas thou oughtest rather to have been melted by my goodness.”
Hence we infer that the Jews could not complain of God’s excessive
severity, since he bore patiently with them for a long time, and they
grew worse and worse in consequence of having been exempted from
punishment. It was therefore necessary that he should assume a totally
different character, and punish them more severely for their iniquities.

<span id="x.i-p110"></span><span id="x.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p111"></span>**12.** *I will declare thy righteousness.*
The Prophet affirms that the Lord will no longer endure what he formerly
endured, and that henceforth he must follow a different method. He calls
it ironically “their righteousness;“ for he means by it all the
wickedness and all the errors by which they were stained and corrupted;
as if he had said, “I will show what is the nature of your
righteousness.” So long as God “holds his peace,” they who are most
unrighteous and most unholy appear to be “righteous” persons; but when
the Lord ascends his judgment-seat, men are brought out of their
lurking­places, and their baseness is dragged forth to public view. And
so the Prophet means that the greatest wickedness passes in the world
for “righteousness,” so long as God holds his peace, but that it shall
at length be scattered, when he ascends his judgment­seat; for men,
after having much and long flattered themselves, shall at length feel
that he is their judge.

<span id="x.i-p112"></span>*And they shall not profit thee.* This
relates to the effect, by which men almost always judge; for they do not
inquire whether a thing be righteous or unrighteous, but think that
whatever is profitable to them ought to be approved. The Prophet
therefore threatens that all the works from which they hoped to derive
some profit shall be destructive to them.

<span id="x.i-p113"></span><span id="x.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p114"></span>**13.** *When thou shalt cry, let thy troops
deliver thee.* He states more fully what he had slightly touched in the
former verse, that, when they shall come to close quarters, they shall
be ashamed; for the potential mood, “Let them deliver,” amounts to
saying, “They will not do it.” He alludes to what he had formerly said,
(verse 9) “Thou wentest to the king with ointments.” And accordingly he
gives the name of “troops” to all the means of defense by which the Jews
thought that they would be safe; for, by trusting to them, they
abandoned themselves to every kind of vices, as if they should be
certain of escaping punishment, because they were guarded and fortified
on every side. But the Lord shows how unavailing are all the troops
which are assembled without his authority.

<span id="x.i-p115"></span>“Cry” denotes here that calamity by which
they were to be afflicted; for, relying on their treaties and on the aid
of allies, they thought that they would enjoy profound peace, as if they
had never at any former period been deceived. But he declares that all
the military defenses which they have collected for themselves shall be
of no advantage to them whatever. Detestable and accursed is that
confidence which men, having forsaken God, place in things of this world
or in human defenses. (<span id="x.i-p115.1"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="x.i-p115.1"></span>)
Formerly he brought it as a reproach against the people, that they were
not satisfied with the gentle waters of Shiloah, and desired to have the
rapid and impetuous rivers which would at length overflow them. (<span
id="x.i-p115.2"></span>[Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)<span
id="x.i-p115.2"></span>) This actually happened; for the Assyrians and
Egyptians, and lastly the Babylonians, were not only unprofitable, but
even ruinous, to the Jews whose allies they were.

<span id="x.i-p116"></span>*But he who hopeth in me.* Next follows a
contrast, in which he invites them to confidence in God, which is the
remedy that ought to be employed against all evils; as, on the other
hand, all evils arise from unbelief and distrust. As to the promise of
an inheritance to those who hope in God, it amounts to this, — “What
else do you seek than to remain safe and sound, and to have your
inheritance uninjured? It is I who can do this. For who brought you into
this country? Who gave you possession of it? And yet you run after
Egypt, and seek from men assistance which will be of little avail, and
disregard my help.”

<span id="x.i-p117"></span>*Shall have the land by inheritance.* I have
no doubt that by the word “inheritance” he means Judea, in which the
Jews were desirous to remain in safety; for he afterwards mentions the
*“mountain* of his holiness,” that is, the mountain on which the temple
was built. So, then, the Jews did not ascribe to the Lord that which
belonged to him, when they fled, not to him, but to the Assyrians or
Egyptians, for help. Hence we ought to draw a universal doctrine,
namely, that our affairs will succeed admirably, if we hope in the Lord;
and if we throw away confidence in him, we certainly need not wonder if
we waver and are tossed about in various ways.

<span id="x.i-p118"></span>When he calls the mountain to which the Jews
were to be brought back “the mountain of *holiness,”* he means that life
and all its comforts are not in themselves desirable, except that we may
worship God; for the end of human life is this, that God may have a
people who shall render to him purity of worship. Let our eyes,
therefore, be always fixed on the worship and service of God, if we
desire life, or deliverance, or any of the comforts of life.

<span id="x.i-p119"></span><span id="x.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p120"></span>**14.** *And he shall say, Prepare, prepare.*
Because this promise, that they who hoped in the Lord should possess the
land, might be thought ridiculous, (for soon afterwards they were to be
driven out of it,) for the sake of believers that still remained, there
is added this second promise, by which he pledges himself that, although
they have been driven out of the land of Canaan, and banished to a
distant country, yet they shall be brought back to it. He therefore
meets a doubt which might arise, that good men might not despair during
that painful and long­continued banishment, or imagine that the promise
of God had failed of accomplishment. Some explain it to mean, that the
Lord will send true and faithful prophets, to cleanse from its scandals
the Church which had been corrupted by false prophets and wicked rulers;
as he formerly showed that from them arose the cause of her ruin; and so
they think that this is a promise of a better and happier condition. But
such an interpretation is excessively forced, and therefore I choose
rather to adopt the former interpretation, that, although for a time the
Jews shall be deprived of that land, yet they shall be restored to it by
the Lord, who will order the roads to be levelled, in order to bring
them back.

<span id="x.i-p121"></span>This passage agrees with that which we
formerly examined, (<span id="x.i-p121.1"></span>[Isa
40:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p121.1"></span>)
in which the Lord commanded to bring comfort to his people, to proclaim
and publish the return to Judea, and to clear the roads; for, in
consequence of their having been shut up in Babylon as in a grave, and
of the length and difficulty of the journey, and of the vast wilderness
that lay between, they could scarcely have any hope of returning to
their native country. It was therefore proper that Isaiah should not
pass by this matter lightly, that they might not dread the mountains or
the sea that lay between, or any other obstructions.

<span id="x.i-p122"></span>*Level the road.* He addresses Cyrus and
Darius, whose minds the Lord inspired to open up the path, and grant
protection to the Jews; as if he had said, that the Lord will send
ministers, who are now unknown to them, by whose agency he will “prepare
the way” and bring out the people. The apostrophe, also, by which he
directly addresses them, carries greater force than if he had spoken in
the third person. By ordering them to *remove the* *stumbling blocks,*
he shows that there is no reason why they should be terrified by the
difficulties and obstructions of the roads, which the Lord will easily
“take away,” whenever he thinks fit.

<span id="x.i-p123"></span>*Out of the way of my people.* The hope of
return is contained in this, that the Lord determines to bring back his
people, and place them again in the land of Canaan. Wherefore, though
there were no other road, yet there must be one, and every bar and
obstacle must be removed; because the Lord hath promised their return,
and consequently is their leader in the journey.

<span id="x.i-p124"></span><span id="x.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p125"></span>**15.** *For thus hath spoken the High and
Lofty One.* He confirms the former statement about the restoration of
the people from captivity. But this verse may be explained in two ways;
either that the Prophet meets the doubt which might spring up in the
hearts of good men, and thus compares things which are contrasted with
each other; or, that he draws an argument from the nature of God, in
order to strengthen weak minds. To explain these things more clearly, we
know, first, that our hearts are often distracted by these thoughts,
that God is actually in heaven, but that there is a great distance
between him and us, and that, he overlooks or despises human affairs,
and, in a word, that he takes no care at all about us. In order to
correct this imagination, the Prophet says that God does indeed dwell in
a lofty place, but does not the less on that account look at this world
and govern it by his providence; for he is anxious about the salvation
of men, and dwells with the afflicted, and with them that are of a
broken and humble heart; as it is said, “Jehovah is high, and hath
respect to the lowly,” (<span id="x.i-p125.1"></span>[Ps
138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)<span id="x.i-p125.1"></span>)
and in other passages.

<span id="x.i-p126"></span>The other meaning is, that the Prophet shows
that God is very unlike us; for we tremble in adversity, because we
measure him by our standard, and say, “How shall the Lord render
assistance to us, who are oppressed?” Besides, men who are in distress
are commonly overlooked and despised. Thus we think that God holds us in
no estimation, because we form our ideas of him from our own nature. But
we ought to entertain very different views of him; and therefore he
says, that he “dwelleth in heaven,” in order to intimate that he is not
liable to human passions; for he is like himself at all times, and never
changes his purpose; and therefore as he has once promised restoration
to his people, so he will perform it. I do not dislike this
interpretation, nor do I reject the former, which is fuller and more
abundant, and agrees with other passages of Scripture, that commonly
join together those two things; that the Lord dwelleth in heaven, and
taketh care of human affairs, and especially of his children, as I
stated briefly a little before.

<span id="x.i-p127"></span>*Who dwelleth in eternity.* We are fickle,
and apply our minds sometimes to one subject, and sometimes to another;
and our hearts do not continue to be fixed on that which we have once
embraced. On this account he distinguishes between God and men, for on
him no shadow of change falls; but we have not such steadfastness as to
exercise constant care about those who need our assistance.

<span id="x.i-p128"></span>*I inhabit the high and holy.* <span
id="x.i-p128.1"></span>קדוש (*kadosh*) sometimes denotes the temple, but
here it denotes heaven itself. We see the reason why he calls him “the
Holy One,” and “the inhabitant of the holy and lofty place.” It is in
order to inform us how much he differs from us, and how unlike he is to
our nature. Besides, we ought to draw from it a singular consolation,
that the Lord wishes to assist the wretched, and even chooses for
himself a habitation amongst them, that is, provided that they
acknowledge their wretchedness.

<span id="x.i-p129"></span>*And with him who is lowly in spirit.* Wicked
men are oppressed by various calamities, but do not cease to be fierce
and haughty. It will be vain for them to hope that God will draw near to
them;  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) for their hearts must be
lowly and utterly cast down, if they expect to obtain any assistance
from God. Accordingly, he descends even to the lifeless, that he may
breathe new life into them and form them anew. Twice he expressly
mentions the “lowly spirit,” and the “afflicted heart,” that we may know
that these promises belong to those who, in their afflictions, shall not
be hardhearted and rebellious, and who, in short, shall lay aside all
haughtiness and be meek and lowly.

<span id="x.i-p131"></span><span id="x.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p132"></span>**16.** *Because not for ever will I strive.*
He continues the same doctrine; for it was difficult to persuade them of
this, seeing that during that painful captivity they perceived that God
was their enemy, and could scarcely obtain any taste of the grace of
God, by which their hearts might be encouraged or relieved. The Prophet
therefore meets this doubt, and shows that the punishments which they
shall endure will be for a short time, and that God will not always be
angry with them; that God has indeed very good reason to be angry, but
yet that he will relinquish his right, and will make abatement of that
which he might have demanded. Thus he connects the wrath of God with
that moderation by which he soothes believers, that they may not be
discouraged; for, although he draws an argument from the nature of God,
yet this promise is especially directed to the Church.

<span id="x.i-p133"></span>This sentence, therefore, ought always to be
remembered by us amidst our sorest afflictions, lest we should think
that God is our enemy, or that he will always contend with us. When he
says that God is angry, he speaks as if he made an admission, and in
accordance with the feelings of our flesh; for we cannot form any other
conception of God during our afflictions, than that he is angry with us.
It is even profitable to be moved by this feeling, that it may instruct
us to repentance; and therefore this form of expression must be viewed
as referring exclusively to our capacity, and not to God.

<span id="x.i-p134"></span>*For the spirit shall be clothed,* (or,
*shall be concealed*, or, *shall fail.)* He assigns the reason why he
will not always strive. There are various interpretations of this
passage. Among others this appears to me to be the more appropriate;
that “the spirit is clothed” with the body, as with a garment. Hence
also the body is called the tabernacle, and, as it were, the habitation
of the spirit. If we adopt this signification of the word, there will be
two modes of interpreting this clause. Some explain it as referring to
the last resurrection: “the spirit shall be clothed;“ that is, after
having gone out of the body, will again return to it as to its
habitation. Thus there will be an argument from the greater to the less:
“I will raise up dead bodies; why then shall I not restore you, though
half­dead, to a better life?” Another meaning, which is also adopted by
some, will be simpler and better; for the interpretation of the clause,
as referring to the last resurrection, is too remote from the context.
“I surrounded the spirit with a body;” as if he had said, “I created
men, and therefore will take care of them.”

<span id="x.i-p135"></span>But for my own part, I think that the Prophet
rises higher; for he shows that the Lord deals so gently and kindly with
us, because he perceives how weak and feeble we are; as is also pointed
out in other passages of Scripture, such as <span
id="x.i-p135.1"></span>[Ps. 103:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p135.1"></span>.
“Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him. He knoweth our condition, remembering that we are dust. The
age of man is like grass, and flourisheth as a flower in the field.” The
same thing is said in <span id="x.i-p135.2"></span>[Ps.
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span id="x.i-p135.2"></span>. “Yet
being inclined to mercy, he was gracious to their iniquity, and did not
destroy them, and often recalled his anger, and did not stir up all his
indignation, remembering that they were flesh, and a wind that passeth
away and returneth not again.” Here the Prophet appears to me to mean
the same thing; as if the Lord had said, “I am unwilling to try my
strength with breath or wind, which would be as if with grass or a leaf,
that shall suddenly vanish away when they have felt the heat of the
sun.” <span id="x.i-p135.3"></span>יעטוף (*yagnatoph*) is explained by
some to mean “Shall fail;“ which agrees very well with this passage; for
our spirit shall fail, when the Lord puts forth his power against us.
Leaving the signification of the words as somewhat doubtful, we
sufficiently understand the Prophet’s design. He shows that God deals
gently with us, and acts with little severity in correcting our sins,
because he takes into account our weakness, and wishes to support and
relieve it.

<span id="x.i-p136"></span><span id="x.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p137"></span>**17.** *For the iniquity of his lust.* Here
he complains of the obstinate wickedness of the people, and shows that
the Lord had very good reason for punishing him in this manner; so that
there can be no complaint of his immoderate cruelty. <span
id="x.i-p137.1"></span>בצעו (*betzagno*) is translated by some “lust,”
and by others “covetousness.” If it be “covetousness,” it will then be a
figurative mode of expression, in which a part is taken for the whole;
for this is the source from which all evils arise. (<span
id="x.i-p137.2"></span>[1Ti 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span
id="x.i-p137.2"></span>) But we may take it generally for every kind of
sinful desire; for it was on account of the various and numerous vices
by which the Jews were polluted, that the Lord was angry, and inflicted
on them severe punishments. But he expressly mentions “lust,” in order
to intimate that they were punished, not because they were openly
wicked, but because they were sinful in the sight of God; for it is
enough to condemn them, that God is Judge of the hearts, and punishes
not only for outward crimes, but likewise for wicked dispositions and
“lusts.” At the same time he reminds them that their punishment is just,
in order that, being conscious of guilt, they may humbly pray for
pardon.

<span id="x.i-p138"></span>*I struck him, I hid myself.* He means that
his favor was, in some respects, withdrawn and “hidden” for a time. Now,
he speaks according to the opinion of men, because, as we have already
said, we imagine that God is an enemy, and is angry with us, when he
punishes for our transgressions. And it is necessary that we should have
those views and conceptions of him, that we may arrive at a true
acknowledgment of our sins; for we should never acknowledge them
sincerely, or be distressed on account of them, if we did not reflect
with ourselves, and know that we had provoked God’s wrath. But, while it
is desirable that we should be led to repentance in this manner, we must
beware, on the other hand, lest in consequence of imagining that God is
hostile and unwilling to be reconciled to us, we should be swallowed up
by sorrow. The Prophet therefore restrains these immoderate terrors, and
forbids us to judge of God according to our natural disposition; for
although he chastises us, he does not cease to cherish a father’s love
and affection towards those whom he has once embraced.

<span id="x.i-p139"></span>*But he went away.* This is the
rebelliousness which the Prophet blames and rebukes, that the people
were in no degree made better, but persevered in their wickedness. He
shows that they were desperate, because the violent remedies which the
Lord had tried could not bring them back into the right way.

<span id="x.i-p140"></span><span id="x.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p141"></span>**18.** *I have seen his ways.*  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Here the Lord, on the contrary,
magnifies his mercy, because he is gracious to that people, though
obstinate and rebellious, and anticipates them by his grace and mercy.
As if he had said, “I labored to bring back this people to repentance by
my chastisements, because they violently pursued their lusts; but they
were obstinate and untameable; all that I did was of no avail. I might
justly, indeed, have ruined him, but I choose rather to heal and
preserve. This cannot be done but by distinguished and incomparable
mercy. I will therefore cease to punish them.” For these reasons Isaiah
gradually magnifies the mercy of God, whom he represents as a physician
considering what remedies are best adapted for healing this people. Now,
our diseases are incurable, if the Lord do not anticipate us by his
mercy.

<span id="x.i-p143"></span>*And will guide him.* No chastisements,
however severe, will drive us to repentance, if the Lord do not quicken
us by his Spirit; for the consequence will be, to render us more
rebellious and hard­hearted. And so we may behold, in the example of
this people, an image of mankind; that we may clearly see what is our
rebellion and obstinacy against God, and what remedies are necessary for
curing our diseases; and that, when we are diseased and almost beyond
hope, we are healed, are brought back to the right path, and afterwards
continue in it. Hence follows consolation:

<span id="x.i-p144"></span>*Restoring comforts to him.* If piety be
wanting, there can be no faith and no consolation; for they who are not
dissatisfied with themselves on account of their vices can look for
nothing but the wrath of God, terrors and despair. It is proper,
therefore, to observe the context, in which the Prophet, after
mentioning “healing,” next mentions “consolation;“ for they whose
diseases have been cured obtain, at the same time, that joy of heart and
that consolation of which they had been deprived.

<span id="x.i-p145"></span>When he adds, *To his mourners*, he appears
especially to denote good men,  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115)
who were few in number; as appears clearly from the complaints of the
prophets, who exclaim loudly against the stupidity which had seized the
people on every side. Thus he describes those who, amidst the universal
guilt, were constrained by sincere grief to mourn, and who not only
bewailed the miseries of the people, but deeply groaned under the burden
of God’s wrath, while others indulged freely in their pleasures.

<span id="x.i-p147"></span><span id="x.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p148"></span>**19.** *I create the fruit of the lips.*
This is an explanation of the former statement, or of the manner in
which the Lord will give consolation to this people. It is, because he
will promise and offer *peace* to them; for by “the fruit of the lips”
he means that he will cause them to hear the glad tidings of peace, by
which they shall be filled with joy.

<span id="x.i-p149"></span>*Peace, peace.* I think that he speaks of the
publication of “peace,” the ministry of which was committed to the
prophets, and was afterwards enjoined on the apostles and the other
ministers of the Gospel; as Paul teaches that they “are ambassadors for
Christ, to reconcile men to God.” (<span id="x.i-p149.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="x.i-p149.1"></span>) The
repetition of the word “Peace” is intended to express not only
certainty, but also uninterrupted continuance. As if he had said, “You
now hear nothing but dreadful threatenings. The doctrine of grace and
salvation is silent, because you are incapable of it. Such is your
obstinacy that I must deal with you by threatenings and terrors. But I
will one day restore the doctrine of ‘peace,’ and open the lips of the
prophets, that they may proclaim it to you.”

<span id="x.i-p150"></span>*To them that are far off.* This is added,
because the people who had been carried into captivity did not think
that these things belonged to them, (because they were “far off,”) but
perhaps to those who were at home; for captivity was a sort of casting
off. But the Prophet foretells that, though they are at a great
distance, yet they shall be partakers of this grace.

<span id="x.i-p151"></span>*And I heal him.* At length he adds the end
or effect, that the Lord determines to heal the people; that is, to make
them safe and sound. Hence we infer what I remarked a little before,
that all that relates to the full and perfect happiness of the Church is
absolutely the gift of God.

<span id="x.i-p152"></span>Paul appears to have glanced at this passage,
when he says that Christ

<span id="x.i-p153"></span>“brought peace to them that are near, and to
them that are far off.” (<span id="x.i-p153.1"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="x.i-p153.1"></span>)

<span id="x.i-p154"></span>He speaks of Gentiles and Jews; for the Jews
were “near,” because God had entered into a covenant with them; but the
Gentiles were “far off,” because they were strangers to that covenant.
But the Prophet appears to speak of Jews only.

<span id="x.i-p155"></span>I reply, Paul adheres to the true meaning of
the Prophet, if the whole be but carefully examined; for the Jews are
said, in this passage, to be “far off,” because the Lord appeared to
have driven them out of his house; and in that respect they resembled
the Gentiles. Since, therefore, at the time of that casting off, there
was no difference between them and the Gentiles, Paul, by putting both,
as it were, in the same rank, justly placed them on a level with the
Jews, and thus applied to them what the Prophet had spoken about the
Jews; as, in a manner not unlike, he elsewhere applies to the Gentiles a
passage in Hosea. (<span id="x.i-p155.1"></span>[Ro
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)<span id="x.i-p155.1"></span>;
<span id="x.i-p155.2"></span>[Ho
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)<span id="x.i-p155.2"></span>)

<span id="x.i-p156"></span><span id="x.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p157"></span>**20.** *But the wicked.* Having formerly
spoken of the “peace” which good men shall enjoy, he threatens that the
wicked, on the contrary, shall have continual war and incessant
uneasiness and distress of heart; in order that good men may value more
highly the excellent blessing of “peace,” and next, that the reprobate
may know that their condition shall in no degree be improved in
consequence of that peace which is promised to the children of God. But
because the reprobate make false pretensions to the name of God, and
vainly glory in it, the Prophet shows that there is no reason why they
should flatter themselves, or advance any claim, on the ground of this
promise, since they can have no share in this peace. Nor will it avail
them anything, that God, having compassion upon his people, receives
them into favor, and commands peace to be proclaimed to them.

<span id="x.i-p158"></span>*As the troubled sea.* That metaphor of “the
sea” is elegant and very well fitted to describe the uneasiness of the
wicked; for of itself “the sea is troubled.” Though it be not beaten by
the wind or agitated by frightful tempests, its billows carry on mutual
war, and dash against each other with terrible violence. In the same
manner wicked men are “troubled” by inward distress, which is deeply
seated in their hearts. They are terrified and alarmed by conscience,
which is the most agonizing of all torments and the most cruel of all
executioners. The furies agitate and pursue the wicked, not with burning
torches, (as the fables run,)but with anguish of conscience and the
torment of wickedness; for every one is distressed by his own wickedness
and his own alarm;  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) every one is
agonized and driven to madness by his own guilt; they are terrified by
their own evil thoughts and by the pangs of conscience. Most
appropriately, therefore, has the Prophet compared them to a stormy and
troubled sea. Whoever then wishes to avoid these alarms and this
frightful agony of heart, let him not reject that peace which the Lord
offers to him. There can be no middle course between them; for, if you
do not lay aside sinful desires and accept of this peace, you must
unavoidably be miserably distressed and tormented.

<span id="x.i-p160"></span><span id="x.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p161"></span>**21.** *There is no peace to the wicked.* He
confirms the preceding statement, namely, that in vain shall the
reprobate endeavor to seek peace, for everywhere they will meet with
war. It is God who threatens war, and therefore there can be no hope of
“peace.” Wicked men would indeed wish to enjoy peace, and ardently long
for it; for there is nothing which they more eagerly desire than to be
at ease, and to lull their consciences, that they may freely take their
pleasures and indulge in their vices. They drive away all thoughts about
the judgment of God, and endeavor to stupify themselves and to repose in
indolence, and think that these are the best ways and methods of
obtaining peace. But they never shall enjoy it; for, until men have been
reconciled to God, conscience will never cease to annoy and carry on war
with them.

<span id="x.i-p162"></span>*Saith my God.* Thus he represents God as the
only author of peace, that he may, by this dreadful threatening, tear
from the Jews their dearest pleasures; and calls him “his God,” in
opposition to the vain boasting of those who falsely boasted of his
name; for they cannot acknowledge God, so long as they reject his
Prophet and his doctrine. For this reason the Prophet boldly declares
that he has received a command from God to declare perpetual war against
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc16009.htm#fr_104) <span
id="x.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p50"></span> “This is a beautiful sentiment, that God
removes righteous and good men from a world unworthy of them, and takes
them to himself, so that they are not stained by the offenses of their
time, or mingled with the prevailing corruption that universally
devours, and do not consent to it, or connive at it, and thus expose
themselves to similar judgments of God, which have been decreed and
appointed for the ungodly. It has undoubtedly been remarked by the wise
in every age, that the sudden death of good and judicious men is a clear
indication of the approaching ruin of a state.” ­ *Vitringa*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc16009.htm#fr_105) <span
id="x.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p53"></span> “<span id="x.i-p53.1"></span>Pource que c’est
une chose avenue depuis peu d’annees.” “Because it is an event that
happened but a few years ago.”

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc16009.htm#fr_106) <span
id="x.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p58"></span> “Walking in his uprightness, or, before him.”
(Eng. Ver.) “The phrase denotes, ‘One who walks straight before him,’ so
as to follow constantly the rule, not turning aside from it to the right
hand or the left, and observing and keeping the straight line and road
towards the end or mark which the Lord has held out to them, according
to the example of the Apostle. (<span id="x.i-p58.1"></span>[Php
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p58.1"></span>)” —
*Vitringa*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc16009.htm#fr_107) <span
id="x.i-p59.4"></span>

<span id="x.i-p60"></span> “<span id="x.i-p60.1"></span>Mais celle des
meschans est effroyable.” “But that of the wicked is frightful.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc16009.htm#fr_108) <span
id="x.i-p72.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p73"></span> See Commentary on Isaiah, Vol. 1, p. 84, n.
1.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc16009.htm#fr_109) <span
id="x.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p82"></span> “Jehovah adds a question, ‘Should I take
consolation in these things?’ Should I shake off from my mind, and bury
in oblivion, my indignation which arises from your heinous crimes, so as
to allow them to pass unpunished? The meaning has been accurately
expressed by the Septuagint, <span id="x.i-p82.1"></span>ἐπὶ τούτοις οὖς
οὐκ ὀργισθήσομαι; ‘Shall I not be enraged on account of these things?’
which has been followed by Jerome, ‘<span id="x.i-p82.2"></span>Nunquid
super his non indignabor?‘“ ­ *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc16009.htm#fr_110) <span
id="x.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p99"></span> “<span id="x.i-p99.1"></span>Comme si tu
eusses gaigne ta vie en travaillant de tes mains.” “As if thou hadst
gained thy life by labouring with thy hands.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc16009.htm#fr_111) <span
id="x.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p101"></span> “Dathius thus translates the Hebrew text,
‘Thou hast found thy life, therefore thou dost not feel thy disease,’
and adds in a note, ‘The phrase, (thy life,) is used ironically by the
Prophet to denote idols, which brought destruction instead of life to
the people. He calls them the life of the hand for this reason, that
they employed all their industry in making them.’ The simplest meaning
appears to me to be, to take ‘the life of the hand’ as denoting either
their strength or the supports of life procured by the hand; so that the
meaning is, Still thou thinkest that by these thy labors thou wilt
procure strength and assistance.” ­ *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc16009.htm#fr_112) <span
id="x.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p108"></span> “Have I not held my peace?” ­ (Eng. Ver.)

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc16009.htm#fr_113) <span
id="x.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p130"></span> “<span id="x.i-p130.1"></span>Que telles
gens n’esperent point que Dieu s’approche d’eux.” “Let not such persons
hope that God will draw near to them.”

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc16009.htm#fr_114) <span
id="x.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p142"></span> “When he (the people of Israel) humbled
himself during the affliction which came upon him.” ­ *Jarchi*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc16009.htm#fr_115) <span
id="x.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p146"></span> “<span id="x.i-p146.1"></span>Fideles.”
“Believers.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc16009.htm#fr_116) <span
id="x.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p159"></span> “<span id="x.i-p159.1"></span>Et gehenne.”
“And by the hell within him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 58](cc16010)
