[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16001)  [Next](cc16003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 50.

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
50:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus saith the LORD, Where *is* the
bill of your mother’s divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my
creditors *is it* to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities
have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put
away.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sic dicit Iehova, Ubi libellus iste
repudii matris vestrae, quam repudiavi? ant quis creditor cui vendidi
vos? Ecce propter iniquitates vestras estis venditi, et propter
transgressiones vestras repudiata est mater vestra.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Wherefore, when I came, *was there* no
man? when I called, *was there* none to answer? Is my hand shortened at
all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my
rebuke I dry up the sea; I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish
stinketh, because *there is* no water, and dieth for thirst.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Cur veni, et nemo (occurrit?) vocavi,
et nemo respondit? An abbreviando abbreviavit se manus mea, ut non
redimat? Annon in me virtus ad liberandum? Ecce increpatione mea exsicco
mare; pono flumina in desertum, ut putrescant pisces eorum prae defectu
aquae, et moriantur siti.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** I clothe the heavens with blackness,
and I make sackcloth their covering.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Induo coelos caligine, et quasi
saccure pono operimentum eorum.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue
of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to *him
that is* weary: he wakeneth morning by morning; he wakeneth mine ear to
hear as the learned.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dominus Iehova aperuit mihi linguam
eruditorum, ut sciam lasso verbum in tempore. Excitabit mane, mane
excitabit mihi aurem, ut audiam, sicut docti.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear,
and I was not rebellious, neither tumed away back.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Dominus Iehova aperuit mihi aurem, et
ego non fui rebellis; retrorsum non reversus sum.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>**6.** I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame
and spitting.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Corpus meum exposui percutientibus,
et genas meas vellentibus; faciem meam non abscondi ab ignominia et
sputo.

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>**7.** For the Lord GOD will help me;
therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a
flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Nam Dominus Iehova auxiliabitur mihi;
propterea non sum pudefactus; ideo posui faciem meam quasi silicem, et
scio quod non confundar.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**8.** *He is* near that justifieth me; who
will contend with me? let us stand together: who *is* mine adversary?
let him come near to me.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Prope est qui me justificat, quis
contendet mecum? Stemus simul: quis adversarius causae meae? Accedat ad
me.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Behold, the Lord GOD will help me;
who *is* he *that* shall condemn me? lo, they all shalt wax old as a
garment; the moth shall eat them up.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ecce, Dominns Iehova auxiliabitur
mihi, quis est qui me condemnet? Ecce omnes quasi vestimeritran
veterascent; tinea comedet eos.

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Who *is* among you that feareth the
LORD, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh *in* darkness,
and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon
his God.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Quis in vobis est timens Iehovam?
Audiat vocem servi ejus. Qui ambulavit in tenebris, et qui caruit luce,
confidat in nomine Iehovae, et innitatur Deo suo.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Behold, all ye that kindle a fire,
that compass *yourselves* about with sparks: walk in the light of your
fire, and in the sparks *that* ye have kindled. This shall ye have of
mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ecce vos omnes succenditis ignem, et
circundati estis scintillis. Ite in lumine ignis vestri, et in
scintillis quas succendistis. E manu mea fuit hoc vobis; in dolore
jacebitis.

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span><span id="iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>**1.** *Where is that bill of divorcement?*
There are various interpretations of this passage, but very few of the
commentators have understood the Prophet’s meaning. In order to have a
general understanding of it, we must observe that union by which the
Lord everywhere testifies that his people are bound to him; that is,
that he occupies the place of a husband, and that we occupy the place of
a wife. It is a spiritual marriage, which has been consecrated by his
eternal doctrine and sealed by the blood of Christ. In the same manner,
therefore, as he takes us under his protection as a early beloved wife,
on condition that we preserve our fidelity to him by chastity; so when
we have been false to him, he rejects us; and then he is said to issue a
lawful divorce against us, as when a husband banished from his house an
adulterous wife.

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>Thus, when the Jews were oppressed by
calamities so many and so great, that it was easy to conclude that God
had rejected and divorced them, the cause of the divorce came to be the
subject of inquiry. Now, as men are usually eloquent in apologizing for
themselves, and endeavor to throw back the blame on God, the Jews also
complained at that time about their condition, as if the Lord had done
wrong in divorcing them; because they were far from thinking that the
promises had been made void, and the covenant annulled, by their crimes.
They even laid the blame on their ancestors, as if they were punished
for the sins of others. Hence those taunts and complaints which Ezekiel
relates.

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>“Our fathers ate a sour grape, and our teeth
are set on edge.” (<span id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>[Eze
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002)<span id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>Speeches of this kind being universally
current among them, the Lord demands that they shall produce the “bill
of divorcement,” by means of which they may prove that they are free
from blame and have been rejected without cause.

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span>Now, a “bill of divorcement” was granted to
wives who were unjustly divorced; for by it the husband was constrained
to testify that his wife had lived chastely and honorably, so that it
was evident that there was no other ground for the divorce than that she
did not please the husband. Thus the woman was at liberty to go away,
and the blame rested solely on the husband, to whose sullenness and bad
temper was ascribed the cause of the divorce. (<span
id="iii.i-p30.1"></span>[De 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)<span
id="iii.i-p30.1"></span>.) This law of divorcement, as Ezekiel shews,
(<span id="iii.i-p30.2"></span>[Mt
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008)<span id="iii.i-p30.2"></span>,)
was given by Moses on account of the hard-heartedness of that nation. By
a highly appropriate metaphor, therefore, the Lord shews that he is not
the author of the divorce, but that the people went away by their own
fault, and followed their lusts, so that they had utterly broken the
bond of marriage. This is the reason why he asks where is “that bill” of
which they boasted; for there is emphasis in the demonstrative pronoun,
<span id="iii.i-p30.3"></span>זה *(zeh), that,* by which he intended to
expose their idle excuses; as if he had said, that they throw off the
accusation, and lay blame on God, as if they had been provided with a
defense, whereas they had violated the bond of marriage, and could
produce nothing to make the divorce lawful.

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>*Or who is the creditor to whom I sold you?*
By another metaphor he demonstrates the same thing. When a man was
overwhelmed by debt, so that he could not satisfy his creditors, he was
compelled to give his children in payment. The Lord therefore asks, “Has
he been constrained to do this? Has he sold them, or given them in
payment to another creditor? Is he like spendthrifts or bad managers,
who allow themselves to be overwhelmed by debt?” As if he had said, “You
cannot bring this reproach against me; and therefore it is evident that,
on account of your transgressions, you have been sold and reduced to
slavery.”

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>*Lo, for your iniquities ye have been sold.*
Thus the Lord defends his majesty from all slanders, and refutes them by
this second clause, in which he declares that it is by their own fault
that the Jews have been divorced and “sold.” The same mode of expression
is employed by Paul, when he says that we are “sold under sin,” (<span
id="iii.i-p32.1"></span>[Ro 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="iii.i-p32.1"></span>,) but in a different sense; in the same manner
as the Hebrew writers are wont to speak of abandoned men, whose
wickedness is desperate. But here the Prophet intended merely to charge
the Jews with guilt, because, by their own transgressions, they had
brought upon themselves all the evils that they endured.

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>If it be asked, “Did the Lord divorce his
heritage? Did he make void the covenant?” Certainly not; but the Lord is
said to “divorce,” as he is elsewhere said to profane, his heritage,
(<span id="iii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ps
89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039)<span id="iii.i-p33.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p33.2"></span>[Eze
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#021)<span id="iii.i-p33.2"></span>,)
because no other conclusion can be drawn from present appearances; for,
when he did not bestow upon them his wonted favor, it was a kind of
divorce or rejection. In a word, we ought to attend to these two
contrasts, that the wife is divorced, either by the husband’s fault, or
because she is unchaste and adulterous; and likewise that children are
sold, either for their father’s poverty or by their own fault. And thus
the course of argument in this passage will be manifest.

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span><span id="iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>**2.** *Why did I come?* This might be a
reason assigned, that the people have not only brought upon themselves
all immense mass of evils by provoking God’s anger, but have likewise,
by their obstinacy, cut off the hope of obtaining pardon and salvation.
But I think that God proceeds still further. After having explained that
he had good reason for divorcing the people, because they had of their
own accord given themselves up to bondage, when they might have been
free, he adds that still it is not he who prevents them from being
immediately set at liberty. As he shewed, in the former verse, that the
whole blame rests with the Jews, so now he declares that it arises from
their own fault that they grow old and rot in their distresses; for the
Lord was ready to assist them, if they had not rejected his grace and
kindness. In a word, he shows that both the beginning and the progress
of the evil arise from the fault of the people, in order that he may
free God from all blame, and may shew that the Jews act wickedly in
accusing him as the author of evil, or in complaining that he will not
assist them.

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span>First, then, the Lord says that he “came;”
and why, but that he might stretch out his hand to the Jews? Whence it
follows that they are justly deprived; for they would not receive his
grace. Now, the Lord is said to “come,” when he gives any token of his
presence. He approaches by the preaching of the Word, and he approaches
also by various benefits which he bestows on us, and by the tokens which
he employs for manifesting his fatherly kindness toward us.

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>“Was there ever any people,” as Moses says,
“that saw so many signs, and heard the voice of God speaking, like this
people?” (<span id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>[De
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033)<span id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span>Constant invitation having been of no
advantage to them, when he held out the hope of pardon and exhorted them
to repentance, it is with good reason that he speaks of it as a
monstrous thing, and asks why there was no man to meet him. They are
therefore held to be convicted of ingratitude, because, while they ought
to have sought God, they did not even choose to meet him when he came;
for it is an instance of extreme ingratitude to refuse to accept the
grace of God which is freely offered.

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>*Why did I call, and no one answered?* In
the word *call* there is a repetition of the same statement in different
words. When God “calls,” we ought to be ready and submissive; for this
is the “answer” which, he complains, was refused to him; that is, we
ought to yield implicitly to his word. But this expression applies
strictly to the matter now in hand; because God, when he offered a
termination to their distresses, was obstinately despised, as if he had
spoken to the deaf and dumb. Hence he infers that on themselves lies the
blame of not having been sooner delivered; and he supports this by
former proofs, because he had formerly shewn to the fathers that he
possessed abundance of power to assist them. Again, that they may not
cavil and excuse themselves by saying that they had not obtained
salvation, though they heartily desired it, he maintains, on the other
hand, that the cause of the change ought to be sought somewhere else
than in him, (for his power was not at all diminished,) and therefore
that he would not have delayed to stretch out his hand to them in
distress, if they had not wickedly refused his aid.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>*By shortening hath my hand been shortened?*
By this interrogation he expresses greater boldness, as if he were
affirming what could not be called in question; for who would venture to
plead against God that his power was diminished? He therefore relates
how powerfully he rescued his people out of Egypt, that they may not now
imagine that he is less powerful, but may acknowledge that their sins
were the hinderance.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) He says that
by his reproof he “dried up the sea,” as if he had struck terror by a
threatening word; for by his authority, and at his command, the seas
were divided, so that a passage was opened up, (<span
id="iii.i-p41.2"></span>[Ex 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)<span
id="iii.i-p41.2"></span>,) and Jordan was driven back. (<span
id="iii.i-p41.3"></span>[Jos 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.i-p41.3"></span>.) The consequence was, that “the fishes,” being
deprived of water, died and putrified.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span><span id="iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>**3.** *I clothe the heavens with
blackness.* He mentions also that thick darkness which was spread over
all Egypt during the space of three days. (<span
id="iii.i-p43.1"></span>[Ex 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022)<span
id="iii.i-p43.1"></span>.) At that time the heaven was clothed as with a
mouming dress; for, as fine weather has a gladdening influence, so
blackness and darkness produce melancholy; and therefore he says, that
the heavens were covered as with sackcloth or with a mouming dress, as
if they had been tokens and expressions of mouming,  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) If any one prefer to view them as general
statements, let him enjoy his opinion; but I think it probable that he
glances at the history of the deliverance from Egypt,  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) front which it might easily be inferred
that God, who had so miraculously assisted the fathers, was prevented by
their ingratitude from granting relief to the miseries which now
oppressed them.

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span><span id="iii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span>**4.** *The Lord Jehovah.* After having
twice convicted them of guilt, he adds a consolation in his usual
manner; for when the Lord covers us with shame, he intends immediately
to free us from shame. Although, therefore, he shewed that the people
had been rejected for the best possible reasons, and had perished by
their own fault, because they proved themselves to be even unworthy of
deliverance, yet he promises assistance to them. Again, because in a
matter so difficult to be believed there needed more than ordinary
proof, he begins by saying that God has sent and instructed him to
execute his commands. This passage is commonly explained so as to relate
to Christ, as if it had not been applicable to the Prophet, because he
afterwards says, that he had been beaten with rods, which we nowhere
read was done to Isaiah. But there is no great force in this argument;
for David complains that his garments were divided, (<span
id="iii.i-p47.1"></span>[Ps 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span
id="iii.i-p47.1"></span>,) which applies literally to Christ, (<span
id="iii.i-p47.2"></span>[Mt 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)<span
id="iii.i-p47.2"></span>; <span id="iii.i-p47.3"></span>[Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span id="iii.i-p47.3"></span>,)
and yet it does not follow that this did not happen to David himself.
For my own part, I have no doubt, that Isaiah comes forward as one who
represents all the servants of God, not only those who were from the
beginning, but those who should come afterwards.

<span id="iii.i-p48"></span>*Hath given me the tongue of the learned.*
He says that the Lord hath given him a “tongue,” that the promises
bywhieh he cheers the people may have greater weight. Our faith wavers,
if we suspect that a man speaks from himself; and the condition of that
people was so wretched that no human arguments could induce them to
entertain the hope of deliverance. It amounts to this, that the message
of approaching salvation is brought to them from heaven; and if any
person do not receive it, he must prove himself to be rebellious and
disobedient. Although these words are literally intended by the Prophet
to secure the belief of his statements, yet we may infer from them
generally, that no man is fit to teach who has not first been qualified
by God. This reminds all godly teachers to ask from the Spirit of God
what otherwise they could not at all possess. They must indeed study
diligently, so as not to ascend the pulpit till they have been fully
prepared; but they must hold by this principle, that all things
necessary for discharging their office are gifts of the Holy Spirit.
And, indeed, if they were not organs of the Holy Spirit, it would be
extreme rashness to come forth publicly in the name of God.

<span id="iii.i-p49"></span>*That I may know a word in season to the
weary.* Some verb must be supplied here, such as, “to administer” or “to
utter.” The word “know” includes wisdom and skill, which a pastor ought
to possess, that the word of God may be faithfully and profitably
administered by him; as if he had said that he has been well instructed
in the school of God, and thus knows well what is suitable to those who
are wretched and who groan under a burden.  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) The term “weary” is applied to those who
are overwhelmed by many afflictions; as we have formerly seen, “who
giveth strength to the weary.” (<span id="iii.i-p50.2"></span>[Isa
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029)<span id="iii.i-p50.2"></span>.)
Thus also Christ speaks, “Come to me, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden.” (<span id="iii.i-p50.3"></span>[Mt
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="iii.i-p50.3"></span>.)
He therefore means that God has been his teacher and instructor, that he
may be able to soothe wretched men by appropriate consolation, that by
means of it their dejected hearts may be encouraged by feeling the mercy
of God.

<span id="iii.i-p51"></span>Hence we infer that the most important duty
of the ministers of the word is, to comfort wretched men, who are
oppressed by afflictions, or who bend under their weight, and, in short,
to point out what is true rest and serenity of mind, as we have formerly
seen. (<span id="iii.i-p51.1"></span>[Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020)<span id="iii.i-p51.1"></span>.)
We are likewise taught what each of us ought chiefly to seek in the
Scriptures, namely, that we may be fumished with doctrine appropriate
and suitable for relieving our distresses, He who, by seasonable
consolation, in afflictive or even desperate affairs, can cheer and
support his heart, ought to know that he has made good proficiency in
the Gospel. I acknowledge that doctrine has indeed various uses; for not
only is it useful for comforting the afflicted and feeble, but it
likewise contains severe reproofs and threatenings against the
obstinate. (<span id="iii.i-p51.2"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="iii.i-p51.2"></span>.)
But Isaiah shews that the chief duty incumbent on him is, to bring some
consolation to the Jews who, in the present distress, are ready to
faint.

<span id="iii.i-p52"></span>*He will waken in the morning.* The Prophet
here testifies that the Lord is so careful about wretched and oppressed
persons that he aids them “in the morning,” that is, seasonably. I do
acknowledge that we are often destitute of consolation; but, although
God often permits us to languish, yet he knows every moment that is
suitable for seasonably meeting the necessity by his aid. Besides, if
his assistance be somewhat late, this happens through our own fault; for
not only by our indolence, but likewise by rebellion, we withdraw
ourselves from his grace. However that may be, he always watches
carefully and runs to give aid; and even when we fly and resist, he
calls us to him, that we may be refreshed by tasting his grace and
kindness.

<span id="iii.i-p53"></span>He twice repeats the phrase, “in the
morning,” by which he expresses continuance and earnestness, that we may
not think that he is liable to sudden impulses like men, to cast off or
quickly forget those whom he has once undertaken to guard, whom he
continues, on the contrary, to make the objects of his grace till the
end, and never leaves destitute of consolation.

<span id="iii.i-p54"></span>*That I may hear as the learned.* He means
that his ear has not only been pulled or twitched, as for sluggish and
indolent persons, but has been formed and trained. Yet by his example he
shews that God efficaciously teaches all whose ministry he intends to
employ for the salvation of his Church; for it would have been a small
matter to be instructed after the manner of men, if they had not within
them the Spirit of God as their instructor. This makes still more
evident the truth of what we have formerly said, that none are good
teachers but those who have been good scholars. He calls them
“learned’and “well-instructed;” for they who do not deign to learn,
because they think that they are wise enough, are doubly fools; since
they alone, in the judgment of God, are reckoned to be “well-instructed”
and “learned,” who permit themselves to be taught before discharging the
office of teachers, that they may have clear knowledge of those things
which they communicate to others, and may publicly bring forward nothing
but what they can testify to have proceeded from God; and, in a word,
they alone are “learned,”  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) who, by
continually learning, do not refuse to make constant progress. Some read
the word in the accusative, meaning, “that I may hear as (hearing) the
learned;” but that is harsh and at variance with the true meaning.

<span id="iii.i-p56"></span><span id="iii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p57"></span>**5.** *The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine
ear.* He again repeats what he had formerly said, and here includes
everything that belongs to the office of a teacher; for the “opening of
the ear” must be understood to refer not only to doctrine, but to the
whole calling; that is, when he takes one to be his servant, and intbrms
of his duty him whom he has determined to send, when he gives commands,
and enjoins him to execute what he commands. But the Lord “opens the
ear,” not only when he declares what is his will, but when he powerfully
affects a man’s heart and moves him to render obedience, as it is said,

<span id="iii.i-p58"></span>“Thou hast bored mine ear.” (<span
id="iii.i-p58.1"></span>[Ps 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span
id="iii.i-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p59"></span>And Christ says,

<span id="iii.i-p60"></span>“Whosoever hath heard and learned from the
Father cometh to me.”  
(<span id="iii.i-p60.2"></span>[Joh
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span id="iii.i-p60.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p61"></span>Such is also the import of the second
clause, *And I was not rebellious,* the meaning of which may be thus
summed up: “He undertakes nothing at random, but, being fully convinced
of God’s calling, he discharges the office of a teacher, though it is
laborious and difficult, because he is ready to obey.”

<span id="iii.i-p62"></span><span id="iii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p63"></span>**6.** *I exposed my body to the smiters.*
With the reproaches, jeers, and insolence of wicked men, he contrasts
the unshaken courage which he possesses; as if he had said that,
“whatever resistancemay be attempted by the despisers of God, yet he
will baffle all their insults, so that he will never repent of the
labors which he has undertaken.” Yet this passage plainly shows that the
ministers of the word cannot perform their office faithfully without
being exposed to a contest with the world, and even without being
fiercely assailed on all sides; for as soon as Isaiah says that he has
obeyed the command of God, he likewise adds that “He has exposed his
body to the smiters.” The faithful servants of God, when they administer
the doctrine of the word, cannot escape from this condition, but must
endure fights, reproaches, hatred, slanders, and various attacks from
adversaries, who loathe that liberty of advising and reproving which it
is necessary for them to use. Let them, therefore, arm themselves with
steadfastness and faith; for a dreadful battle is prepared for them. And
not only does he describe the persecutions of wicked men, but the
reproach of the world; because wicked men desire to be thought to have
good cause for opposing the ministers of the word and persecuting their
doctrine, and wish that those ministers should be regarded as criminals
and malefactors, and held up to universal hatred and abhorrence. For
these reasons they lead them with various slanders, and do not refrain
from any kind of reproach, as we know well enough by experience in the
present day, when our adversaries call us heretics, deceivers, seditious
persons, and assail us with other slanders, which were also directed
against Christ and the Apostles. (<span id="iii.i-p63.1"></span>[Mt
27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)<span id="iii.i-p63.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p63.2"></span>[Joh
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012)<span id="iii.i-p63.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p63.3"></span>[Ac
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#020)<span id="iii.i-p63.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p64"></span>*My face I did not hide from shame and
spitting.* He not only says that open and outward foes spat and
inflicted blows on him, but glances at the slanders which he is
compelled to bear from foes who are within and belong to the household;
for out of the very bosom of the Church there always spring up wicked
men and despisers of God, who insolently attack the prophets. They who
wish to serve God must be prepared to endure all these things calmly,
that they may walk through evil report and through good report, (<span
id="iii.i-p64.1"></span>[2Co 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span
id="iii.i-p64.1"></span>,) and may despise not only banishment, stripes,
imprisonment, and death, but likewise reproaches and disgrace, though
they may sometimes appear harder to endure than death itself. While this
doctrine belongs to all believers, it belongs especially to the teachers
of the word, who ought to go before others, and to be, as it were,
standard-bearers.

<span id="iii.i-p65"></span><span id="iii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p66"></span>**7.** *For the Lord Jehovah will help me.*
The Prophet declares whence comes so great courage, which he and the
other servants of God need to possess, in order to withstand
courageously the attacks of every one. It comes from God’s assistance,
by relying on whom he declares that he is fortified against all the
attacks of the world. After having, with lofty fortitude, looked down
contemptuously on all that was opposed to him, he exhorts others also to
maintain the same firmness, and gives what may be called a picture of
the condition of all the ministers of the word; that, by tuming aside
from the world, they may tum wholly to God and have their eyes entirely
fixed upon him. There never will be a contest so arduous that they shall
not gain the victory by trusting to such a leader.

<span id="iii.i-p67"></span>*Therefore I have set my face as a flint.*
By the metaphor of “a flint” he shews that, whatever may happen, he will
not be afraid; for terror or alarm, like other passions, makes itself
visible in the face. The countenance itself speaks, and shews what are
our feelings. The servants of God, being so shamefully treated, must
inevitably have sunk under such attacks, had they not withstood them
with a forehead of stone or of iron. In this sense of the term, Jeremiah
also is said to have been “set for a fortified city, an iron pillar, and
a brazen wall, against the kings of Judah, and the princes, and the
people,” (<span id="iii.i-p67.1"></span>[Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018)<span id="iii.i-p67.1"></span>;)
and to Ezekiel is said to have been given “a strong forehead, and even
one of adamant, and harder than that, that he might not be dismayed at
the obstinacy of the people.” (<span id="iii.i-p67.2"></span>[Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)<span id="iii.i-p67.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p68"></span>*Therefore I was not ashamed.* The word
“ashamed” is twice used in this verse, but in different senses; for in
the former clause it relates to the feeling, and in the latter to the
thing itself or the effect. Accordingly, in the beginning of the verse,
where he boasts that he is not confounded with shame, because God is on
his side, he means that it is not enough that God is willing to help us,
if we do not also feel it; for of what advantage to us will the promises
of God be, if we distrust him? Confidence, therefore, is demanded, that
we may be supported by it, and may assuredly know that we enjoy God’s
favor.

<span id="iii.i-p69"></span>*I shall not be confounded.* In the
conclusion of the verse he boldly declares his conviction that the end
will be prosperous. Thus “to be confounded” means “to be disappointed;”
for they who had entertained a vain and deceitful hope are liable to be
mocked. Here we see that some special assistance is promised to godly
teachers and ministers of the word; so that the fiercer the attacks of
Satan, and the stronger the hostility of the world, so much the more
does the Lord defend and guard them by extraordinary protection. And
hence we ought to conclude, that all those who, when they come to the
contest, tremble and lose courage, have never been duly qualified for
discharging their office; for he who knows not how to strive knows not
how to serve God and the Church, and is not fitted for administering the
doctrine of the word.

<span id="iii.i-p70"></span><span id="iii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p71"></span>**8.** *He is near that justifieth me.* We
ought always to keep in remembrance that the Prophet mentions nothing
that is peculiar to himself, but testifies what the Lord chooses to be,
and will always be, towards faithful ministers, that whosoever has this
testimony, that God has sent him, and knows that he discharges his
office faithfully, may boldly despise all adversaries, and may not be
moved by their reproaches, for he is “justified” by the Lord; and, in
like manner, the Lord always is, and will be, near to defend and
maintain his truth. Besides, that any one may be able to make this
protestation, it is necessary that his conscience be pure; for, if any
man thrust himself rashly into the office, and have no testimony of his
calling, or bring forward his dreams publicly, in vain will he boast of
this promise, which belongs only to those who have been called by God,
and who sincerely and uprightly perform their duty. Now, although either
hypocrites or despisers never cease to annoy the servants of God, yet
Isaiah advances to meet them, as if none would venture to pick a quarrel
or utter a slander; not that he can keep them in check,  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) but because they will gain nothing by all
their attempts. He therefore declares, that he looks down with utter
contempt on the false accusations which the enemies of sound doctrine
pour out against its teachers. There is no crime with which they do not
upbraid them; but their efforts are fruitless; for the Judge, by whom
their integrity is maintained, is not far off. They may, therefore, as
Paul did, boldly appeal from the wicked and unjust judgments of men to
“the day of the Lord,” by whom their innocence will be made manifest.
(<span id="iii.i-p72.2"></span>[1Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="iii.i-p72.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p73"></span>*Let us stand together.* Godly teachers
ought to have so great confidence as not to hesitate to give a bold
defiance to adversaries. Satan, with his agents, does not always venture
to attack openly, especially when he fights by falsehoods, but by
ambuscade, and by burrowing under ground, endeavors to take them by
surprise; but the servants of God are not afraid to “stand up” openly,
and enter into contest with the enemy, and contend by arguments,
provided that adversaries are willing to enter into the lists. So great
is the force of truth that it does not dread the light of day, as we say
that Isaiah here attacks boldly those whom he perceives to be plotting
against him; and therefore he repeats, —

<span id="iii.i-p74"></span>*Let him draw near to* me. Godly ministers
ought to be ready to assign a reason for their doctrine. But where is
the man that is willing to hear them patiently, and to consider what is
the nature of that doctrine which they publicly declare? True indeed,
adversaries will approach, but it is to draw their swords to slay them;
to sharpen their tongues, that by every kind of slander they may tear
them in pieces. In short, their whole defense consists in arms or
deceitful stratagems; for they do not venture to contend by scriptural
arguments. Relying, therefore, on the justice of our cause, we may
freely defy them to the conflict. Though they condemn us without
listening to our vindication, and though they have many that support the
sentence which they have pronounced, we have no reason to be afraid; for
God, whose cause we plead, is our Judge, and will at length acquit us.

<span id="iii.i-p75"></span><span id="iii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p76"></span>**9.** *Who is he that condemmeth me?* Paul
appears to allude to this passage, in his Epistle to the Romans, when he
says, “It is God that justifieth; who shall condemn?” (<span
id="iii.i-p76.1"></span>[Rom. 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="iii.i-p76.1"></span>.) We
may safely have recourse to the judgment-seat of God, when we are well
assured that we have obtained his righteousness by free grace through
Christ. But here Isaiah handles a different subject; for he does not
speak of the universal salvation of men, but of the ministry of the
Word, which the Lord will defend against the attacks of wicked men, and
will not suffer his people to be overwhelmed by their fraud or violence.

<span id="iii.i-p77"></span>*Lo, they shall all wax old as a garment.*
He now shews more clearly that it is not in the shade or at case that he
boasts of his courage, as if none were giving him any disturbance; but
he declares that, though he is assailed by deadly foes, still he boldly
maintains his position; because all who fight with the Word of God shall
fall and vanish away through their own frailty. In order to place the
matter before their own eyes, he employs a demonstrative particle,
*“Behold,* like garments shall they perish, being consumed by worms.”
The Psalmist makes use of the same metaphor, when he compares the men of
this world to the children of God. (<span id="iii.i-p77.1"></span>[Ps.
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)<span id="iii.i-p77.1"></span>.)
The former, though they make a show and shine like dazzling garments,
shall perish; but believers, who now are covered with filth, shall at
length obtain new brightness and shine brilliantly like the stars. Here
he speaks literally of fierce dogs that attack and bark at godly
teachers. Though such persons are held in high estimation by men, and
possess very high authority among them, yet their lustre shall perish
and fade away, like that of garments which are eaten by worms.

<span id="iii.i-p78"></span><span id="iii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p79"></span>**10.** *Who is among you that feareth the
Lord?* After having spoken of God’s invincible aid, by which all
prophets are protected, he directs his discourse to believers, that they
may suffer themselves to be guided by the Word of God, and may become
obedient. Hence we may infer how far a holy boasting raised him above
his slanderers; for, in consequence of wicked men, through their vast
numbers, possessing at that time great influence among the Jews, there
was a risk of overwhelming the faith of the small minority.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) When he asks, “Where are they that fear
God?” he points out that their number is small. Yet he addresses them
separately, that they may detach themselves from the mixed crowd, and
not take part in counsels which are wicked, and which God has condemned.
In like manner we have formerly met with these words, “Say ye not, A
confederacy.” (<span id="iii.i-p80.2"></span>[Isa
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012)<span id="iii.i-p80.2"></span>.)
Although therefore the enemies of God are so numerous as to constitute a
vast army, yet Isaiah does not hesitate to say that there are some left
who shall profit by his doctrine.

<span id="iii.i-p81"></span>He speaks to those who “fear God;” for,
wherever there is no religion and no fear of God, there can be also no
entrance for doctrine. We see how audaciously doctrine is rejected by
those who, in other respects, wish to be reckoned acute and sagacious;
for, in consequence of being swelled with pride, they detest modesty and
humility, and are exceedingly stupid in this wisdom of God. It is not
without good reason, therefore, that he lays this foundation, namely,
the fear of God, that his Word may be attentively and diligently heard.
Hence also it is evident that true fear of God is nowhere to be found,
unless where men listen to his Word; for hypocrites do proudly and
haughtily boast of piety and the fear of God, but they manifest
rebellious contempt, when they reject the doctrine of the Gospel and all
godly exhortations. The clear proof of such persons is, that the mask
which they desire to wear is torn off.

<span id="iii.i-p82"></span>*Let him hear the voice of his servant.* He
might have simply said, “the voice of God,” but he expressly says, “of
his servant;” for God does not wish to be heard but by the voice of his
ministers, whom he employs to instruct us. Isaiah speaks first of
himself, and next of all others who have been invested with the same
office; and there is an implied contrast between that “hearing” which he
demands and that wicked eagerness to despise doctrine in which
irreligious men indulge, while they also, by their insolence, encourage
many idle and foolish persons to practice similar contempt.

<span id="iii.i-p83"></span>*He who hath walked in darkness.* Believers
might have brought it as an objection, that the fruit of their piety was
not visible, but that they were miserably afflicted, as if they had
lived a life of abandoned wickedness; and therefore the Prophet
anticipates and sets aside this complaint, by affirming that believers,
though hitherto they have been harshly treated, yet do not in vain obey
God and his Word; for, if they “have walked in darkness,” they shall at
length enjoy the light of the Lord. By “darkness” the Prophet here means
not the ignorance or blindness of the human understanding, but the
afflictions by which the children of God are almost always overwhelmed.
And this is the consolation which he formerly mentioned, when he
declared that “the tongue of the learned had been given to him, that he
might speak a word to one who was faint.” (Ver. 4.) Thus he promises
that they who have hitherto been discouraged and almost overwhelmed by
so many distresses shall receive consolation.

<span id="iii.i-p84"></span><span id="iii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p85"></span>**11.** *Lo, all of you kindle a fire.* He
upbraids the Jews with choosing to kindle for themselves their own
light, instead of drawing near to the light of God. This passage has
been badly expounded; and if we wish to understand its true meaning, we
must attend to the contrast between the light of God and the light of
men; that is, between the consolation which is brought to us by the Word
of God and the empty words of comfort uttered by men, when by idle and
useless things they attempt and toil to alleviate their distresses.
Having formerly spoken of “light” and “darkness,” and having promised
light to believers, who hear the voice of the Lord, he shews that the
Jews had rejected this light, in order to kindle another light for
themselves, and threatens that ultimately they shall be consumed by this
light, as by a conflagration. Thus Christ upbraids the Jews with
“rejoicing in John’s light,” (<span id="iii.i-p85.1"></span>[Joh
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iii.i-p85.1"></span>,)
because they made a wrong use of his official character, in order to
obscure or rather to extinguish the glory of Christ. To bring forward
John’s official character, in order to cover with darkness the glory of
Christ, was nothing else than to extinguish the light of God shining in
a mortal man, in order to kindle another light for themselves, not that
it might guide them by pointing out the road, but that, by foolishly
rejoicing in it, they might be driven about in every direction.

<span id="iii.i-p86"></span>When he says that they are *surrounded by
sparks,* he glances at their various thoughts, by which they were
agitated and carried about in uncertainty sometimes in one direction and
sometimes in another; and in this way he mocks at their folly, because
they willingly and eagerly ran wheresoever their foolish pleasures drew
them.

<span id="iii.i-p87"></span>*Walk in the light of your fire.* As if he
had said, “You shall know by experience how useless and transitory is
your light, when your unwarranted hopes shall have deceived you.” The
ironical permission denotes disappointment. Others explain it, that
wicked men kindle against themselves the fire of God’s wrath; but the
Prophet looked higher, and that sentiment appears not to agree with this
passage.

<span id="iii.i-p88"></span>*From my hand.* Because wicked men, being
intoxicated by false confidence, think that they are placed beyond the
reach of all danger, and, viewing the future with reckless disregard,
trust to “their own light,” that is, to the means of defense with which
they imagine themselves to be very abundantly provided; the Lord
declares, that *they shall lie down in sorrow,* and that this shall
proceed “from his hand;” and, in a word, that men who have forsaken the
light of the Word, and who seek consolation from some other quarter,
shall miserably perish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc16002.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p41.1"></span>Ains
recognoissent que leurs vices empeschent que ceste puissance ne se
monstre;” “But may acknowledge that their sins hinder that power from
being manifested.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc16002.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span> “This gives a great idea of God’s power.
Though the sun shines so bright that no mortal eye can steadily behold
its lustre, I can at pleasure send a thick cloud and intercept its rays,
and make the heavens appear as if they had put on mourning.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc16002.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p45.1"></span>A l’histoire
de la deliverance d’Egypte.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc16002.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p50"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p50.1"></span>Qui
gemissent sous le fardeau de leurs pechez;” “Who groan under the burden
of their sins.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc16002.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p55"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p55.1"></span>Ceux-la sont
doctes.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc16002.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p72"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p72.1"></span>Non pas
qu’il puisse tenir les meschans en bride;” “Not that he can keep wicked
men in check.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc16002.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p80"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p80.1"></span>Le danger
estoit qu’ils n’ estaignissent la foy d’une petite troupe de fideles;”
“The danger was that they would extinguish the faith of a small body of
believers.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 51](cc16003)
