[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah09)  [Next](sah11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter X - Science of Being

<span id="pg_268">p. 268</span>

That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, of the Word of life, . . . That which we have seen and heard
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ. -
JOHN, First Epistle.

Here I stand. I can do no otherwise; so help me God! Amen!--MARTIN
LUTHER.

Materialistic challenge

In the material world, thought has brought to light with great rapidity
many useful wonders. With like activity have thought's swift pinions
been rising towards the realm of the real, to the spiritual cause of
those lower things which give impulse to inquiry. Belief in a material
basis, from which may be deduced all rationality, is slowly yielding to
the idea of a metaphysical basis, looking away from matter to Mind as
the cause of every effect. Materialistic hypotheses challenge
metaphysics to meet in final combat. In this revolutionary period, like
the shepherd-boy with his sling, woman goes forth to battle with
Goliath.

Confusion confounded

In this final struggle for supremacy, semi-metaphysical systems afford
no substantial aid to scientific metaphysics, for their arguments are
based on the false testimony of the material senses as well as on the
facts of Mind. These semi-metaphysical

<span id="pg_269">p. 269</span>

systems are one and all pantheistic, and savor of Pandemonium, a house
divided against itself.

From first to last the supposed coexistence of Mind and matter and the
mingling of good and evil have resulted from the philosophy of the
serpent. Jesus' demonstrations sift the chaff from the wheat, and unfold
the unity and the reality of good, the unreality, the nothingness, of
evil.

Divine metaphysics

Human philosophy has made God manlike. Christian Science makes man
Godlike. The first is error; the latter is truth. Metaphysics is above
physics, and matter does not enter into metaphysical premises or
conclusions. The categories of metaphysics rest on one basis, the divine
Mind. Metaphysics resolves things into thoughts, and exchanges the
objects of sense for the ideas of Soul.

These ideas are perfectly real and tangible to spiritual consciousness,
and they have this, advantage over the objects and thoughts of material
sense,--they are good and eternal.

Biblical foundations

The testimony of the material senses is neither absolute nor divine. I
therefore plant myself unreservedly on the teachings of Jesus, of his
apostles, of the prophets, and on the testimony of the Science of Mind.
Other foundations there are none. All other systems--systems based
wholly or partly on knowledge gained through the material senses--are
reeds shaken by the wind, not houses built on the rock.

Rejected theories

The theories I combat are these: (1) that all is matter; (2) that matter
originates in Mind, and is as real as Mind, possessing intelligence and
life. The first theory, that matter is everything, is quite as

<span id="pg_270">p. 270</span>

reasonable as the second, that Mind and matter coexist and cooperate.
One only of the following statements can be true: (1) that everything is
matter; (2) that everything is Mind. Which one is it?

Matter and Mind are opposites. One is contrary to the other in its very
nature and essence; hence both cannot be real. If one is real, the other
must be unreal. Only by understanding that there is but one power,--not
two powers, matter and Mind,--are scientific and logical conclusions
reached. Few deny the hypothesis that intelligence, apart from man and
matter, governs the universe; and it is generally admitted that this
intelligence is the eternal Mind or divine principle, Love.

Prophetic ignorance

The prophets of old looked for something higher than the systems of
their times; hence their foresight of the new dispensation of Truth. But
they knew not what would be the precise nature of the teaching and
demonstration of God, divine Mind, in His more infinite meanings,--the
demonstration which was to destroy sin, sickness, and death, establish
the definition of omnipotence, and maintain the Science of Spirit.

The pride of priesthood is the prince of this world. It has nothing in
Christ. Meekness and charity have divine authority. Mortals think
wickedly; consequently they are wicked. They think sickly thoughts, and
so become sick. If sin makes sinners, Truth and Love alone can unmake
them. If a sense of disease produces suffering and a sense of ease
antidotes suffering, disease is mental, not material. Hence the fact
that the human mind alone suffers, is sick, and that the divine Mind
alone heals.

The life of Christ Jesus was not miraculous, but it was indigenous to
his spirituality,--the good soil wherein the

<span id="pg_271">p. 271</span>

seed of Truth springs up and bears much fruit. Christ's Christianity is
the chain of scientific being reappearing in all ages, maintaining its
obvious correspondence with the Scriptures and uniting all periods in
the design of God. Neither emasculation, illusion, nor insubordination
exists in divine Science.

Jesus instructed his disciples whereby to heal the sick through Mind
instead of matter. He knew that the philosophy, Science, and proof of
Christianity were in Truth, casting out all inharmony.

Studious disciples

In Latin the word rendered disciple signifies student; and the word
indicates that the power of healing was not a supernatural gift to those
learners, but the result of their cultivated spiritual understanding of
the divine Science, which their Master demonstrated by healing the sick
and sinning. Hence the universal application of his saying: "Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
\[understand me\] through their word."

New Testament basis

Our Master said, "But the Comforter . . . shall teach you all things."
When the Science of Christianity appears, it will lead you into all
truth. The Sermon on the Mount is the essence of this Science, and the
eternal life, not the death of Jesus, is its outcome.

Modern evangel

Those, who are willing to leave their nets or to cast them on the right
side for Truth, have the opportunity now, as aforetime, to learn and to
practise Christian healing. The Scriptures contain it. The spiritual
import of the Word imparts this power. But, as Paul says, "How shall
they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be

<span id="pg_272">p. 272</span>

sent?" If sent, how shall they preach, convert, and heal multitudes,
except the people hear?

Spirituality of Scripture

The spiritual sense of truth must be gained before Truth can be
understood. This sense is assimilated only as we are honest, unselfish,
loving, and meek. In the soil of an "honest and good heart" the seed
must be sown; else it beareth not much fruit, for the swinish element in
human nature uproots it. Jesus said: "Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures." The spiritual sense of the Scriptures brings out the
scientific sense, and is the new tongue referred to in the last chapter
of Mark's Gospel.

Jesus' parable of "the sower" shows the care our Master took not to
impart to dull ears and gross hearts the spiritual teachings which
dulness and grossness could not accept. Reading the thoughts of the
people, he said: "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither
cast ye your pearls before swine."

Unspiritual contrasts

It is the spiritualization of thought and Christianization of daily
life, in contrast with the results of the ghastly farce of material
existence; it is chastity and purity, in contrast with the downward
tendencies and earthward gravitation of sensualism and impurity, which
really attest the divine origin and operation of Christian Science. The
triumphs of Christian Science are recorded in the destruction of error
and evil, from which are propagated the dismal beliefs of sin, sickness,
and death.

God the Principle of all

The divine Principle of the universe must interpret the universe. God is
the divine Principle of all that represents Him and of all that really
exists. Christian Science, as demonstrated by Jesus, alone reveals the
natural, divine Principle of Science.

<span id="pg_273">p. 273</span>

Matter and its claims of sin, sickness, and death are contrary to God,
and cannot emanate from Him. There is no material truth. The physical
senses can take no cognizance of God and spiritual Truth. Human belief
has sought out many inventions, but not one of them can solve the
problem of being without the divine Principle of divine Science.
Deductions from material hypotheses are not scientific. They differ from
real Science because they are not based on the divine law.

Science versus sense

Divine Science reverses the false testimony of the material senses, and
thus tears away the foundations of error. Hence the enmity between
Science and the senses, and the impossibility of attaining perfect
understanding till the errors of sense are eliminated.

The so-called laws of matter and of medical science have never made
mortals whole, harmonious, and immortal. Man is harmonious when governed
by Soul. Hence the importance of understanding the truth of being, which
reveals the laws of spiritual existence.

Spiritual law the only law

God never ordained a material law to annul the spiritual law. If there
were such a material law, it would oppose the supremacy of Spirit, God,
and impugn the wisdom of the creator. Jesus walked on the waves, fed the
multitude, healed the sick, and raised the dead in direct opposition to
material laws. His acts were the demonstration of Science, overcoming
the false claims of material sense or law.

Material knowledge illusive

Science shows that material, conflicting mortal opinions and beliefs
emit the effects of error at all times, but this atmosphere of mortal
mind cannot be destructive to morals and health when it is opposed
promptly and per

<span id="pg_274">p. 274</span>

sistently by Christian Science. Truth and Love antidote this mental
miasma, and thus invigorate and sustain existence. Unnecessary knowledge
gained from the five senses is only temporal, - the conception of mortal
mind, the offspring of sense, not of Soul, Spirit,--and symbolizes all
that is evil and perishable. Natural science, as it is commonly called,
is not really natural nor scientific, because it is deduced from the
evidence of the material senses. Ideas, on the contrary, are born of
Spirit, and are not mere inferences drawn from material premises.

Five senses deceptive

The senses of Spirit abide in Love, and they demonstrate Truth and Life.
Hence Christianity and the Science which expounds it are based on
spiritual understanding, and they supersede the socalled laws of matter.
Jesus demonstrated this great verity. When what we erroneously term the
five physical senses are misdirected, they are simply the manifested
beliefs of mortal mind, which affirm that life, substance, and
intelligence are material, instead of spiritual. These false beliefs and
their products constitute the flesh, and the flesh wars against Spirit.

Impossible partnership

Divine Science is absolute, and permits no half-way position in learning
its Principle and rule--establishing it by demonstration. The
conventional firm, called matter and mind, God never formed. Science and
understanding, governed by the unerring and eternal Mind, destroy the
imaginary copartnership, matter and mind, formed only to be destroyed in
a manner and at a period as yet unknown. This suppositional partnership
is already obsolete, for matter, examined in the light of divine
metaphysics, disappears.

<span id="pg_275">p. 275</span>

Spirit the starting-point

Matter has no life to lose, and Spirit never dies. A partnership of mind
with matter would ignore omnipresent and omnipotent Mind. This shows
that matter did not originate in God, Spirit, and is not eternal.
Therefore matter is neither substantial, living, nor intelligent. The
starting-point of divine Science is that God, Spirit, is All-in-all, and
that there is no other might nor Mind,--that God is Love, and therefore
He is divine Principle.

Divine synonyms

To grasp the reality and order of being in its Science, you must begin
by reckoning God as the divine Principle of all that really is. Spirit,
Life, Truth, Love, combine as one,--and are the Scriptural names for
God. All substance, intelligence, wisdom, being, immortality, cause, and
effect belong to God. These are His attributes, the eternal
manifestations of the infinite divine Principle, Love. No wisdom is wise
but His wisdom; no truth is true, no love is lovely, no life is Life but
the divine; no good is, but the good God bestows.

The divine completeness

Divine metaphysics, as revealed to spiritual understanding, shows
clearly that all is Mind, and that Mind is God, omnipotence,
omnipresence, omniscience, - that is, all power, all presence, all
Science. Hence all is in reality the manifestation of Mind.

Our material human theories are destitute of Science. The true
understanding of God is spiritual. It robs the grave of victory. It
destroys the false evidence that misleads thought and points to other
gods, or other so-called powers, such as matter, disease, sin, and
death, superior or contrary to the one Spirit.

Truth, spiritually discerned, is scientifically understood. It casts out
error and heals the sick.

<span id="pg_276">p. 276</span>

Universal brotherhood

Having one God, one Mind, unfolds the power that heals the sick, and
fulfils these sayings of Scripture, "I am the Lord that healeth thee,"
and "I have found a ransom." When the divine precepts are understood,
they unfold the foundation of fellowship, in which one mind is not at
war with another, but all have one Spirit, God, one intelligent source,
in accordance with the Scriptural command: "Let this Mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus." Man and his Maker are correlated in
divine Science, and real consciousness is cognizant only of the things
of God.

The realization that all inharmony is unreal brings objects and thoughts
into human view in their true light, and presents them as beautiful and
immortal. Harmony in man is as real and immortal as in music. Discord is
unreal and mortal.

Perfection requisite

If God is admitted to be the only Mind and Life, there ceases to be any
opportunity for sin and death. When we learn in Science how to be
perfect even as our Father in heaven is perfect, thought is turned into
new and healthy channels, towards the contemplation of things immortal
and away from materiality to the Principle of the universe, including
harmonious man.

Material beliefs and spiritual understanding never mingle. The latter
destroys the former. Discord is the nothingness named error. Harmony is
the somethingness named Truth.

Like evolving like

Nature and revelation inform us that like produces like. Divine Science
does not gather grapes from thorns nor figs from thistles. Intelligence
never produces non-intelligence; but matter is

<span id="pg_277">p. 277</span>

ever non-intelligent and therefore cannot spring from intelligence. To
all that is unlike unerring and eternal Mind, this Mind saith, "Thou
shalt surely die;" and elsewhere the Scripture says that dust returns to
dust. The non-intelligent relapses into its own unreality. Matter never
produces mind. The immortal never produces the mortal. Good cannot
result in evil. As God Himself is good and is Spirit, goodness and
spirituality must be immortal. Their opposites, evil and matter, are
mortal error, and error has no creator. If goodness and spirituality are
real, evil and materiality are unreal and cannot be the outcome of an
infinite God, good.

Natural history presents vegetables and animals as preserving their
original species,--like reproducing like. A mineral is not produced by a
vegetable nor the man by the brute. In reproduction, the order of genus
and species is preserved throughout the entire round of nature. This
points to the spiritual truth and Science of being. Error relies upon a
reversal of this order, asserts that Spirit produces matter and matter
produces all the ills of flesh, and therefore that good is the origin of
evil. These suppositions contradict even the order of material so-called
science.

Material error

The realm of the real is Spirit. The unlikeness of Spirit is matter, and
the opposite of the real is not divine,--it is a human concept. Matter
is an error of statement. This error in the premise leads to errors in
the conclusion in every statement into which it enters. Nothing we can
say or believe regarding matter is immortal, for matter is temporal and
is therefore a mortal phenomenon, a human concept, sometimes beautiful,
always erroneous.

<span id="pg_278">p. 278</span>

Substance versus supposition

Is Spirit the source or creator of matter? Science reveals nothing in
Spirit out of which to create matter. Divine metaphysics explains away
matter. Spirit is the only substance and consciousness recognized by
divine Science. The material senses oppose this, but there are no
material senses, for matter has no mind. In Spirit there is no matter,
even as in Truth there is no error, and in good no evil. It is a false
supposition, the notion that there is real substancematter, the opposite
of Spirit. Spirit, God, is infinite, all. Spirit can have no opposite.

One cause supreme

That matter is substantial or has life and sensation, is one of the
false beliefs of mortals, and exists only in a supposititious mortal
consciousness. Hence, as we approach Spirit and Truth, we lose the
consciousness of matter. The admission that there can be material
substance requires another admission, namely, that Spirit is not
infinite and that matter is selfcreative, self-existent, and eternal.
From this it would follow that there are two eternal causes, warring
forever with each other; and yet we say that Spirit is supreme and
all-presence.

The belief of the eternity of matter contradicts the demonstration of
life as Spirit, and leads to the conclusion that if man is material, he
originated in matter and must return to dust, - logic which would prove
his annihilation.

Substance is Spirit

All that we term sin, sickness, and death is a mortal belief. We define
matter as error, because it is the opposite of life, substance, and
intelligence. Matter, with its mortality, cannot be substantial if
Spirit is substantial and eternal. Which ought to

<span id="pg_279">p. 279</span>

be substance to us,--the erring, changing, and dying, the mutable and
mortal, or the unerring, immutable, and immortal? A New Testament writer
plainly describes faith, a quality of mind, as "the substance of things
hoped for."

Material mortality

The doom of matter establishes the conclusion that matter, slime, or
protoplasm never originated in the immortal Mind, and is therefore not
eternal. Matter is neither created by Mind nor for the manifestation and
support of Mind.

Spiritual tangibility

Ideas are tangible and real to immortal consciousness, and they have the
advantage of being eternal. Spirit and matter can neither coexist nor
cooperate, and one can no more create the other than Truth can create
error, or vice versa.

In proportion as the belief disappears that life and intelligence are in
or of matter, the immortal facts of being are seen, and their only idea
or intelligence is in God. Spirit is reached only through the
understanding and demonstration of eternal Life and Truth and Love.

Pantheistic tendencies

Every system of human philosophy, doctrine, and medicine is more or less
infected with the pantheistic belief that there is mind in matter; but
this belief contradicts alike revelation and right reasoning. A logical
and scientific conclusion is reached only through the knowledge that
there are not two bases of being, matter and mind, but one alone, Mind.

Pantheism, starting from a material sense of God, seeks cause in effect,
Principle in its idea, and life and intelligence in matter.

<span id="pg_280">p. 280</span>

The things of God are beautiful

In the infinitude of Mind, matter must be unknown. Symbols and elements
of discord and decay are not products of the infinite, perfect, and
eternal All. From Love and from the light and harmony which are the
abode of Spirit, only reflections of good can come. All things beautiful
and harmless are ideas of Mind. Mind creates and multiplies them, and
the product must be mental.

Finite belief can never do justice to Truth in any direction. Finite
belief limits all things, and would compress Mind, which is infinite,
beneath a skull bone. Such belief can neither apprehend nor worship the
infinite; and to accommodate its finite sense of the divisibility of
Soul and substance, it seeks to divide the one Spirit into persons and
souls.

Belief in many gods

Through this error, human belief comes to have "gods many and lords
many." Moses declared as Jehovah's first command of the Ten: "Thou shalt
have no other gods before me!" But behold the zeal of belief to
establish the opposite error of many minds. The argument of the serpent
in the allegory, "Ye shall be as gods," urges through every avenue the
belief that Soul is in body, and that infinite Spirit, and Life, is in
finite forms.

Sensationless body

Rightly understood, instead of possessing a sentient material form, man
has a sensationless body; and God, the Soul of man and of all existence,
being perpetual in His own individuality, harmony, and immortality,
imparts and perpetuates these qualities in man,--through Mind, not
matter. The only excuse for entertaining human opinions and rejecting
the Science of being is our mortal ignorance of Spirit,--ignorance

<span id="pg_281">p. 281</span>

which yields only to the understanding of divine Science, the
understanding by which we enter into the kingdom of Truth on earth and
learn that Spirit is infinite and supreme. Spirit and matter no more
commingle than light and darkness. When one appears, the other
disappears.

God and His image

Error presupposes man to be both mind and matter. Divine Science
contradicts the corporeal senses, rebukes mortal belief, and asks: What
is the Ego, whence its origin and what its destiny? The Ego-man is the
reflection of the Ego-God; the Ego-man is the image and likeness of
perfect Mind, Spirit, divine Principle.

The one Ego, the one Mind or Spirit called God, is infinite
individuality, which supplies all form and comeliness and which reflects
reality and divinity in individual spiritual man and things.

The mind supposed to exist in matter or beneath a skull bone is a myth,
a misconceived sense and false conception as to man and Mind. When we
put off the false sense for the true, and see that sin and mortality
have neither Principle nor permanency, we shall learn that sin and
mortality are without actual origin or rightful existence. They are
native nothingness, out of which error would simulate creation through a
man formed from dust.

The true new idea

Divine Science does not put new wine into old bottles, Soul into matter,
nor the infinite into the finite. Our false views of matter perish as we
grasp the facts of Spirit. The old belief must be cast out or the new
idea will be spilled, and the inspiration, which is to change our
standpoint, will be

<span id="pg_282">p. 282</span>

lost. Now, as of old, Truth casts out evils and heals the sick.

Figures of being

The real Life, or Mind, and its opposite, the so-called material life
and mind, are figured by two geometrical symbols, a circle or sphere and
a straight line. The circle represents the infinite without beginning or
end; the straight line represents the finite, which has both beginning
and end. The sphere represents good, the self-existent and eternal
individuality or Mind; the straight line represents evil, a belief in a
self-made and temporary material existence. Eternal Mind and temporary
material existence never unite in figure or in fact.

Opposite symbols

A straight line finds no abiding-place in a curve, and a curve finds no
adjustment to a straight line. Similarly, matter has no place in Spirit,
and Spirit has no place in matter. Truth has no home in error, and error
has no foothold in Truth. Mind cannot pass into non-intelligence and
matter, nor can non-intelligence become Soul. At no point can these
opposites mingle or unite. Even though they seem to touch, one is still
a curve and the other a straight line.

There is no inherent power in matter; for all that is material is a
material, human, mortal thought, always governing itself erroneously.

Truth is the intelligence of immortal Mind. Error is the so-called
intelligence of mortal mind.

Truth is not inverted

Whatever indicates the fall of man or the opposite of God or God's
absence, is the Adam-dream, which is neither Mind nor man, for it is not
begotten of the Father. The rule of inversion infers from error its
opposite, Truth; but Truth is the light which

<span id="pg_283">p. 283</span>

dispels error. As mortals begin to understand Spirit, they give up the
belief that there is any true existence apart from God.

Source of all life and action

Mind is the source of all movement, and there is no inertia to retard or
check its perpetual and harmonious action. Mind is the same Life, Love,
and wisdom "yesterday, and to-day, and forever." Matter and its
effects--sin, sickness, and death--are states of mortal mind which act,
react, and then come to a stop. They are not facts of Mind. They are not
ideas, but illusions. Principle is absolute. It admits of no error, but
rests upon understanding.

But what say prevalent theories? They insist that Life, or God, is one
and the same with material life socalled. They speak of both Truth and
error as mind, and of good and evil as spirit. They claim that to be
life which is but the objective state of material sense, such as the
structural life of the tree and of material man,--and deem this the
manifestation of the one Life, God.

Spiritual structure

This false belief as to what really constitutes life so detracts from
God's character and nature, that the true sense of His power is lost to
all who cling to this falsity. The divine Principle, or Life, cannot be
practically demonstrated in length of days, as it was by the patriarchs,
unless its Science be accurately stated. We must receive the divine
Principle in the understanding, and live it in daily life; and unless we
so do, we can no more demonstrate Science, than we can teach and
illustrate geometry by calling a curve a straight line or a straight
line a sphere.

Are mentality, immortality, consciousness, resident in

<span id="pg_284">p. 284</span>

matter? It is not rational to say that Mind is infinite, but dwells in
finiteness,--in matter,--or that matter is infinite and the medium of
Mind.

Mind never limited

If God were limited to man or matter, or if the infinite could be
circumscribed within the finite, God would be corporeal, and unlimited
Mind would seem to spring from a limited body; but this is an
impossibility. Infinite Mind can have no starting-point, and can return
to no limit. It can never be in bonds, nor be fully manifested through
corporeality.

Material recognition impossible

Is God's image or likeness matter, or a mortal, sin, sickness, and
death? Can matter recognize Mind? Can infinite Mind recognize matter?
Can the infinite dwell in the finite or know aught unlike the infinite?
Can Deity be known through the material senses? Can the material senses,
which receive no direct evidence of Spirit, give correct testimony as to
spiritual life, truth, and love?

The answer to all these questions must forever be in the negative.

Our physical insensibility to Spirit

The physical senses can obtain no proof of God. They can neither see
Spirit through the eye nor hear it through the ear, nor can they feel,
taste, or smell Spirit. Even the more subtile and misnamed material
elements are beyond the cognizance of these senses, and are known only
by the effects commonly attributed to them.

According to Christian Science, the only real senses of man are
spiritual, emanating from divine Mind. Thought passes from God to man,
but neither sensation nor report goes from material body to Mind. The
intercommunication is always from God to His idea, man.

<span id="pg_285">p. 285</span>

Matter is not sentient and cannot be cognizant of good or of evil, of
pleasure or of pain. Man's individuality is not material. This Science
of being obtains not alone hereafter in what men call Paradise, but here
and now; it is the great fact of being for time and eternity.

The human counterfeit

What, then, is the material personality which suffers, sins, and dies?
It is not man, the image and likeness of God, but man's counterfeit, the
inverted likeness, the unlikeness called sin, sickness, and death. The
unreality of the claim that a mortal is the true image of God is
illustrated by the opposite natures of Spirit and matter, Mind and body,
for one is intelligence while the other is non-intelligence.

Material misconceptions

Is God a physical personality? Spirit is not physical. The belief that a
material body is man is a false conception of man. The time has come for
a finite conception of the infinite and of a material body as the seat
of Mind to give place to a diviner sense of intelligence and its
manifestations, to the better understanding that Science gives of the
Supreme Being, or divine Principle, and idea.

Salvation is through reform

By interpreting God as a corporeal Saviour but not as the saving
Principle, or divine Love, we shall continue to seek salvation through
pardon and not through reform, and resort to matter instead of Spirit
for the cure of the sick. As mortals reach, through knowledge of
Christian Science, a higher sense, they will seek to learn, not from
matter, but from the divine Principle, God, how to demonstrate the
Christ, Truth, as the healing and saving power.

It is essential to understand, instead of believe, what

<span id="pg_286">p. 286</span>

relates most nearly to the happiness of being. To seek Truth through
belief in a human doctrine is not to understand the infinite. We must
not seek the immutable and immortal through the finite, mutable, and
mortal, and so depend upon belief instead of demonstration, for this is
fatal to a knowledge of Science. The understanding of Truth gives full
faith in Truth, and spiritual understanding is better than all burnt
offerings.

The Master said, "No man cometh unto the Father \[the divine Principle
of being\] but by me," Christ, Life, Truth, Love; for Christ says, "I am
the way." Physical causation was put aside from first to last by this
original man, Jesus. He knew that the divine. Principle, Love, creates
and governs all that is real.

Goodness a portion of God

In the Saxon and twenty other tongues good is the term for God. The
Scriptures declare all that He made to be good, like Himself,--good in
Principle and in idea. Therefore the spiritual universe is good, and
reflects God as He is.

Spiritual thoughts

God's thoughts are perfect and eternal, are substance and Life. Material
and temporal thoughts are human, involving error, and since God, Spirit,
is the only cause, they lack a divine cause. The temporal and material
are not then creations of Spirit. They are but counterfeits of the
spiritual and eternal. Transitory thoughts are the antipodes of
everlasting Truth, though (by the supposition of opposite qualities)
error must also say, "I am true." But by this saying error, the lie,
destroys itself.

Sin, sickness, and death are comprised in human material belief, and
belong not to the divine Mind. They

<span id="pg_287">p. 287</span>

are without a real origin or existence. They have neither Principle nor
permanence, but belong, with all that is material and temporal, to the
nothingness of error, which simulates the creations of Truth. All
creations of Spirit are eternal; but creations of matter must return to
dust. Error supposes man to be both mental and material. Divine Science
contradicts this postulate and maintains man's spiritual identity.

Divine allness

We call the absence of Truth, error. Truth and error are unlike. In
Science, Truth is divine, and the infinite God can have no unlikeness.
Did God, Truth, create error? No! "Doth a fountain send forth at the
same place sweet water and bitter?" God being everywhere and
all-inclusive, how can He be absent or suggest the absence of
omnipresence and omnipotence? How can there be more than all?

Neither understanding nor truth accompanies error, nor is error the
offshoot of Mind. Evil calls itself something, when it is nothing. It
saith, "I am man, but I am not the image and likeness of God;" whereas
the Scriptures declare that man was made in God's likeness.

Error unveiled

Error is false, mortal belief; it is illusion, without spiritual
identity or foundation, and it has no real existence. The supposition
that life, substance, and intelligence are in matter, or of it, is an
error. Matter is neither a thing nor a person, but merely the objective
supposition of Spirit's opposite. The five material senses testify to
truth and error as united in a mind both good and evil. Their false
evidence will finally yield to Truth,--to the recognition of Spirit and
of the spiritual creation.

Truth cannot be contaminated by error. The state

<span id="pg_288">p. 288</span>

ment that Truth is real necessarily includes the correlated statement,
that error, Truth's unlikeness, is unreal.

The great conflict

The suppositional warfare between truth and error is only the mental
conflict between the evidence of the spiritual senses and the testimony
of the material senses, and this warfare between the Spirit and flesh
will settle all questions through faith in and the understanding of
divine Love.

Superstition and understanding can never combine. When the final
physical and moral effects of Christian Science are fully apprehended,
the conflict between truth and error, understanding and belief, Science
and material sense, foreshadowed by the prophets and inaugurated by
Jesus, will cease, and spiritual harmony reign. The lightnings and
thunderbolts of error may burst and flash till the cloud is cleared and
the tumult dies away in the distance. Then the raindrops of divinity
refresh the earth. As St. Paul says: "There remaineth therefore a rest
to the people of God" (of Spirit).

The chief stones in the temple

The chief stones in the temple of Christian Science are to be found in
the following postulates: that Life is God, good, and not evil; that
Soul is sinless, not to be found in the body; that Spirit is not, and
cannot be, materialized; that Life is not subject to death; that the
spiritual real man has no birth, no material life, and no death.

The Christ-element

Science reveals the glorious possibilities of immortal man, forever
unlimited by the mortal senses. The Christ-element in the Messiah made
him the Way-shower, Truth and Life.

The eternal Truth destroys what mortals seem to have learned from error,
and man's real existence as a child

<span id="pg_289">p. 289</span>

of God comes to light. Truth demonstrated is eternal life. Mortal man
can never rise from the temporal debris of error, belief in sin,
sickness, and death, until he learns that God is the only Life. The
belief that life and sensation are in the body should be overcome by the
understanding of what constitutes man as the image of God. Then Spirit
will have overcome the flesh.

Wickedness is not man

A wicked mortal is not the idea of God. He is little else than the
expression of error. To suppose that sin, lust, hatred, envy, hypocrisy,
revenge, have life abiding in them, is a terrible mistake. Life and
life's idea, Truth and Truth's idea, never make men sick, sinful, or
mortal.

Death but an illusion

The fact that the Christ, or Truth, overcame and still overcomes death
proves the "king of terrors" to be but a mortal belief, or error, which
Truth destroys with the spiritual evidences of Life; and this shows that
what appears to the senses to be death is but a mortal illusion, for to
the real man and the real universe there is no death-process.

The belief that matter has life results, by the universal law of mortal
mind, in a belief in death. So man, tree, and flower are supposed to
die; but the fact remains, that God's universe is spiritual and
immortal.

Spiritual offspring

The spiritual fact and the material belief of things are contradictions;
but the spiritual is true, and therefore the material must be untrue.
Life is not in matter. Therefore it cannot be said to pass out of
matter. Matter and death are mortal illusions. Spirit and all things
spiritual are the real and eternal.

Man is not the offspring of flesh, but of Spirit,--of Life, not of
matter. Because Life is God, Life must be

<span id="pg_290">p. 290</span>

eternal, self-existent. Life is the everlasting I AM, the Being who was
and is and shall be, whom nothing can erase.

Death no advantage

If the Principle, rule, and demonstration of man's being are not in the
least understood before what is termed death overtakes mortals, they
will rise no higher spiritually in the scale of existence on account of
that single experience, but will remain as material as before the
transition, still seeking happiness through a material, instead of
through a spiritual sense of life, and from selfish and inferior
motives. That Life or Mind is finite and physical or is manifested
through brain and nerves, is false. Hence Truth comes to destroy this
error and its effects,--sickness, sin, and death. To the spiritual
class, relates the Scripture: "On such the second death hath no power."

Future purification

If the change called death destroyed the belief in sin, sickness, and
death, happiness would be won at the moment of dissolution, and be
forever permanent; but this is not so. Perfection is gained only by
perfection. They who are unrighteous shall be unrighteous still, until
in divine Science Christ, Truth, removes all ignorance and sin.

Sin is punished

The sin and error which possess us at the instant of death do not cease
at that moment, but endure until the death of these errors. To be wholly
spiritual, man must be sinless, and he becomes thus only when he reaches
perfection. The murderer, though slain in the act, does not thereby
forsake sin. He is no more spiritual for believing that his body died
and learning that his cruel mind died not. His thoughts are no purer
until evil is disarmed by good. His body is as material as his mind, and
vice versa.

<span id="pg_291">p. 291</span>

The suppositions that sin is pardoned while unforsaken, that happiness
can be genuine in the midst of sin, that the so-called death of the body
frees from sin, and that God's pardon is aught but the destruction of
sin,--these are grave mistakes. We know that all will be changed "in the
twinkling of an eye," when the last trump shall sound; but this last
call of wisdom cannot come till mortals have already yielded to each
lesser call in the growth of Christian character. Mortals need not fancy
that belief in the experience of death will awaken them to glorified
being.

Salvation and probation

Universal salvation rests on progression and probation, and is
unattainable without them. Heaven is not a locality, but a divine state
of Mind in which all the manifestations of Mind are harmonious and
immortal, because sin is not there and man is found having no
righteousness of his own, but in possession of "the mind of the Lord,"
as the Scripture says.

"In the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be." So we read in
Ecclesiastes. This text has been transformed into the popular proverb,
"As the tree falls, so it must lie." As man falleth asleep, so shall he
awake. As death findeth mortal man, so shall he be after death, until
probation and growth shall effect the needed change. Mind never becomes
dust. No resurrection from the grave awaits Mind or Life, for the grave
has no power over either.

Day of judgment

No final judgment awaits mortals, for the judgmentday of wisdom comes
hourly and continually, even the judgment by which mortal man is
divested of all material error. As for spiritual error there is none.

<span id="pg_292">p. 292</span>

When the last mortal fault is destroyed, then the final trump will sound
which will end the battle of Truth with error and mortality; "but of
that day and hour, knoweth no man." Here prophecy pauses. Divine Science
alone can compass the heights and depths of being and reveal the
infinite.

Primitive error

Truth will be to us "the resurrection and the life" only as it destroys
all error and the belief that Mind, the only immortality of man, can be
fettered by the body, and Life be controlled by death. A sinful, sick,
and dying mortal is not the likeness of God, the perfect and eternal.

Matter is the primitive belief of mortal mind, because this so-called
mind has no cognizance of Spirit. To mortal mind, matter is substantial,
and evil is real. The so-called senses of mortals are material. Hence
the so-called life of mortals is dependent on matter.

Explaining the origin of material man and mortal mind, Jesus said: "Why
do ye not understand my speech? Even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye
are of your father, the devil \[evil\], and the lusts of your father ye
will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it."

Immortal man

This carnal material mentality, misnamed mind, is mortal. Therefore man
would be annihilated, were it not for the spiritual real man's
indissoluble connection with his God, which Jesus brought to light. In
his resurrection and ascension, Jesus showed that a mortal man is not
the real essence of manhood, and

<span id="pg_293">p. 293</span>

that this unreal material mortality disappears in presence of the
reality.

Elementary electricity

Electricity is not a vital fluid, but the least material form of
illusive consciousness, - the material mindlessness, which forms no link
between matter and Mind, and which destroys itself. Matter and mortal
mind are but different strata of human belief. The grosser substratum is
named matter or body; the more ethereal is called mind. This so-called
mind and body is the illusion called a mortal, a mind in matter. In
reality and in Science, both strata, mortal mind and mortal body, are
false representatives of man.

The material so-called gases and forces are counterfeits of the
spiritual forces of divine Mind, whose potency is Truth, whose
attraction is Love, whose adhesion and cohesion are Life, perpetuating
the eternal facts of being. Electricity is the sharp surplus of
materiality which counterfeits the true essence of spirituality or
truth,--the great difference being that electricity is not intelligent,
while spiritual truth is Mind.

The counterfeit forces

There is no vapid fury of mortal mind--expressed in earthquake, wind,
wave, lightning, fire, bestial ferocity - and this so-called mind is
self-destroyed. The manifestations of evil, which counterfeit divine
justice, are called in the Scriptures, "The anger of the Lord." In
reality, they show the self-destruction of error or matter and point to
matter's opposite, the strength and permanency of Spirit. Christian
Science brings to light Truth and its supremacy, universal harmony, the
entireness of God, good, and the nothingness of evil.

Instruments of error

The five physical senses are the avenues and instru

<span id="pg_294">p. 294</span>

ments of human error, and they correspond with error. These senses
indicate the common human belief, that life, substance, and intelligence
are a unison of matter with Spirit. This is pantheism, and carries
within itself the seeds of all error.

If man is both mind and matter, the loss of one finger would take away
some quality and quantity of the man, for matter and man would be one.

Mortal verdict

The belief that matter thinks, sees, or feels is not more real than the
belief that matter enjoys and suffers. This mortal belief, misnamed man,
is error, saying: "Matter has intelligence and sensation. Nerves feel.
Brain thinks and sins. The stomach can make a man cross. Injury can
cripple and matter can kill man." This verdict of the so-called material
senses victimizes mortals, taught, as they are by physiology and
pathology, to revere false testimony, even the errors that are destroyed
by Truth through spiritual sense and Science.

Mythical pleasure

The lines of demarcation between immortal man, representing Spirit, and
mortal man, representing the error that life and intelligence are in
matter, show the pleasures and pains of matter to be myths, and human
belief in them to be the father of mythology, in which matter is
represented as divided into intelligent gods. Man's genuine selfhood is
recognizable only in what is good and true. Man is neither self-made nor
made by mortals. God created man.

Severed members

The inebriate believes that there is pleasure in intoxication. The thief
believes that he gains something by stealing, and the hypocrite that he
is hiding himself. The Science of Mind corrects such mistakes, for Truth
demonstrates the falsity of error.

<span id="pg_295">p. 295</span>

Severed members

The belief that a severed limb is aching in the old location, the
sensation seeming to be in nerves which are no longer there, is an added
proof of the unreliability of physical testimony.

Mortals unlike immortals

God creates and governs the universe, including man. The universe is
filled with spiritual ideas, which He evolves, and they are obedient to
the Mind that makes them. Mortal mind would transform the spiritual into
the material, and then recover man's original self in order to escape
from the mortality of this error. Mortals are not like immortals,
created in God's own image; but infinite Spirit being all, mortal
consciousness will at last yield to the scientific fact and disappear,
and the real sense of being, perfect and forever intact, will appear.

Goodness transparent

The manifestation of God through mortals is as light passing through the
window-pane. The light and the glass never mingle, but as matter, the
glass is less opaque than the walls. The mortal mind through which Truth
appears most vividly is that one which has lost much materiality--much
error--in order to become a better transparency for Truth. Then, like a
cloud melting into thin vapor, it no longer hides the sun.

Brainology a myth

All that is called mortal thought is made up of error. The theoretical
mind is matter, named brain, or material consciousness, the exact
opposite of real Mind, or Spirit. Brainology teaches that mortals are
created to suffer and die. It further teaches that when man is dead, his
immortal soul is resurrected from death and mortality. Thus error
theorizes that spirit is born of matter and returns to mat

<span id="pg_296">p. 296</span>

ter, and that man has a resurrection from dust; whereas Science unfolds
the eternal verity, that man is the spiritual, eternal reflection of
God.

Scientific purgation

Progress is born of experience. It is the ripening of mortal man,
through which the mortal is dropped for the immortal. Either here or
hereafter, suffering or Science must destroy all illusions regarding
life and mind, and regenerate material sense and self. The old man with
his deeds must be put off. Nothing sensual or sinful is immortal. The
death of a false material sense and of sin, not the death of organic
matter, is what reveals man and Life, harmonious, real, and eternal.

The so-called pleasures and pains of matter perish, and they must go out
under the blaze of Truth, spiritual sense, and the actuality of being.
Mortal belief must lose all satisfaction in error and sin in order to
part with them.

Whether mortals will learn this sooner or later, and how long they will
suffer the pangs of destruction, depends upon the tenacity of error.

Mixed testimony

The knowledge obtained from the corporeal senses leads to sin and death.
When the evidence of Spirit and matter, Truth and error, seems to
commingle, it rests upon foundations which time is wearing away. Mortal
mind judges by the testimony of the material senses, until Science
obliterates this false testimony. An improved belief is one step out of
error, and aids in taking the next step and in understanding the
situation in Christian Science.

Belief an autocrat

Mortal belief is a liar from the beginning, not deserving power. It says
to mortals, "You are wretched!" and they

<span id="pg_297">p. 297</span>

think they are so; and nothing can change this state, until the belief
changes. Mortal belief says, "You are happy!" and mortals are so; and no
circumstance can alter the situation, until the belief on this subject
changes. Human belief says to mortals, "You are sick!" and this
testimony manifests itself on the body as sickness. It is as necessary
for a health-illusion, as for an illusion of sickness, to be instructed
out of itself into the understanding of what constitutes health; for a
change in either a health-belief or a belief in sickness affects the
physical condition.

Self-improvement

Erroneous belief is destroyed by truth. Change the evidence, and that
disappears which before seemed real to this false belief, and the human
consciousness rises higher. Thus the reality of being is attained and
man found to be immortal. The only fact concerning any material concept
is, that it is neither scientific nor eternal, but subject to change and
dissolution.

Faith higher than belief

Faith is higher and more spiritual than belief. It is a chrysalis state
of human thought, in which spiritual evidence, contradicting the
testimony of material sense, begins to appear, and Truth, the
ever-present, is becoming understood. Human thoughts have their degrees
of comparison. Some thoughts are better than others. A belief in Truth
is better than a belief in error, but no mortal testimony is founded on
the divine rock. Mortal testimony can be shaken. Until belief becomes
faith, and faith becomes spiritual understanding, human thought has
little relation to the actual or divine.

A mortal belief fulfils its own conditions. Sickness,

<span id="pg_298 ">p. 298</span>

sin, and death are the vague realities of human conclusions. Life,
Truth, and Love are the realities of divine Science. They dawn in faith
and glow full-orbed in spiritual understanding. As a cloud hides the sun
it cannot extinguish, so false belief silences for a while the voice of
immutable harmony, but false belief cannot destroy Science armed with
faith, hope, and fruition.

Truth's witness

What is termed material sense can report only a mortal temporary sense
of things, whereas spiritual sense can bear witness only to Truth. To
material sense, the unreal is the real until this sense is corrected by
Christian Science.

Spiritual sense, contradicting the material senses, involves intuition,
hope, faith, understanding, fruition, reality. Material sense expresses
the belief that mind is in matter. This human belief, alternating
between a sense of pleasure and pain, hope and fear, life and death,
never reaches beyond the boundary of the mortal or the unreal. When the
real is attained, which is announced by Science, joy is no longer a
trembler, nor is hope a cheat. Spiritual ideas, like numbers and notes,
start from Principle, and admit no materialistic beliefs. Spiritual
ideas lead up to their divine origin, God, and to the spiritual sense of
being.

Thought-angels

Angels are not etherealized human beings, evolving animal qualities in
their wings; but they are celestial visitants, flying on spiritual, not
material, pinions. Angels are pure thoughts from God, winged with Truth
and Love, no matter what their individualism may be. Human conjecture
confers upon angels its own forms of thought, marked with superstitious
outlines, making them human creatures with suggestive

<span id="pg_299">p. 299</span>

feathers; but this is only fancy. It has behind it no more reality than
has the sculptor's thought when he carves his "Statue of Liberty," which
embodies his conception of an unseen quality or condition, but which has
no physical antecedent reality save in the artist's own observation and
"chambers of imagery."

Our Angelic messengers

My angels are exalted thoughts, appearing at the door of some sepulchre,
in which human belief has buried its fondest earthly hopes. With white
fingers they point upward to a new and glorified trust, to higher ideals
of life and its joys. Angels are God's representatives. These
upward-soaring beings never lead towards self, sin, or materiality, but
guide to the divine Principle of all good, whither every real
individuality, image, or likeness of God, gathers. By giving earnest
heed to these spiritual guides they tarry with us, and we entertain
"angels unawares."

Knowledge and Truth

Knowledge gained from material sense is figuratively represented in
Scripture as a tree, bearing the fruits of sin, sickness, and death.
Ought we not then to judge the knowledge thus obtained to be untrue and
dangerous, since "the tree is known by his fruit"?

Truth never destroys God's idea. Truth is spiritual, eternal substance,
which cannot destroy the right reflection. Corporeal sense, or error,
may seem to hide Truth, health, harmony, and Science, as the mist
obscures the sun or the mountain; but Science, the sunshine of Truth,
will melt away the shadow and reveal the celestial peaks.

Old and new man

If man were solely a creature of the material senses, he would have no
eternal Principle and would be mutable

<span id="pg_300">p. 300</span>

and mortal. Human logic is awry when it attempts to draw correct
spiritual conclusions regarding life from matter. Finite sense has no
true appreciation of infinite Principle, God, or of His infinite image
or reflection, man. The mirage, which makes trees and cities seem to be
where they are not, illustrates the illusion of material man, who cannot
be the image of God.

So far as the scientific statement as to man is understood, it can be
proved and will bring to light the true reflection of God--the real man,
or the new man (as St. Paul has it).

The tares and wheat

The temporal and unreal never touch the eternal and real. The mutable
and imperfect never touch the immutable and perfect. The inharmonious
and self-destructive never touch the harmonious and self-existent. These
opposite qualities are the tares and wheat, which never really mingle,
though (to mortal sight) they grow side by side until the harvest; then,
Science separates the wheat from the tares, through the realization of
God as ever present and of man as reflecting the divine likeness.

The divine reflection

Spirit is God, Soul; therefore Soul is not in matter. If Spirit were in
matter, God would have no representative, and matter would be identical
with God. The theory that soul, spirit, intelligence, inhabits matter is
taught by the schools. This theory is unscientific. The universe
reflects and expresses the divine substance or Mind; therefore God is
seen only in the spiritual universe and spiritual man, as the sun is
seen in the ray of light which goes out from it. God is revealed only in
that which reflects Life, Truth, Love,

<span id="pg_301">p. 301</span>

yea, which manifests God's attributes and power, even as the human
likeness thrown upon the mirror, repeats the color, form, and action of
the person in front of the mirror.

Few persons comprehend what Christian Science means by the word
reflection. To himself, mortal and material man seems to be substance,
but his sense of substance involves error and therefore is material,
temporal.

On the other hand, the immortal, spiritual man is really substantial,
and reflects the eternal substance, or Spirit, which mortals hope for.
He reflects the divine, which constitutes the only real and eternal
entity. This reflection seems to mortal sense transcendental, because
the spiritual man's substantiality transcends mortal vision and is
revealed only through divine Science.

Inverted images and ideas

As God is substance and man is the divine image and likeness, man should
wish for, and in reality has, only the substance of good, the substance
of Spirit, not matter. The belief that man has any other substance, or
mind, is not spiritual and breaks the First Commandment, Thou shalt have
one God, one Mind. Mortal man seems to himself to be material substance,
while man is "image" (idea). Delusion, sin, disease, and death arise
from the false testimony of material sense, which, from a supposed
standpoint outside the focal distance of infinite Spirit, presents an
inverted image of Mind and substance with everything turned upside down.

This falsity presupposes soul to be an unsubstantial dweller in material
forms, and man to be material instead of spiritual. Immortality is not
bounded by mortality.

<span id="pg_302">p. 302</span>

Soul is not compassed by finiteness. Principle is not to be found in
fragmentary ideas.

Identity not lost

The material body and mind are temporal, but the real man is spiritual
and eternal. The identity of the real man is not lost, but found through
this explanation; for the conscious infinitude of existence and of all
identity is thereby discerned and remains unchanged. It is impossible
that man should lose aught that is real, when God is all and eternally
his. The notion that mind is in matter, and that the so-called pleasures
and pains, the birth, sin, sickness, and death of matter, are real, is a
mortal belief; and this belief is all that will ever be lost.

Definition of man

Continuing our definition of man, let us remember that harmonious and
immortal man has existed forever, and is always beyond and above the
mortal illusion of any life, substance and intelligence as existent in
matter. This statement is based on fact, not fable. The Science of being
reveals man as perfect, even as the Father is perfect, because the Soul,
or Mind, of the spiritual man is God, the divine Principle of all being,
and because this real man is governed by Soul instead of sense, by the
law of Spirit, not by the so-called laws of matter.

God is Love. He is therefore the divine, infinite Principle, called
Person or God. Man's true consciousness is in the mental, not in any
bodily or personal likeness to Spirit. Indeed, the body presents no
proper likeness of divinity, though mortal sense would fain have us so
believe.

Mental propagation

Even in Christian Science, reproduction by Spirit's individual ideas is
but the reflection of the creative power

<span id="pg_303">p. 303</span>

of the divine Principle of those ideas. The reflection, through mental
manifestation, of the multitudinous forms of Mind which people the realm
of the real is controlled by Mind, the Principle governing the
reflection. Multiplication of God's children comes from no power of
propagation in matter, it is the reflection of Spirit.

The minutiae of lesser individualities reflect the one divine
individuality and are comprehended in and formed by Spirit, not by
material sensation. Whatever reflects Mind, Life, Truth, and Love, is
spiritually conceived and brought forth; but the statement that man is
conceived and evolved both spiritually and materially, or by both God
and man, contradicts this eternal truth. All the vanity of the ages can
never make both these contraries true. Divine Science lays the axe at
the root of the illusion that life, or mind, is formed by or is in the
material body, and Science will eventually destroy this illusion through
the self-destruction of all error and the beatified understanding of the
Science of Life.

Error defined

The belief that pain and pleasure, life and death, holiness and
unholiness, mingle in man,--that mortal, material man is the likeness of
God and is himself a creator,--is a fatal error.

Man's entity spiritual

God, without the image and likeness of Himself, would be a nonentity, or
Mind unexpressed. He would be without a witness or proof of His own
nature. Spiritual man is the image or idea of God, an idea which cannot
be lost nor separated from its divine Principle. When the evidence
before the material senses yielded to spiritual sense, the apostle
declared that nothing could alienate him from

<span id="pg_304">p. 304</span>

God, from the sweet sense and presence of Life and Truth.

Man inseparable from Love

It is ignorance and false belief, based on a material sense of things,
which hide spiritual beauty and goodness. Understanding this, Paul said:
"Neither death, nor life, . . . nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God." This is the doctrine of Christian Science:
that divine Love cannot be deprived of its manifestation, or object;
that joy cannot be turned into sorrow, for sorrow is not the master of
joy; that good can never produce evil; that matter can never produce
mind nor life result in death. The perfect man--governed by God, his
perfect Principle--is sinless and eternal.

Harmony natural

Harmony is produced by its Principle, is controlled by it and abides
with it. Divine Principle is the Life of man. Man's happiness is not,
therefore, at the disposal of physical sense. Truth is not contaminated
by error. Harmony in man is as beautiful as in music, and discord is
unnatural, unreal.

The science of music governs tones. If mortals caught harmony through
material sense, they would lose harmony, if time or accident robbed them
of material sense. To be master of chords and discords, the science of
music must be understood. Left to the decisions of material sense, music
is liable to be misapprehended and lost in confusion. Controlled by
belief, instead of understanding, music is, must be, imperfectly
expressed. So man, not understanding the Science of being,--thrusting
aside his divine Principle as incomprehensible,--is abandoned to
conjectures, left in

<span id="pg_305">p. 305</span>

the hands of ignorance, placed at the disposal of illusions, subjected
to material sense which is discord. A discontented, discordant mortal is
no more a man than discord is music.

Human reflection

A picture in the camera or a face reflected in the mirror is not the
original, though resembling it. Man, in the likeness of his Maker,
reflects the central light of being, the invisible God. As there is no
corporeality in the mirrored form, which is but a reflection, so man,
like all things real, reflects God, his divine Principle, not in a
mortal body.

Gender also is a quality, not of God, but a characteristic of mortal
mind. The verity that God's image is not a creator, though he reflects
the creation of Mind, God, constitutes the underlying reality of
reflection. "Then answered Jesus and said unto them: Verily, verily I
say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the
Father do: for what things soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son
likewise."

Inverted images

The inverted images presented by the senses, the deflections of matter
as opposed to the Science of spiritual reflection, are all unlike
Spirit, God. In the illusion of life that is here to-day and gone
to-morrow, man would be wholly mortal, were it not that Love, the divine
Principle that obtains in divine Science, destroys all error and brings
immortality to light. Because man is the reflection of his Maker, he is
not subject to birth, growth, maturity, decay. These mortal dreams are
of human origin, not divine.

Jewish traditions

The Sadducees reasoned falsely about the resurrection, but not so
blindly as the Pharisees, who believed

<span id="pg_306">p. 306</span>

error to be as immortal as Truth. The Pharisees thought that they could
raise the spiritual from the material. They would first make life result
in death, and then resort to death to reproduce spiritual life. Jesus
taught them how death was to be overcome by spiritual Life, and
demonstrated this beyond cavil.

Divinity not childless

Life demonstrates Life. The immortality of Soul makes man immortal. If
God, who is Life, were parted for a moment from His reflection, man,
during that moment there would be no divinity reflected. The Ego would
be unexpressed, and the Father would be childless,--no Father.

If Life or Soul and its representative, man, unite for a period and then
are separated as by a law of divorce to be brought together again at
some uncertain future time and in a manner unknown,--and this is the
general religious opinion of mankind,--we are left without a rational
proof of immortality. But man cannot be separated for an instant from
God, if man reflects God. Thus Science proves man's existence to be
intact.

Thought-forms

The myriad forms of mortal thought, made manifest as matter, are not
more distinct nor real to the material senses than are the Soul-created
forms to spiritual sense, which cognizes Life as permanent. Undisturbed
amid the jarring testimony of the material senses, Science, still
enthroned, is unfolding to mortals the immutable, harmonious, divine
Principle, - is unfolding Life and the universe, ever present and
eternal.

God's man, spiritually created, is not material and mortal.

The serpent's whisper

The parent of all human discord was the Adam-dream,

<span id="pg_307">p. 307</span>

the deep sleep, in which originated the delusion that life and
intelligence proceeded from and passed into matter. This pantheistic
error, or so-called serpent, insists still upon the opposite of Truth,
saying, "Ye shall be as gods;" that is, I will make error as real and
eternal as Truth.

Evil still affirms itself to be mind, and declares that there is more
than one intelligence or God. It says: "There shall be lords and gods
many. I declare that God makes evil minds and evil spirits, and that I
aid Him. Truth shall change sides and be unlike Spirit. I will put
spirit into what I call matter, and matter shall seem to have life as
much as God, Spirit, who is the only life."

Bad results from error

This error has proved itself to be error. Its life is found to be not
Life, but only a transient, false sense of an existence which ends in
death. Error charges its lie to Truth and says: "The Lord knows it. He
has made man immortal and material, out of matter instead of Spirit."
Thus error partakes of its own nature and utters its own falsities. If
we regard matter as intelligent, and Mind as both good and evil, every
sin or supposed material pain and pleasure seems normal, a part of God's
creation, and so weighs against our course Spiritward.

Higher statutes

Truth has no beginning. The divine Mind is the Soul of man, and gives
man dominion over all things. Man was not created from a material basis,
nor bidden to obey material laws which Spirit never made; his province
is in spiritual statutes, in the higher law of Mind.

The great question

Above error's awful din, blackness, and chaos, the voice of Truth still
calls: "Adam, where art thou? Conscious

<span id="pg_308">p. 308</span>

ness, where art thou? Art thou dwelling in the belief that mind is in
matter, and that evil is mind, or art thou in the living faith that
there is and can be but one God, and keeping His commandment?" Until the
lesson is learned that God is the only Mind governing man, mortal belief
will be afraid as it was in the beginning, and will hide from the
demand, "Where art thou?" This awful demand, "Adam, where art thou?" is
met by the admission from the head, heart, stomach, blood, nerves, etc.:
"Lo, here I am, looking for happiness and life in the body, but finding
only an illusion, a blending of false claims, false pleasure, pain, sin,
sickness, and death."

The Soul-inspired patriarchs heard the voice of Truth, and talked with
God as consciously as man talks with man.

Wrestling of Jacob

Jacob was alone, wrestling with error,--struggling with a mortal sense
of life, substance, and intelligence as existent in matter with its
false pleasures and pains,--when an angel, a message from Truth and
Love, appeared to him and smote the sinew, or strength, of his error,
till he saw its unreality; and Truth, being thereby understood, gave him
spiritual strength in this Peniel of divine Science. Then said the
spiritual evangel: "Let me go, for the day breaketh;" that is, the light
of Truth and Love dawns upon thee. But the patriarch, perceiving his
error and his need of help, did not loosen his hold upon this glorious
light until his nature was transformed. When Jacob was asked, "What is
thy name?" he straightway answered; and then his name was changed to
Israel, for "as a prince" had he prevailed and had "power with God and
with men." Then Jacob questioned his deliverer, "Tell me,

<span id="pg_309">p. 309</span>

I pray thee, thy name;" but this appellation was withheld, for the
messenger was not a corporeal being, but a nameless, incorporeal
impartation of divine Love to man, which, to use the word of the
Psalmist, restored his Soul,--gave him the spiritual sense of being and
rebuked his material sense.

Israel the new name

The result of Jacob's struggle thus appeared. He had conquered material
error with the understanding of Spirit and of spiritual power. This
changed the man. He was no longer called Jacob, but Israel, a prince of
God, or a soldier of God, who had fought a good fight. He was to become
the father of those, who through earnest striving followed his
demonstration of the power of Spirit over the material senses; and the
children of earth who followed his example were to be called the
children of Israel, until the Messiah should rename them. If these
children should go astray, and forget that Life is God, good, and that
good is not in elements which are not spiritual,--thus losing the divine
power which heals the sick and sinning,--they were to be brought back
through great tribulation, to be renamed in Christian Science and led to
deny material sense, or mind in matter, even as the gospel teaches.

Life never structural

The Science of being shows it to be impossible for infinite Spirit or
Soul to be in a finite body or for man to have an intelligence separate
from his Maker. It is a self-evident error to suppose that there can be
such a reality as organic animal or vegetable life, when such so-called
life always ends in death. Life is never for a moment extinct. Therefore
it is never structural nor organic, and is never absorbed nor limited by
its own formations.

<span id="pg_310">p. 310</span>

Thought seen as substance

The artist is not in his painting. The picture is the artist's thought
objectified. The human belief fancies that it delineates thought on
matter, but what is matter? Did it exist prior to thought? Matter is
made up of supposititious mortal mind-force; but all might is divine
Mind. Thought will finally be understood and seen in all form,
substance, and color, but without material accompaniments. The potter is
not in the clay; else the clay would have power over the potter. God is
His own infinite Mind, and expresses all.

The central intelligence

Day may decline and shadows fall, but darkness flees when the earth has
again turned upon its axis. The sun is not affected by the revolution of
the earth. So Science reveals Soul as God, untouched by sin and
death,--as the central life and intelligence around which circle
harmoniously all things in the systems of Mind.

Soul imperishable

Soul changeth not. We are commonly taught that there is a human soul
which sins and is spiritually lost,--that soul may be lost, and yet be
immortal. If Soul could sin, Spirit, Soul, would be flesh instead of
Spirit. It is the belief of the flesh and of material sense which sins.
If Soul sinned, Soul would die. Sin is the element of self-destruction,
and spiritual death is oblivion. If there was sin in Soul, the
annihilation of Spirit would be inevitable. The only Life is Spirit, and
if Spirit should lose Life as God, good, then Spirit, which has no other
existence, would be annihilated.

Mind is God, and God is not seen by material sense, because Mind is
Spirit, which material sense cannot discern. There is neither growth,
maturity, nor decay in Soul. These changes are the mutations of material
sense,

<span id="pg_311">p. 311</span>

the varying clouds of mortal belief, which hide the truth of being.

What we term mortal mind or carnal mind, dependent on matter for
manifestation, is not Mind. God is Mind: all that Mind, God, is, or hath
made, is good, and He made all. Hence evil is not made and is not real.

Sin only of the flesh

Soul is immortal because it is Spirit, which has no element of
self-destruction. is man lost spiritually? No, he can only lose a sense
material. All sin is of the flesh. It cannot be spiritual. Sin exists
here or hereafter only so long as the illusion of mind in matter
remains. It is a sense of sin, and not a sinful soul, which is lost.
Evil is destroyed by the sense of good.

Soul impeccable

Through false estimates of soul as dwelling in sense and of mind as
dwelling in matter, belief strays into a sense of temporary loss or
absence of soul, spiritual truth. This state of error is the mortal
dream of life and substance as existent in matter, and is directly
opposite to the immortal reality of being. So long as we believe that
soul can sin or that immortal Soul is in mortal body, we can never
understand the Science of being. When humanity does understand this
Science, it will become the law of Life to man,--even the higher law of
Soul, which prevails over material sense through harmony and
immortality.

The objects cognized by the physical senses have not the reality of
substance. They are only what mortal belief calls them. Matter, sin, and
mortality lose all supposed consciousness or claim to life or existence,
as mortals lay off a false sense of life, substance, and intelligence.
but the spiritual, eternal man is not touched by these phases of
mortality.

<span id="pg_312">p. 312</span>

Sense-dreams

How true it is that whatever is learned through material sense must be
lost because such so-called knowledge is reversed by the spiritual facts
of being in Science. That which material sense calls intangible, is
found to be substance. What to material sense seems substance, becomes
nothingness, as the sensedream vanishes and reality appears.

The senses regard a corpse, not as man, but simply as matter. People
say, "Man is dead;" but this death is the departure of a mortal's mind,
not of matter. The matter is still there. The belief of that mortal that
he must die occasioned his departure; yet you say that matter has caused
his death.

Vain ecstasies

People go into ecstasies over the sense of a corporeal Jehovah, though
with scarcely a spark of love in their hearts; yet God is love, and
without Love, God, immortality cannot appear. Mortals try to believe
without understanding Truth; yet God is Truth. Mortals claim that death
is inevitable; but man's eternal Principle is ever-present life. Mortals
believe in a finite personal God; while God is infinite Love, which must
be unlimited.

Man-made theories

Our theories are based on finite premises, which cannot penetrate beyond
matter. A personal sense of God and of man's capabilities necessarily
limits faith and hinders spiritual understanding. It divides faith and
understanding between matter and Spirit, the finite and the infinite,
and so turns away from the intelligent and divine healing Principle to
the inanimate drug.

The one anointed

Jesus' spiritual origin and his demonstration of divine Principle richly
endowed him and entitled him to sonship

<span id="pg_313">p. 313</span>

in Science. He was the son of a virgin. The term Christ Jesus, or Jesus
the Christ (to give the full and proper translation of the Greek), may
be rendered "Jesus the anointed," Jesus the Godcrowned or the divinely
royal man, as it is said of him in the first chapter of Hebrews:

   Therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee    With the oil of
gladness above thy fellows.

With this agrees another passage in the same chapter, which refers to
the Son as "the brightness of His \[God's\] glory, and the express
\[expressed\] image of His person \[infinite Mind\]." It is noteworthy
that the phrase "express image" in the Common Version is, in the Greek
Testament, character. Using this word in its higher meaning, we may
assume that the author of this remarkable epistle regarded Christ as the
Son of God, the royal reflection of the infinite; and the cause given
for the exaltation of Jesus, Mary's son, was that he "loved
righteousness and hated iniquity." The passage is made even clearer in
the translation of the late George R. Noyes, D.D.: "Who, being a
brightness from His glory, and an image of His being."

Jesus the Scientist

Jesus of Nazareth was the most scientific man that ever trod the globe.
He plunged beneath the material surface of things, and found the
spiritual cause. To accommodate himself to immature ideas of spiritual
power,--for spirituality was pos sessed only in a limited degree even by
his disciples, Jesus called the body, which by spiritual power he raised
from the grave, "flesh and bones." To show that the substance of himself
was Spirit and the body

<span id="pg_314">p. 314</span>

no more perfect because of death and no less material until the
ascension (his further spiritual exaltation), Jesus waited until the
mortal or fleshly sense had relinquished the belief of substance-matter,
and spiritual sense had quenched all earthly yearnings. Thus he found
the eternal Ego, and proved that he and the Father were inseparable as
God and His reflection or spiritual man. Our Master gained the solution
of being, demonstrating the existence of but one Mind without a second
or equal.

The bodily resurrection

The Jews, who sought to kill this man of God, showed plainly that their
material views were the parents of their wicked deeds. When Jesus spoke
of reproducing his body,--knowing, as he did, that Mind was the
builder,--and said, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise
it up," they thought that he meant their material temple instead of his
body. To such materialists, the real man seemed a spectre, unseen and
unfamiliar, and the body, which they laid in a sepulchre, seemed to be
substance. This materialism lost sight of the true Jesus; but the
faithful Mary saw him, and he presented to her, more than ever before,
the true idea of Life and substance.

Opposition of materialists

Because of mortals' material and sinful belief, the spiritual Jesus was
imperceptible to them. The higher his demonstration of divine Science
carried the problem of being, and the more distinctly he uttered the
demands of its divine Principle, Truth and Love, the more odious he
became to sinners and to those who, depending on doctrines and material
laws to save them from sin and sickness, were submissive to death as
being in supposed accord with the inevitable law of life. Jesus proved
them wrong by

<span id="pg_315">p. 315</span>

his resurrection, and said: "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall
never die."

Hebrew theology

That saying of our Master, "I and my Father are one," separated him from
the scholastic theology of the rabbis. His better understanding of God
was a rebuke to them. He knew of but one Mind and laid no claim to any
other. He knew that the Ego was Mind instead of body and that matter,
sin, and evil were not Mind; and his understanding of this divine
Science brought upon him the anathemas of the age.

The true sonship

The opposite and false views of the people hid from their sense Christ's
sonship with God. They could not discern his spiritual existence. Their
carnal minds were at enmity with it. Their thoughts were filled with
mortal error, instead of with God's spiritual idea as presented by
Christ Jesus. The likeness of God we lose sight of through sin, which
beclouds the spiritual sense of Truth; and we realize this likeness only
when we subdue sin and prove man's heritage, the liberty of the sons of
God.

Immaculate conception

Jesus' spiritual origin and understanding enabled him to demonstrate the
facts of being,--to prove irrefutably how spiritual Truth destroys
material error, heals sickness, and overcomes death. The divine
conception of Jesus pointed to this truth and presented an illustration
of creation. The history of Jesus shows him to have been more spiritual
than all other earthly personalities.

Jesus as mediator

Wearing in part a human form (that is, as it seemed to mortal view),
being conceived by a human mother, Jesus was the mediator between Spirit
and the flesh, between Truth and error. Explaining and demonstrat

<span id="pg_316">p. 316</span>

ing the way of divine Science, he became the way of salvation to all who
accepted his word. From him mortals may learn how to escape from evil.
The real man being linked by Science to his Maker, mortals need only
turn from sin and lose sight of mortal selfhood to find Christ, the real
man and his relation to God, and to recognize the divine sonship.
Christ, Truth, was demonstrated through Jesus to prove the power of
Spirit over the flesh,--to show that Truth is made manifest by its
effects upon the human mind and body, healing sickness and destroying
sin.

Spiritual government

Jesus represented Christ, the true idea of God. Hence the warfare
between this spiritual idea and perfunctory religion, between spiritual
clear-sightedness and the blindness of popular belief, which led to the
conclusion that the spiritual idea could be killed by crucifying the
flesh. The Christ-idea, or the Christman, rose higher to human view
because of the crucifixion, and thus proved that truth was the master of
death. Christ presents the indestructible man, whom Spirit creates,
constitutes, and governs. Christ illustrates that blending with God, his
divine Principle, which gives man dominion over all the earth.

Deadness in sin

The spiritual idea of God, as presented by Jesus, was scourged in
person, and its Principle was rejected. That man was accounted a
criminal who could prove God's divine power by healing the sick, casting
out evils, spiritualizing materialistic beliefs, and raising the
dead,--those dead in trespasses and sins, satisfied with the flesh,
resting on the basis of matter, blind to the possibilities of Spirit and
its correlative truth.

<span id="pg_317">p. 317</span>

Jesus uttered things which had been "secret from the foundation of the
world,"--since material knowledge usurped the throne of the creative
divine Principle, insisted on the might of matter, the force of falsity,
the insignificance of spirit, and proclaimed an anthropomorphic God.

The cup of Jesus

Whosoever lives most the life of Jesus in this age and declares best the
power of Christian Science, will drink of his Master's cup. Resistance
to Truth will haunt his steps, and he will incur the hatred of sinners,
till "wisdom is justified of her children." These blessed benedictions
rest upon Jesus' followers: "If the world hate you, ye know that it
hated me before it hated you;" "Lo, I am with you alway,"--that is, not
only in all time, but in all ways and conditions.

The individuality of man is no less tangible because it is spiritual and
because his life is not at the mercy of matter. The understanding of his
spiritual individuality makes man more real, more formidable in truth,
and enables him to conquer sin, disease, and death. Our Lord and Master
presented himself to his disciples after his resurrection from the
grave, as the self-same Jesus whom they had loved before the tragedy on
Calvary.

Material skepticism

To the materialistic Thomas, looking for the ideal Saviour in matter
instead of in Spirit and to the testimony of the material senses and the
body, more than to Soul, for an earnest of immortality,--to him Jesus
furnished the proof that he was unchanged by the crucifixion. To this
dull and doubting disciple Jesus remained a fleshly reality, so long as
the Master remained an inhabitant of the earth. Nothing but a display of
matter could make existence real

<span id="pg_318">p. 318</span>

to Thomas. For him to believe in matter was no task, but for him to
conceive of the substantiality of Spirit to know that nothing can efface
Mind and immortality, in which Spirit reigns--was more difficult.

What the senses originate

Corporeal senses define diseases as realities; but the Scriptures
declare that God made all, even while the corporeal senses are saying
that matter causes disease and the divine Mind cannot or will not heal
it. The material senses originate and support all that is material,
untrue, selfish, or debased. They would put soul into soil, life into
limbo, and doom all things to decay. We must silence this lie of
material sense with the truth of spiritual sense. We must cause the
error to cease that brought the belief of sin and death and would efface
the pure sense of omnipotence.

Sickness as discord

Is the sick man sinful above all others? No! but so far as he is
discordant, he is not the image of God. Weary of their material beliefs,
from which comes so much suffering, invalids grow more spiritual, as the
error - or belief that life is in matter yields to the reality of
spiritual Life.

The Science of Mind denies the error of sensation in matter, and heals
with Truth. Medical science treats disease as though disease were real,
therefore right, and attempts to heal it with matter. If disease is
right it is wrong to heal it. Material methods are temporary, and are
not adapted to elevate mankind.

The governor is not subjected to the governed. In Science man is
governed by God, divine Principle, as numbers are controlled and proved
by His laws. Intelligence does not originate in numbers, but is
manifested through them. The body does not include soul, but man

<span id="pg_319">p. 319</span>

ifests mortality, a false sense of soul. The delusion that there is life
in matter has no kinship with the Life supernal.

Unscientific introspection

Science depicts disease as error, as matter versus Mind, and error
reversed as subserving the facts of health. To calculate one's
life-prospects from a material basis, would infringe upon spiritual law
and misguide human hope. Having faith in the divine Principle of Health
and spiritually understanding God, sustains man under all circumstances;
whereas the lower appeal to the general faith in material means
(commonly called nature) must yield to the allmight of infinite Spirit.

Throughout the infinite cycles of eternal existence, Spirit and matter
neither concur in man nor in the universe.

God the only Mind

The varied doctrines and theories which presuppose life and intelligence
to exist in matter are so many ancient and modern mythologies. Mystery,
miracle, sin, and death will disappear when it becomes fairly understood
that the divine Mind controls man and man has no Mind but God.

Scriptures misinterpreted

The divine Science taught in the original language of the Bible came
through inspiration, and needs inspiration to be understood. Hence the
misapprehension of the spiritual meaning of the Bible, and the
misinterpretation of the Word in some instances by uninspired writers,
who only wrote down what an inspired teacher had said. A misplaced word
changes the sense and misstates the Science of the Scriptures, as, for
instance, to name Love as merely an attribute of God; but we can by
special and proper capitalization speak of the love of Love, meaning by
that what the beloved disciple meant in one of his epistles,

<span id="pg_320">p. 320</span>

when he said, "God is love." Likewise we can speak of the truth of Truth
and of the life of Life, for Christ plainly declared, "I am the way, the
truth, and the life."

Interior meaning

Metaphors abound in the Bible, and names are often expressive of
spiritual ideas. The most distinguished theologians in Europe and
America agree that the Scriptures have both a spiritual and literal
meaning. In Smith's Bible Dictionary it is said: "The spiritual
interpretation of Scripture must rest upon both the literal and moral;"
and in the learned article on Noah in the same work, the familiar text,
Genesis vi. 3, "And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh," is quoted as follows, from the
original Hebrew: "And Jehovah said, My spirit shall not forever rule
\[or be humbled\] in men, seeing that they are \[or, in their error they
are\] but flesh." Here the original text declares plainly the spiritual
fact of being, even man's eternal and harmonious existence as image,
idea, instead of matter (however transcendental such a thought appears),
and avers that this fact is not forever to be humbled by the belief that
man is flesh and matter, for according to that error man is mortal.

Job, on the resurrection

The one important interpretation of Scripture is the spiritual. For
example, the text, "In my flesh shall I see God," gives a profound idea
of the divine power to heal the ills of the flesh, and encourages
mortals to hope in Him who healeth all our diseases; whereas this
passage is continually quoted as if Job intended to declare that even if
disease and worms destroyed his body, yet in the latter days he should
stand in celestial perfection before Elohim, still clad

<span id="pg_321">p. 321</span>

in material flesh, - an interpretation which is just the opposite of the
true, as may be seen by studying the book of Job. As Paul says, in his
first epistle to the Corinthians, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God."

Fear of the serpent overcome

The Hebrew Lawgiver, slow of speech, despaired of making the people
understand what should be revealed to him. When, led by wisdom to cast
down his rod, he saw it become a serpent, Moses fled before it; but
wisdom bade him come back and handle the serpent, and then Moses' fear
departed. In this incident was seen the actuality of Science. Matter was
shown to be a belief only. The serpent, evil, under wisdom's bidding,
was destroyed through understanding divine Science, and this proof was a
staff upon which to lean. The illusion of Moses lost its power to alarm
him, when he discovered that what he apparently saw was really but a
phase of mortal belief.

Leprosy healed

It was scientifically demonstrated that leprosy was a creation of mortal
mind and not a condition of matter, when Moses first put his hand into
his bosom and drew it forth white as snow with the dread disease, and
presently restored his hand to its natural condition by the same simple
process. God had lessened Moses' fear by this proof in divine Science,
and the inward voice became to him the voice of God, which said: "It
shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to
the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the
latter sign." And so it was in the coming centuries, when the Science of
being was demonstrated by Jesus, who showed his students the power of
Mind by changing water into wine, and taught them how to handle

<span id="pg_322">p. 322</span>

serpents unharmed, to heal the sick and cast out evils in proof of the
supremacy of Mind.

Standpoints changed

When understanding changes the standpoints of life and intelligence from
a material to a spiritual basis, we shall gain the reality of Life, the
control of Soul over sense, and we shall perceive Christianity, or
Truth, in its divine Principle. This must be the climax before
harmonious and immortal man is obtained and his capabilities revealed.
It is highly important--in view of the immense work to be accomplished
before this recognition of divine Science can come--to turn our thoughts
towards divine Principle, that finite belief may be prepared to
relinquish its error.

Saving the inebriate

Man's wisdom finds no satisfaction in sin, since God has sentenced sin
to suffer. The necromancy of yesterday foreshadowed the mesmerism and
hypnotism of to-day. The drunkard thinks he enjoys drunkenness, and you
cannot make the inebriate leave his besottedness, until his physical
sense of pleasure yields to a higher sense. Then he turns from his cups,
as the startled dreamer who wakens from an incubus incurred through the
pains of distorted sense. A man who likes to do wrong--finding pleasure
in it and refraining from it only through fear of consequences--is
neither a temperate man nor a reliable religionist.

Uses of suffering

The sharp experiences of belief in the supposititious life of matter, as
well as our disappointments and ceaseless woes, turn us like tired
children to the arms of divine Love. Then we begin to learn Life in
divine Science. Without this process of weaning, "Canst thou by
searching find out God?" It is easier to desire Truth than to rid one's
self of error. Mortals

<span id="pg_323">p. 323</span>

may seek the understanding of Christian Science, but they will not be
able to glean from Christian Science the facts of being without striving
for them. This strife consists in the endeavor to forsake error of every
kind and to possess no other consciousness but good.

A bright outlook

Through the wholesome chastisements of Love, we are helped onward in the
march towards righteousness, peace, and purity, which are the landmarks
of Science. Beholding the infinite tasks of truth, we pause,--wait on
God. Then we push onward, until boundless thought walks enraptured, and
conception unconfined is winged to reach the divine glory.

Need and supply

In order to apprehend more, we must put into practice what we already
know. We must recollect that Truth is demonstrable when understood, and
that good is not understood until demonstrated. If "faithful over a few
things," we shall be made rulers over many; but the one unused talent
decays and is lost. When the sick or the sinning awake to realize their
need of what they have not, they will be receptive of divine Science,
which gravitates towards Soul and away from material sense, removes
thought from the body, and elevates even mortal mind to the
contemplation of something better than disease or sin. The true idea of
God gives the true understanding of Life and Love, robs the grave of
victory, takes away all sin and the delusion that there are other minds,
and destroys mortality.

Childlike receptivity

The effects of Christian Science are not so much seen as felt. It is the
"still, small voice" of Truth uttering itself. We are either turning
away from this utterance, or we are listening to it and going up higher.
Willingness to become as a little child and

<span id="pg_324">p. 324</span>

to leave the old for the new, renders thought receptive of the advanced
idea. Gladness to leave the false landmarks and joy to see them
disappear,--this disposition helps to precipitate the ultimate harmony.
The purification of sense and self is a proof of progress. "Blessed are
the pure in heart: for they shall see God."

Narrow pathway

Unless the harmony and immortality of man are becoming more apparent, we
are not gaining the true idea of God; and the body will reflect what
governs it, whether it be Truth or error, understanding or belief,
Spirit or matter. Therefore "acquaint now thyself with Him, and be at
peace." Be watchful, sober, and vigilant. The way is straight and
narrow, which leads to the understanding that God is the only Life. It
is a warfare with the flesh, in which we must conquer sin, sickness, and
death, either here or hereafter,--certainly before we can reach the goal
of Spirit, or life in God.

Paul's enlightenment

Paul was not at first a disciple of Jesus but a persecutor of Jesus'
followers. When the truth first appeared to him in Science, Paul was
made blind, and his blindness was felt; but spiritual light soon enabled
him to follow the example and teachings of Jesus, healing the sick and
preaching Christianity throughout Asia Minor, Greece, and even in
imperial Rome.

Paul writes, "If Christ \[Truth\] be not risen, then is our preaching
vain." That is, if the idea of the supremacy of Spirit, which is the
true conception of being, come not to your thought, you cannot be
benefited by what I say.

Abiding in Life

Jesus said substantially, "He that believeth in me

<span id="pg_325">p. 325</span>

shall not see death." That is, he who perceives the true idea of Life
loses his belief in death. He who has the true idea of good loses all
sense of evil, and by reason of this is being ushered into the undying
realities of Spirit. Such a one abideth in Life, life obtained not of
the body incapable of supporting life, but of Truth, unfolding its own
immortal idea. Jesus gave the true idea of being, which results in
infinite blessings to mortals.

Indestructible being

In Colossians (iii. 4) Paul writes: "When Christ, who is our life, shall
appear \[be manifested\], then shall ye also appear \[be manifested\]
with him in glory." When spiritual being is understood in all its
perfection, continuity, and might, then shall man be found in God's
image. The absolute meaning of the apostolic words is this: Then shall
man be found, in His likeness, perfect as the Father, indestructible in
Life, "hid with Christ in God,"--with Truth in divine Love, where human
sense hath not seen man.

Consecration required

Paul had a clear sense of the demands of Truth upon mortals physically
and spiritually, when he said: "Present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service." But he,
who is begotten of the beliefs of the flesh and serves them, can never
reach in this world the divine heights of our Lord. The time cometh when
the spiritual origin of man, the divine Science which ushered Jesus into
human presence, will be understood and demonstrated.

When first spoken in any age, Truth, like the light, "shineth in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not." A false sense of life,
substance, and mind

<span id="pg_326">p. 326</span>

hides the divine possibilities, and conceals scientific demonstration.

Loving God supremely

If we wish to follow Christ, Truth, it must be in the way of God's
appointing. Jesus said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do
shall he do also." He, who would reach the source and find the divine
remedy for every ill, must not try to climb the hill of Science by some
other road. All nature teaches God's love to man, but man cannot love
God supremely and set his whole affections on spiritual things, while
loving the material or trusting in it more than in the spiritual.

We must forsake the foundation of material systems, however
time-honored, if we would gain the Christ as our only Saviour. Not
partially, but fully, the great healer of mortal mind is the healer of
the body.

The purpose and motive to live aright can be gained now. This point won,
you have started as you should. You have begun at the numeration-table
of Christian Science, and nothing but wrong intention can hinder your
advancement. Working and praying with true motives, your Father will
open the way. "Who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth?"

Conversion of Saul

Saul of Tarsus beheld the way--the Christ, or Truth - only when his
uncertain sense of right yielded to a spiritual sense, which is always
right. Then the man was changed. Thought assumed a nobler outlook, and
his life became more spiritual. He learned the wrong that he had done in
persecuting Christians, whose religion he had not understood, and in
humility he took the new name of Paul. He beheld for the first time the
true idea of Love, and learned a lesson in divine Science.

<span id="pg_327">p. 327</span>

Reform comes by understanding that there is no abiding pleasure in evil,
and also by gaining an affection for good according to Science, which
reveals the immortal fact that neither pleasure nor pain, appetite nor
passion, can exist in or of matter, while divine Mind can and does
destroy the false beliefs of pleasure, pain, or fear and all the sinful
appetites of the human mind.

Image of the beast

What a pitiful sight is malice, finding pleasure in revenge! Evil is
sometimes a man's highest conception of right, until his grasp on good
grows stronger. Then he loses pleasure in wickedness, and it becomes his
torment. The way to escape the misery of sin is to cease sinning. There
is no other way. Sin is the image of the beast to be effaced by the
sweat of agony. It is a moral madness which rushes forth to clamor with
midnight and tempest.

Peremptory demands

To the physical senses, the strict demands of Christian Science seem
peremptory; but mortals are hastening to learn that Life is God, good,
and that evil has in reality neither place nor power in the human or the
divine economy.

Moral courage

Fear of punishment never made man truly honest. Moral courage is
requisite to meet the wrong and to proclaim the right. But how shall we
reform the man who has more animal than moral courage, and who has not
the true idea of good? Through human consciousness, convince the mortal
of his mistake in seeking material means for gaining happiness. Reason
is the most active human faculty. Let that inform the sentiments and
awaken the man's dormant sense of moral obligation, and by degrees he
will learn the nothingness of the pleasures of human sense

<span id="pg_328">p. 328</span>

and the grandeur and bliss of a spiritual sense, which silences the
material or corporeal. Then he not only will be saved, but is saved.

Final destruction of error

Mortals suppose that they can live without goodness, when God is good
and the only real Life. What is the result? Understanding little about
the divine Principle which saves and heals, mortals get rid of sin,
sickness, and death only in belief. These errors are not thus really
destroyed, and must therefore cling to mortals until, here or hereafter,
they gain the true understanding of God in the Science which destroys
human delusions about Him and reveals the grand realities of His
allness.

Promise perpetual

This understanding of man's power, when he is equipped by God, has sadly
disappeared from Christian history. For centuries it has been dormant, a
lost element of Christianity. Our missionaries carry the Bible to India,
but can it be said that they explain it practically, as Jesus did, when
hundreds of persons die there annually from serpent-bites? Understanding
spiritual law and knowing that there is no material law, Jesus said:
"These signs shall follow them that believe, . . . they shall take up
serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them.
They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." It were well
had Christendom believed and obeyed this sacred saying.

Jesus' promise is perpetual. Had it been given only to his immediate
disciples, the Scriptural passage would read you, not they. The purpose
of his great life-work extends through time and includes universal
humanity. Its Principle is infinite, reaching beyond the pale of a

<span id="pg_329">p. 329</span>

single period or of a limited following. As time moves on, the healing
elements of pure Christianity will be fairly dealt with; they will be
sought and taught, and will glow in all the grandeur of universal
goodness.

Imitation of Jesus

A little leaven leavens the whole lump. A little understanding of
Christian Science proves the truth of all that I say of it. Because you
cannot walk on the water and raise the dead, you have no right to
question the great might of divine Science in these directions. Be
thankful that Jesus, who was the true demonstrator of Science, did these
things, and left his example for us. In Science we can use only what we
understand. We must prove our faith by demonstration.

One should not tarry in the storm if the body is freezing, nor should he
remain in the devouring flames. Until one is able to prevent bad
results, he should avoid their occasion. To be discouraged, is to
resemble a pupil in addition, who attempts to solve a problem of Euclid,
and denies the rule of the problem because he fails in his first effort.

Error destroyed, not pardoned

There is no hypocrisy in Science. Principle is imperative. You cannot
mock it by human will. Science is a divine demand, not a human. Always
right, its divine Principle never repents, but maintains the claim of
Truth by quenching error. The pardon of divine mercy is the destruction
of error. If men understood their real spiritual source to be all
blessedness, they would struggle for recourse to the spiritual and be at
peace; but the deeper the error into which mortal mind is plunged, the
more intense the opposition to spirituality, till error yields to Truth.

The hopeful outlook

Human resistance to divine Science weakens in pro

<span id="pg_330">p. 330</span>

portion as mortals give up error for Truth and the understanding of
being supersedes mere belief. Until the author of this book learned the
vastness of Christian Science, the fixedness of mortal illusions, and
the human hatred of Truth, she cherished sanguine hopes that Christian
Science would meet with immiediate and universal acceptance.

When the following platform is understood and the letter and the spirit
bear witness, the infallibility of divine metaphysics will be
demonstrated.

The deific supremacy

I. God is infinite, the only Life, substance, Spirit, or Soul, the only
intelligence of the universe, including man. Eye hath neither seen God
nor His image and likeness. Neither God nor the perfect man can be
discerned by the material senses. The individuality of Spirit, or the
infinite, is unknown, and thus a knowledge of it is left either to human
conjecture or to the revelation of divine Science.

The deific definitions

II\. God is what the Scriptures declare Him to be, Life, Truth, Love.
Spirit is divine Principle, and divine Principle is Love, and Love is
Mind, and Mind is not both good and bad, for God is Mind; therefore
there is in reality one Mind only, because there is one God.

Evil obsolete

III\. The notion that both evil and good are real is a delusion of
material sense, which Science annihilates. Evil is nothing, no thing,
mind, nor power. As manifested by mankind it stands for a lie, nothing
claiming to be something,--for lust, dishonesty, selfishness, envy,
hypocrisy, slander, hate, theft, adultery, murder, dementia, insanity,
inanity, devil, hell, with all the etceteras that word includes.

<span id="pg_331">p. 331</span>

Life the creator

IV\. God is divine Life, and Life is no more confined to the forms which
reflect it than substance is in its shadow. If life were in mortal man
or material things, it would be subject to their limitations and would
end in death. Life is Mind, the creator reflected in His creations. If
He dwelt within what He creates, God would not be reflected but
absorbed, and the Science of being would be forever lost through a
mortal sense, which falsely testifies to a beginning and an end.

Allness of Spirit

V. The Scriptures imply that God is All-in-all. From this it follows
that nothing possesses reality nor existence except the divine Mind and
His ideas. The Scriptures also declare that God is Spirit. Therefore in
Spirit all is harmony, and there can be no discord; all is Life, and
there is no death. Everything in God's universe expresses Him.

The universal cause

VI\. God is individual, incorporeal. He is divine Principle, Love, the
universal cause, the only creator, and there is no other self-existence.
He is allinclusive, and is reflected by all that is real and eternal and
by nothing else. He fills all space, and it is impossible to conceive of
such omnipresence and individuality except as infinite Spirit or Mind.
Hence all is Spirit and spiritual.

Divine trinity

VII\. Life, Truth, and Love constitute the triune Person called
God,--that is, the triply divine Principle, Love. They represent a
trinity in unity, three in one, - the same in essence, though multiform
in office: God the Father-Mother; Christ the spiritual idea of sonship;
divine Science or the Holy Comforter. These three express in divine
Science the threefold, essen

<span id="pg_332">p. 332</span>

tial nature of the infinite. They also indicate the divine Principle of
scientific being, the intelligent relation of God to man and the
universe.

Father-Mother

VIII\. Father-Mother is the name for Deity, which indicates His tender
relationship to His spiritual creation. As the apostle expressed it in
words which he quoted with approbation from a classic poet: "For we are
also His offspring."

The Son of God

IX\. Jesus was born of Mary. Christ is the true idea voicing good, the
divine message from God to men speaking to the human consciousness. The
Christ is incorporeal, spiritual,--yea, the divine image and likeness,
dispelling the illusions of the senses; the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, healing the sick and casting out evils, destroying sin, disease,
and death. As Paul says: "There is one God, and one mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus." The corporeal man Jesus was human.

Holy Ghost or Comforter

X. Jesus demonstrated Christ; he proved that Christ is the divine idea
of God--the Holy Ghost, or Comforter, revealing the divine Principle,
Love, and leading into all truth.

Christ Jesus

XI\. Jesus was the son of a virgin. He was appointed to speak God's word
and to appear to mortals in such a form of humanity as they could
understand as well as perceive. Mary's conception of him was spiritual,
for only purity could reflect Truth and Love, which were plainly
incarnate in the good and pure Christ Jesus. He expressed the highest
type of divinity, which a fleshly form could express in that age. Into
the real and ideal man the fleshly element cannot enter. Thus it is that
Christ illustrates the coincidence,

<span id="pg_333">p. 333</span>

or spiritual agreement, between God and man in His image.

Messiah or Christ

XII\. The word Christ is not properly a synonym for Jesus, though it is
commonly so used. Jesus was a human name, which belonged to him in
common with other Hebrew boys and men, for it is identical with the name
Joshua, the renowned Hebrew leader. On the other hand, Christ is not a
name so much as the divine title of Jesus. Christ expresses God's
spiritual, eternal nature. The name is synonymous with Messiah, and
alludes to the spirituality which is taught, illustrated, and
demonstrated in the life of which Christ Jesus was the embodiment. The
proper name of our Master in the Greek was Jesus the Christ; but Christ
Jesus better signifies the Godlike.

The divine Principle and idea

XIII\. The advent of Jesus of Nazareth marked the first century of the
Christian era, but the Christ is without beginning of years or end of
days. Throughout all generations both before and after the Christian
era, the Christ, as the spiritual idea,--the reflection of God,--has
come with some measure of power and grace to all prepared to receive
Christ, Truth. Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and the prophets caught glorious
glimpses of the Messiah, or Christ, which baptized these seers in the
divine nature, the essence of Love. The divine image, idea, or Christ
was, is, and ever will be inseparable from the divine Principle, God.
Jesus referred to this unity of his spiritual identity thus: "Before
Abraham was, I am;" "I and my Father are one;" "My Father is greater
than I." The one Spirit includes all identities.

Spiritual oneness

XIV\. By these sayings Jesus meant, not that the hu

<span id="pg_334">p. 334</span>

man Jesus was or is eternal, but that the divine idea or Christ was and
is so and therefore antedated Abraham; not that the corporeal Jesus was
one with the Father, but that the spiritual idea, Christ, dwells forever
in the bosom of the Father, God, from which it illumines heaven and
earth; not that the Father is greater than Spirit, which is God, but
greater, infinitely greater, than the fleshly Jesus, whose earthly
career was brief.

The Son's duality

XV\. The invisible Christ was imperceptible to the so-called personal
senses, whereas Jesus appeared as a bodily existence. This dual
personality of the unseen and the seen, the spiritual and material, the
eternal Christ and the corporeal Jesus manifest in flesh, continued
until the Master's ascension, when the human, material concept, or
Jesus, disappeared, while the spiritual self, or Christ, continues to
exist in the eternal order of divine Science, taking away the sins of
the world, as the Christ has always done, even before the human Jesus
was incarnate to mortal eyes.

Eternity of the Christ

XVI\. This was "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world," -
slain, that is, according to the testimony of the corporeal senses, but
undying in the deific Mind. The Revelator represents the Son of man as
saying (Revelation i. 17, 18): "I am the first and the last: I am he
that liveth, and was dead \[not understood\]; and, behold, I am alive
for evermore, \[Science has explained me\]." This is a mystical
statement of the eternity of the Christ, and is also a reference to the
human sense of Jesus crucified.

Infinite Spirit

XVII\. Spirit being God, there is but one Spirit, for there can be but
one infinite and therefore one God.

<span id="pg_335">p. 335</span>

There are neither spirits many nor gods many. There is no evil in
Spirit, because God is Spirit. The theory, that Spirit is distinct from
matter but must pass through it, or into it, to be individualized, would
reduce God to dependency on matter, and establish a basis for pantheism.

The only substance

XVIII\. Spirit, God, has created all in and of Himself. Spirit never
created matter. There is nothing in Spirit out of which matter could be
made, for, as the Bible declares, without the Logos, the AEon or Word of
God, "was not anything made that was made." Spirit is the only
substance, the invisible and indivisible infinite God. Things spiritual
and eternal are substantial. Things material and temporal are
insubstantial.

Soul and Spirit one

XIX\. Soul and Spirit being one, God and Soul are one, and this one
never included in a limited mind or a limited body. Spirit is eternal,
divine. Nothing but Spirit, Soul, can evolve Life, for Spirit is more
than all else. Because Soul is immortal, it does not exist in mortality.
Soul must be incorporeal to be Spirit, for Spirit is not finite. Only by
losing the false sense of Soul can we gain the eternal unfolding of Life
as immortality brought to light.

The one divine Mind

XX\. Mind is the divine Principle, Love, and can produce nothing unlike
the eternal Father-Mother, God. Reality is spiritual, harmonious,
immutable, immortal, divine, eternal. Nothing unspiritual can be real,
harmonious, or eternal. Sin, sickness, and mortality are the
suppositional antipodes of Spirit, and must be contradictions of
reality.

The divine Ego

XXI\. The Ego is deathless and limitless, for limits

<span id="pg_336">p. 336</span>

would imply and impose ignorance. Mind is the I AM, or infinity. Mind
never enters the finite. Intelligence never passes into
non-intelligence, or matter. Good never enters into evil the unlimited
into the limited, the eternal into the temporal, nor the immortal into
mortality. The divine Ego, or individuality, is reflected in all
spiritual individuality from the infinitesimal to the infinite.

The real manhood

XXII\. Immortal man was and is God's image or idea, even the infinite
expression of infinite Mind, and immortal man is coexistent and
coeternal with that Mind. He has been forever in the eternal Mind, God;
but infinite Mind can never be in man, but is reflected by man. The
spiritual man's consciousness and individuality are reflections of God.
They are the emanations of Him who is Life, Truth, and Love. Immortal
man is not and never was material, but always spiritual and eternal.

Indivisibility of the infinite

XXIII\. God is indivisible. A portion of God could not enter man;
neither could God's fulness be reflected by a single man, else God would
be manifestly finite, lose the deific character, and become less than
God. Allness is the measure of the infinite, and nothing less can
express God.

God the parent Mind

XXIV\. God, the divine Principle of man, and man in God's likeness are
inseparable, harmonious, and eternal. The Science of being furnishes the
rule of perfection, and brings immortality to light. God and man are not
the same, but in the order of divine Science, God and man coexist and
are eternal. God is the parent Mind, and man is God's spiritual
offspring.

Man reflects the perfect God

XXV\. God is individual and personal in a scientific

<span id="pg_337">p. 337</span>

sense, but not in any anthropomorphic sense. Therefore man, reflecting
God, cannot lose his individuality; but as material sensation, or a soul
in the body, blind mortals do lose sight of spiritual individuality.
Material personality is not realism; it is not the reflection or
likeness of Spirit, the perfect God. Sensualism is not bliss, but
bondage. For true happiness, man must harmonize with his Principle,
divine Love; the Son must be in accord with the Father, in conformity
with Christ. According to divine Science, man is in a degree as perfect
as the Mind that forms him. The truth of being makes man harmonious and
immortal, while error is mortal and discordant.

Purity the path to perfection

XXVI\. Christian Science demonstrates that none but the pure in heart
can see God, as the gospel teaches. In proportion to his purity is man
perfect; and perfection is the order of celestial being which
demonstrates Life in Christ, Life's spiritual ideal.

True idea of man

XXVII\. The true idea of man, as the reflection of the invisible God, is
as incomprehensible to the limited senses as is man's infinite
Principle. The visible universe and material man are the poor
counterfeits of the invisible universe and spiritual man. Eternal things
(verities) are God's thoughts as they exist in the spiritual realm of
the real. Temporal things are the thoughts of mortals and are the
unreal, being the opposite of the real or the spiritual and eternal.

Truth demonstrated

XXVIII\. Subject sickness, sin, and death to the rule of health and
holiness in Christian Science, and you ascertain that this Science is
demonstrably true, for it heals the sick and sinning as no

<span id="pg_338">p. 338</span>

other system can. Christian Science, rightly understood, leads to
eternal harmony. It brings to light the only living and true God and man
as made in His likeness; whereas the opposite belief--that man
originates in matter and has beginning and end, that he is both soul and
body, both good and evil, both spiritual and material--terminates in
discord and mortality, in the error which must be destroyed by Truth.
The mortality of material man proves that error has been ingrafted into
the premises and conclusions of material and mortal humanity.

Adam not ideal man

XXIX\. The word Adam is from the Hebrew adamah, signifying the red color
of the ground, dust, nothingness. Divide the name Adam into two
syllables, and it reads, a dam, or obstruction. This suggests the
thought of something fluid, of mortal mind in solution. It further
suggests the thought of that "darkness . . . upon the face of the deep,"
when matter or dust was deemed the agent of Deity in creating man,--when
matter, as that which is accursed, stood opposed to Spirit. Here a dam
is not a mere play upon words; it stands for obstruction, error, even
the supposed separation of man from God, and the obstacle which the
serpent, sin, would impose between man and his creator. The dissection
and definition of words, aside from their metaphysical derivation, is
not scientific. Jehovah declared the ground was accursed; and from this
ground, or matter, sprang Adam, notwithstanding God had blessed the
earth "for man's sake." From this it follows that Adam was not the ideal
man for whom the earth was blessed. The ideal man was revealed in due
time, and was known as Christ Jesus.

<span id="pg_339">p. 339</span>

Divine pardon

XXX\. The destruction of sin is the divine method of pardon. Divine Life
destroys death, Truth destroys error, and Love destroys hate. Being
destroyed, sin needs no other form of forgiveness. Does not God's
pardon, destroying any one sin, prophesy and involve the final
destruction of all sin?

Evil not produced by God

XXXI\. Since God is All, there is no room for His unlikeness. God,
Spirit, alone created all, and called it good. Therefore evil, being
contrary to good, is unreal, and cannot be the product of God. A sinner
can receive no encouragement from the fact that Science demonstrates the
unreality of evil, for the sinner would make a reality of sin,--would
make that real which is unreal, and thus heap up "wrath against the day
of wrath." He is joining in a conspiracy against himself, - against his
own awakening to the awful unreality by which he has been deceived. Only
those, who repent of sin and forsake the unreal, can fully understand
the unreality of evil.

Basis of health and immortality

XXXII\. As the mythology of pagan Rome has yielded to a more spiritual
idea of Deity, so will our material theories yield to spiritual ideas,
until the finite gives place to the infinite, sickness to health, sin to
holiness, and God's kingdom comes "in earth, as it is in heaven." The
basis of all health, sinlessness, and immortality is the great fact that
God is the only Mind; and this Mind must be not merely believed, but it
must be understood. To get rid of sin through Science, is to divest sin
of any supposed mind or reality, and never to admit that sin can have
intelligence or power, pain or pleasure. You conquer error by denying
its verity. Our various theories will never lose

<span id="pg_340">p. 340</span>

their imaginary power for good or evil, until we lose our faith in them
and make life its own proof of harmony and God.

This text in the book of Ecclesiastes conveys the Christian Science
thought, especially when the word duty, which is not in the original, is
omitted: "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep His commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." In other
words: Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: love God and keep
His commandments: for this is the whole of man in His image and
likeness. Divine Love is infinite. Therefore all that really exists is
in and of God, and manifests His love.

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus xx. 3.) The First
Commandment is my favorite text. It demonstrates Christian Science. It
inculcates the triunity of God, Spirit, Mind; it signifies that man
shall have no other spirit or mind but God, eternal good, and that all
men shall have one Mind. The divine Principle of the First Commandment
bases the Science of being, by which man demonstrates health, holiness,
and life eternal. One infinite God, good, unifies men and nations;
constitutes the brotherhood of man; ends wars; fulfils the Scripture,
"Love thy neighbor as thyself;" annihilates pagan and Christian
idolatry,--whatever is wrong in social, civil, criminal, political, and
religious codes; equalizes the sexes; annuls the curse on man, and
leaves nothing that can sin, suffer, be punished or destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI - Some Objections Answered](sah11) 
