[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter XVIII - Fruitage

<span id="pg_600">p. 600</span>

Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.- JESUS.

That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful
in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.--PAUL.

Let us get up early to the vineyards: let us see if the vine flourish,
whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud
forth.--SOLOMON'S SONG.

THOUSANDS of letters could be presented in testimony of the healing
efficacy of Christian Science and particularly concerning the vast
number of people who have been reformed and healed through the perusal
or study of this book.

For the assurance and encouragement of the reader, a few of these
letters are here republished from THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE JOURNAL and
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL. The originals are in the possession of the
Editor, who can authenticate the testimonials which follow.

RHEUMATISM HEALED

I was a great sufferer from a serious form of rheumatic trouble, my
hands being affected to such an extent that it was impossible for me
even to dress without assistance. The trouble finally reached the knees,
and I became very lame and had to be assisted in and out of bed. I went
to the different health resorts for the benefit I hoped to derive from
the baths and waters that were prescribed by

<span id="pg_601">p. 601</span>

physicians, but found no permanent relief. I was placed under an X-ray
examination, and was told that the joints were becoming ossified. I then
consulted a celebrated specialist, who after a thorough examination said
my condition would continue to grow worse and that I would become
completely helpless.

At that time a copy of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures"
by Mrs. Eddy was loaned me. I read it more from curiosity than with the
thought of any physical benefit. As the truth was unfolded to me, I
realized that the mental condition was what needed correcting, and that
the Spirit of truth which inspired this book was my physician. My
healing is complete, and the liberation in thought is manifest in a life
of active usefulness rather than the bondage of helpless invalidism and
suffering. I owe to our beloved Leader, Mrs. Eddy, gratitude which words
cannot express. Her revelation of the practical rather than the merely
theoretical application of Jesus' words, "Ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free," proved to be my redeemer. I did not even
have to apply to a practitioner, but am most grateful for the helpful
words of loving friends.--E. B. B., Pasadena, Cal.

ASTIGMATISM AND HERNIA HEALED

It is nearly five years since I bought my first copy of Science and
Health, the reading of which cured me of chronic constipation, nervous
headache, astigmatism, and hernia, in less than four months.

Where would I be now, had not this blessed truth been brought to me by
much persuasion of a very dear friend?

<span id="pg_602">p. 602</span>

I certainly should have been deep in the slough of despond, if not in
the grave. Am I truly thankful for all the good that has come to me and
mine? I try to let my works testify of that; but to those whom I do not
meet in person, I can truly say, Yes; I am indeed more thankful than
words can express for the glorious healing that has come to me, both
physical, mental, and moral, and I also convey herein, my song of
gratitude to the dear Leader who has through her fidelity to Truth
enabled me to touch at least the hem of Christ's garment.--B. S. J.,
Sioux City, Iowa.

SUBSTANCE OF LUNGS RESTORED

It was about fifteen years ago that Christian Science first came to my
notice. At that time I had been a chronic invalid for a good many years.
I had acute bowel trouble, bronchitis, and a number of other troubles.
One physician had told me that my lungs were like wet paper, ready to
tear at any time, and I was filled with fear, as my mother, two
brothers, and a sister had been victims of consumption. I tried many
physicians and every material remedy that promised help, but no help
came until I found a copy of Mrs. Eddy's book, Science and Health. The
book was placed in my hands by one who did not then appreciate it, and I
was told that it would be hard for me to understand it. I commenced
reading it with this thought, but I caught beautiful glimpses of Truth,
which took away my fear and healed me of all those diseases, and they
have never returned.

I would also like to tell how I was healed of a sprained

<span id="pg_603">p. 603</span>

ankle. The accident occurred in the morning, and all that day and during
the night I gave myself Christian Science treatment, as best I could.
The next morning it seemed to be no better, being very sore, badly
swollen, and much discolored. Feeling that I had done all I could, I
decided to stop thinking about it. I took my copy of Science and Health
and began reading. Very soon I became so absorbed in the book that I
forgot all about my ankle; it went entirely out of my thought, for I had
a glimpse of all God's creation as spiritual, and for the time being
lost sight of my material selfhood. After two hours I laid the book down
and walked into another room. When next I thought of my ankle, I found
it was not hurting me. The swelling had gone down, the black and blue
appearance had nearly vanished, and it was perfectly well. It was healed
while I was "absent from the body" and "present with the Lord." This
experience was worth a great deal to me, for it showed me how the
healing is done.--C. H., Portland, Or .

FIBROID TUMOR HEALED IN A FEW DAYS

My gratitude for Christian Science is boundless. I was afflicted with a
fibroid tumor which weighed not less than fifty pounds, attended by a
continuous hemorrhage for eleven years. The tumor was a growth of
eighteen years.

I lived in Fort Worth, Tex., and I had never heard of Christian Science
before leaving there for Chicago in the year 1887. I had tried to live
near to God, and I feel sure He guided me in all my steps to this
healing and saving truth. After being there several weeks

<span id="pg_604">p. 604</span>

I received letters from a Texas lady who had herself been healed, and
who wrote urging me to try Christian Science. Changing my
boarding-place, I met a lady who owned a copy of Science and Health, and
in speaking to her of having seen the book, she informed me she had one,
and she got it and told me I could read it. The revelation was marvelous
and brought a great spiritual awakening. This awakened sense never left
me, and one day when walking alone it came to me very suddenly that I
was healed, and I walked the faster declaring every step that I was
healed. When I reached my boarding-place, I found my hostess and told
her I was healed. She looked the picture of amazement. The tumor began
to disappear at once, the hemorrhage ceased, and perfect strength was
manifest.

There was no joy ever greater than mine for this Christ-cure, for I was
very weary and heavy laden. I thought very little of either sleeping or
eating, and my heart was filled with gratitude, since I knew I had
touched the hem of his garment.

I must add that the reading of Science and Health, and that alone,
healed me, and it was the second copy I ever saw.--S. L., Fort Worth,
Tex.

INSANITY AND EPILEPSY HEALED

While an inmate of the State asylum for the insane at Middletown, Conn.,
an epileptic, and at times confined to my bed with bilious attacks,
pronounced incurable by the doctors (at least six in number), the book,
Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures, by Mrs. Eddy was

<span id="pg_605">p. 605</span>

placed in my hands. After reading a few pages, I became very much
impressed with the truth therein stated, and although I was surrounded
with opposition, I knew that "underneath are the everlasting arms."
Since that time--past the middle of the year 1899--I have kept pressing
on, until I have been healed by reading Science and Health. At times I
was beset by what seemed unconquerable opposition, until the first week
in October, 1904, when, upon going to my home in Darien for a visit, I
was given my liberty, and I am now earning my living in this city. After
having been subject to epileptic attacks since 1892, and at one time
pronounced dying by the doctor in charge, I am now well. I have had no
fit, or symptoms of any, since the first week in May, 1904.

I trust that this testimony to the healing power of Truth, realized by
reading Science and Health (for I had no treatment), may reach the eye
of some to whom the battle seems long, and inspire them with fresh
courage and a realization of the worth of the victory. I am filled with
inexpressible gratitude and love to God, and to Mrs. Eddy.--Mrs. B. B.
C., Stamford, Conn.

A CASE OF MENTAL SURGERY

I have felt for some time I should give my experience in mental surgery.
In May, 1902, going home for lunch, on a bicycle, and while riding down
a hill at a rapid gait, I was thrown from the wheel, and falling on my
left side with my arm under my head, the bone was broken about half-way
between the shoulder and elbow. While the pain was intense, I lay still
in the dust,

<span id="pg_606">p. 606</span>

declaring the truth and denying that there could be a break or accident
in the realm of divine Love, until a gentleman came to assist me,
saying, he thought I had been stunned. I was only two and a half blocks
from home, so I mounted my wheel again and managed to reach it. On
arriving there I lay down and asked my little boy to bring me our
textbook. He immediately brought Science and Health, which I read for
about ten minutes, when all pain left.

I said nothing to my family of the accident, but attended to some duties
and was about half an hour late in returning to the office, this being
my only loss of time from work. My friends claimed that the arm had not
been broken, as it would have been impossible for me to continue my work
without having it set, and carrying it in a sling until the bone knit
together. Their insistence almost persuaded me that I might have been
mistaken, until one of my friends invited me to visit a physician's
office where they were experimenting with an X-ray machine. The
physician was asked to examine my left arm to see if it differed from
the ordinary. On looking through it, he said, "Yes, it has been broken,
but whoever set it made a perfect job of it, and you will never have any
further trouble from that break." My friend then asked the doctor to
show how he could tell where the break had been. The doctor pointed out
the place as being slightly thicker at that part, like a piece of steel
that had been welded. This was he first of several cases of mental
surgery that have come under my notice, and it made a deep impression on
me.

<span id="pg_607">p. 607</span>

For the benefit of others who may have something similar to meet, I will
say that I have overcome almost constant attacks of sick headaches,
extending back to my earliest recollection.--L. C. S., Salt Lake City,
Utah.

CATARACT QUICKLY CURED

I wish to add my testimony to those of others, and hope that it may be
the means of bringing some poor sufferer to health, to happiness, and to
God. I was healed through simply reading this wonderful book, Science
and Health. I had been troubled periodically for many years with sore
eyes, and had been to many doctors, who called the disease iritis and
cataract. They told me that my eyes would always give me trouble, and
that I would eventually lose my sight if I remained in an office, and
advised me to go under an operation. Later on I had to wear glasses at
my work, also out of doors as I could not bear the winds, and my eyes
were gradually becoming worse. I could not read for longer than a few
minutes at a time, otherwise they would smart severely. I had to rest my
eyes each evening to enable me to use them the next day; in fact
gas-light was getting unbearable because of the pain, and I made home
miserable. A dear brother told me about Christian Science, and said that
if I would read Science and Health i would help me. He procured for me
the loan of the book. The first night I read it, it so interested me I
quite forgot all about my eyes until my wife remarked that it was eleven
o'clock. I found that I had been reading this book for nearly four
hours, and I remarked immediately after, "I believe my eyes are cured,"
which was really

<span id="pg_608">p. 608</span>

the case. The next day, on looking at my eyes, my wife noticed that the
cataract had disappeared. I put away my outdoor glasses, which I have
not required since, and through the understanding gained by studying
Christian Science I have been able to do away with my indoor glasses
also, and have had no return of pain in my eyes since. This is now a
year and a half ago.--G. F. S., Liverpool, England.

VALVULAR HEART DISEASE HEALED

Fourteen years ago my heart awoke to gratitude to God and the dear
Leader at the same time. After a patient and persistent effort of three
months' duration, to procure a copy of Science and Health (during which
time I had visited every bookstore, and many of the second-hand
bookstores in the city of St. Paul), and had failed to find it, I at
last remembered that the stranger who told me I might be healed, had
mentioned a name, and McVicker's Theatre Building in Chicago as being in
some way connected with the work. I sent there for information regarding
a book called Health and Science, and the return mail brought me the
book, Science and Health, and in it I at once found sure promise of
deliverance from valvular heart disease, with all the accompaniments,
such as extreme nervousness, weakness, dyspepsia, and insomnia. I had
suffered from these all my life, finding no permanent relief, even, in
material remedies, and no hope of cure at any time. Only those who have
been healed in such bondage and have been l berated by the same means,
can know the eager joy of the first perusal of that wonderful book.

<span id="pg_609">p. 609</span>

Half a day's reading convinced me that I had found the way to holiness
and health. I read on, thinking only of the spiritual enlightenment,
content to wait until I should be led to some person who would heal me;
but old things had passed away, and all things had become new. I was
completely healed before I had met a Scientist, or one who knew anything
about Christian Science, and before I had read a line of any other
Christian Science literature except one leaf of a tract; so it is
absolutely certain that the healing was entirely impersonal, as was also
the teaching, which enabled me to begin at once demonstrating the power
of Truth to destroy all forms of error.--E. J. W., North Yakima, Wash.

THE TRUE PHYSICIAN FOUND

It is with a deep sense of gratitude that I send the particulars of my
healing through Christian Science. While visiting friends in the
southwestern part of Ontario, about three years ago, my attention was
called to Christian Science and the wonderful healing it was doing. I
had lived in New York for twenty-five years, but had never heard of
Christian Science before, to my recollection.

Up to that time, for seventeen years, I had suffered with indigestion
and gastritis in the worst form, often being overcome from a seeming
pressure against the heart. I had asthma for four years, also had worn
glasses for four years. It seemed to me that I had swallowed every known
medicine to relieve my indigestion, but they only gave me temporary
benefit. I purchased a copy of Science and Health, and simply from the
reading of that

<span id="pg_610">p. 610</span>

grand book I was completely healed of all my physical ailments in two
weeks' time. I have used no medicine from that day to this, and with
God's help, and the wonderful light revealed to me through the reading
of Mrs. Eddy's book, I never expect to again. I used to smoke eight or
ten cigars a day, and also took an occasional drink, but the desire for
these has gone,--I feel forever. I travel on the road, and am constantly
being invited to indulge, but it is no effort to abstain, and in many
instances I find that my refusal helps others.

While I fully appreciate the release from my physical troubles, this
pales into insignificance in comparison with the spiritual uplifting
Christian Science has brought me. I had not been inside a church for
more than ten years, to attend regular services, until I entered a
Christian Science church. What I saw and realized there, seemed so
genuine that I loved Christian Science from the very start. I have never
taken a treatment,--every inch of the way has been through study and
practical demonstration, and I know that all can do the same thing if
they will try.

Since I have been in Science I have overcome a case of ulcerated tooth
in one night through the reading of Science and Health; also a severe
attack of grip in thirty-six hours by obeying the Scripture saying,
"Physician, heal thyself."--B. H. N., New York, N. Y.

CANCER AND CONSUMPTION HEALED

I was a great sufferer for many years from internal cancer and
consumption. I was treated by the best of

<span id="pg_611">p. 611</span>

physicians in New York, Minneapolis, and Duluth, and was finally given
up as incurable, when I heard of Christian Science. A neighbor who had
been healed of consumption, kindly loaned me Science and Health by Mrs.
Eddy, which I read and became interested in. In three months' time, I
was healed, the truth conveyed to me by this book being the healer, and
not only of these diseases, but I was made whole mentally as well. I
have not been in bed one day since, or rather in eleven years. I have
had many good demonstrations during this time, have passed through many
a "fiery trial," but this blessed truth has caused me to stand, at times
seemingly alone, and God was with me.

I will mention a demonstration of painless childbirth which I have had
since coming to Idaho. Perhaps it may help some sister who is looking
through the Journal for a demonstration of this kind, as I was before my
baby came. Good help being scarce here, I did my housework up to the
time I was confined, and was in perfect health. I awoke my husband one
morning at five o'clock, and at half past five baby was born, no one
being present but my husband and myself. It was quite a surprise to the
rest of the family to see me sitting by the fire with a new baby on my
lap. My son got the breakfast, of which I ate heartily; at noon I joined
the family in the dining-room. I was out on the porch the second day,
around the yard the third day, and have been perfectly well ever since,
which has been now over three years. To one who had previously passed
through agony untold, with a physician in attendance, this seemed
wonderful. I hope this will interest some one who is seeking the truth,
and I wish to express my sincere love for our beloved

<span id="pg_612">p. 612</span>

Leader, who has given us the " Key to the Scriptures."--E. C. C.,
Lewiston, Idaho.

A REMARKABLE CASE

Nine years ago my only child was hovering between life and death. Some
of the best physicians in Boston had pronounced his case incurable,
saying that if he lived he would always be an invalid and a cripple. One
of the diseases was gastric catarrh. He was allowed to eat but very few
things, and even after taking every precaution, he suffered to the
extent that he would lie in spasms for half a day. He also had rickets;
physicians saying that there was not a natural bone in his body.

It was while he was in what seemed to be his greatest agony, and when I
was in the darkest despair, that I first heard of Christian Science. The
bearer of the joyful tidings could only tell me to come and hear of the
wonderful things that Christian Science was doing. I accepted the
invitation, for I was willing to try anything to save my child, and the
following Friday evening I attended my first meeting, which was in The
Mother Church of Christ, Scientist. Long before the service began every
seat was filled, which was amazing to me, being an ordinary weekly
meeting, and that night I realized from the testimonies given that
Christian Science was the religion for which I had been searching for
years. The next day I went to find a practitioner, but was unable to get
the one who had been recommended, he being too busy. On my way home I
thought of some of the testimonies which I had heard the night
before,--of people being

<span id="pg_613">p. 613</span>

healed by simply reading Science and Health. I resolved at once to
borrow a copy, and not dreaming of the sacrifice that my friend would
make by conferring such a favor, I went and asked her for a loan of
Science and Health. I never saw any one part so reluctantly with a book
as my friend did with her copy of the textbook.

I read it silently and audibly, day and night, in my home, and although
I could not seem to understand it, yet the healing commenced to take
place at once. The little mouth which had been twisted by spasms grew
natural and the child was soon able to be up, playing and romping about
the house as any child should. About this time we decided to move to the
far West.

I was young in Science at the time, and my husband greatly feared that
the journey would cause a relapse for the child, but instead, he
continued to improve. I constantly read the Bible, Science and Health,
and Miscellaneous Writings, the two weeks we traveled, and we were the
only ones in our car who, throughout the journey, did not get train
sick. The child's limbs grew perfectly straight, he ate anything he
wanted, and for years he has been a natural, healthy child in every way.
He has passed through some of the worst forms of contagion untouched and
unharmed.

I had been reading Science and Health several months, before I gave any
thought to myself and my numerous complaints. I had never been very
strong, and some of my ailments were supposed to be hereditary and
chronic, hence I dragged through many tedious years with a belief in
medical laws and hereditary laws resting upon me.

<span id="pg_614">p. 614</span>

Just before I commenced reading Science and Health I spent a half day in
having my eyes examined by one of the leading oculists in Boston. His
verdict was that my eyes were in a dreadful condition, and that I would
always need to wear glasses. In the meantime I commenced to read Science
and Health, and when I thought of my eyes, I had no need for glasses.
The years that I have been in Science I have used my eyes incessantly,
night as well as day, doing all kinds of trying work and without
requiring the aid of glasses. I was healed of all my complaints whilst
seeking the truth for my child, and many of them have never returned.
Those that appeared simply came to the surface to be destroyed. Teeth
have been restored and facial blemishes removed, unconsciously, simply
by reading Science and Health. All of this is, however, nothing to
compare with the spiritual uplifting which I have received, and I have
everything to be thankful for.--M. T. W., Los Angeles, Cal.

INTENSE SUFFERING OVERCOME

For about five years I was afflicted with sciatic rheumatism, in such a
severe form that my body was drawn out of shape. When able to be around,
I walked with the assistance of a cane. The attacks were periodical,
recurring every few months; any exposure to rain or dampness would bring
one. At one time I was in bed eleven weeks, suffering intensely all the
time except when relieved by hypodermic injections. When I had these
attacks, my regular physician was always in attendance. My daughter
consulted another physician, who said there

<span id="pg_615">p. 615</span>

would have to be an operation which would include the exposing and
scraping of the sciatic nerve. There was also another physician who,
knowing of the case, examined my heart and claimed that it was weak and
that I was liable to pass on at any time from heart trouble.

After suffering three years I heard of Christian Science, but did not
avail myself of it for two years, when I decided to give up all other
means and rely wholly upon it. It was not convenient to call a
practitioner, so I took Science and Health and applied its teachings as
best I could. In three days the trouble completely left me and there has
never been the slightest return. My health has been good ever since, and
I am at present in perfect physical health. I have been benefited in
every way by Christian Science, physically, mentally, and spiritually,
and would not be without my understanding of it for anything.--Mrs. E.
A. K., Billings, Mont.

HEALED OF RHEUMATISM AND BRIGHT'S DISEASE

I am very thankful to God for what He has done for me. I was suddenly
left alone, with many troubles and trials, and I took up the study of
the Bible. I was trying to understand it, prior to joining some church,
as it seemed to me this would be expected. I had attended all sorts of
churches from my childhood up, but never could find any that met my
need. As time passed on, my condition became very alarming. Sciatic
rheumatism, that had troubled me for some years, became so severe I
could scarcely do anything.

<span id="pg_616">p. 616</span>

Then there appeared some complications, so distressing that I was unable
to walk far, and had to sit down frequently by the way. I thought I had
Bright's disease,--such excruciating pains, no tongue could tell my
sufferings. With all these things upon me, death seemed very near. I had
never joined any church, and I thought it now too late, as I would have
to wait six months on probation, and I would be dead before that.

About this time I made some inquiries of my sister in reference to
Christian Science, as she had already turned to that faith, and I soon
found that it was just what I had been looking for. I saw at once that
it declared the truth and nothing but the truth. I commenced reading
Science and Health, also the New Testament. I wanted to find out what
Jesus said, as I did not expect then to live long. I did not go to the
meetings, nor did I read Science and Health to be cured,--not thinking
of that,--but to be saved from an everlasting hell hereafter. My sister
urged me to have a practitioner, but I kept on reading, and praying to
God in silence, and what happened? Where had the diseases gone? I
persisted in reading Science and Health, together with the Bible, with
the knowledge that God as revealed by Christ Jesus can do everything,
that He made everything that was made, that He can and does heal the
afflicted. He has healed me, thanks to His most holy name.--G. J. H.,
Charleston, Ill.

GRATEFUL FOR MANY BLESSINGS

In the year 1901, Christian Science found me a hopeless invalid. I had
suffered for seven years previous with a very painful back, the result
of an operation. I could

<span id="pg_617">p. 617</span>

get no rest or sleep at night, as I could not lie down, but had to sit
propped in a chair with pillows around me. Only those who have suffered
as I did can know the full misery of it. I had come to the end of
material means and never hoped to get well. One day, however, while out
walking, it was my good fortune to come to a Christian Scientist's
house, and there the teaching was explained to me. I was advised to buy
Science and Health, which I did, and the study of this book has healed
my back entirely. Christian Science has also cured me of long-standing
catarrh of the throat, and neuralgia with which I had been afflicted
from childhood. Before coming into Science I had doctored with three of
the best physicians in Seattle, but none could give me relief.

I am no longer a sufferer, but rejoice exceedingly in Christian Science.
God's promise has been fulfilled to me, " But unto you that fear my name
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings."--E. O.,
Georgetown, Wash.

FREED FROM NEURASTHENIC AND OTHER TROUBLES

Christian Science found in me a minister's son who had failed to profit
by continuous teaching in the old thought. Some years ago I was
pronounced by a professor of materia medica, whose works are in general
use, a neurasthenic. I had been in this condition more or less for eight
years, and up to two years ago, when Christian Science was first brought
to my attention (thanks to Almighty God) through a kind friend, I was
almost constantly taking medicine and had in all eleven physicians who
undoubtedly did their best, but without avail, not

<span id="pg_618">p. 618</span>

withstanding almost all known drugs were prescribed, and further I had
tried very many patent medicines. I was also put through forms of
hygienic treatment and other things that offered inducements. At the
time of coming into Science I was taking three times daily forty minims
of cod-liver oil and three of creosote, also three drops of Fowler's
solution of arsenic, and on the month or so previous had bought eighteen
dollars' worth of patent medicine. I was restricted to the simplest
means of diet,--all stews, fries, sweets, berries, and tomatoes I had
not touched for two years.

I started to read Science and Health, and before I had half finished the
book once I was eating everything that any one does. I read the book
eleven times straight ahead and many times skipping about. The book has
done the work and I am a well man.--C. E. M., Philadelphia, Pa.

MANY ILLS OVERCOME

I have received much help, spiritually and physically, through Christian
Science. I had what the doctors diagnosed as muscular rheumatism,
dropsy, and constipation of thirty years' standing. A dear friend whom I
had known as an invalid had been healed by Christian Science and advised
me to read Science and Health. I did so, having a desire to know the
truth. One of my troubles was that I could not sleep. I began reading
the Bible and the Christian Science textbook, and troubles of every kind
disappeared before I had read Science and Health through. The thought
came, What about the old remedies? but truth prevailed, and I took all
the

<span id="pg_619">p. 619</span>

material remedies I had and threw them away. That was seven years ago,
and I have not had any use for them since. My husband was healed of the
tobacco habit of fifty years' standing, also of kidney trouble, by
reading Science and Health. I have not words to express the gratitude I
feel to-day for the many blessings that have come to our home.--Mrs. M.
K. O., Seattle, Wash.

A HELPFUL HEALING

I became interested in Christian Science about eleven years ago, and was
healed of neuralgia of the stomach, from which I had suffered from a
child. As I grew older, the spells became more frequent and more severe;
the only relief physicians could give me was by hypodermic injections of
morphine. Finally, after each spell, I would be prostrated for a day or
two with the after-effect of the morphine. I was entirely healed of this
trouble through the study of Science and Health. I think I never
realized what fear meant until I began to try and put into practice my
understanding of Christian Science for my children. I have proved,
however, many times, that fear can neither help nor hinder in our
demonstration of truth. The first time I realized this was in the
overcoming of a severe case of croup for my little boy. I was awakened
one night by the sound that seems to bring terror to every mother's
heart, and found the little fellow sitting up in bed, gasping for
breath. I got up, took him in my arms, and went i to the next room. My
first thought was, "O if only there was another Christian Scientist in
town!" But there was not, and the work must be done and done quickly. I
tried

<span id="pg_620">p. 620</span>

to treat him, but was so frightened I could not think; so I picked up
Science and Health, which lay on the table beside me, and began reading
aloud. I had read but a few lines when these words came to me as though
a voice spoke, "The word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than
any two-edged sword." Almost immediately after, the little one said,
"Mamma, sing 'Shepherd,' "--our Leader's hymn, that both the big and the
little children love. I began singing, and commencing with the second
line, the little voice joined me. I shall never forget the feeling of
joy and peace that came over me, when I realized how quickly God's word,
through Science and Health and the beautiful hymn, had accomplished the
healing work. This is only one of many instances in which the power of
God's word to heal has been demonstrated in our home.--A. J. G.,
Riverside, Cal.

RELIEF FROM MANY ILLS

Paul said, "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind." In my own
case deafness has been overcome by an enlarged understanding of God's
word, as explained by Mrs. Eddy in Science and Health. Many times I have
been enabled to turn to God, to know it was His will to help in trouble,
and obtained the needed benefit. Catarrh has disappeared; tonsilitis,
which very frequently laid me aside from duties in the schoolroom and
home, is no longer manifest. When temptation comes (for Christian
Science is both preventive and curative), I turn to that wonderful book,
Science and Health, and my precious Bible, grown dearer since read in
the new light

<span id="pg_621">p. 621</span>

of spiritual understanding, until I know that my mind is renewed,
because the action is changed and the inflammation has abated.

Thus in my experience in Christian Science, I have seen the
transformation begun, and Truth is able to perfect that which is begun
in me so gloriously.--Mrs. C.A. McL., Brooklyn, Nova Scotia.

HEALTH AND PEACE ATTAINED

For fifteen years I was a great sufferer physically and mentally.
Eminent physicians treated me for hereditary consumption, torpid liver,
and many other diseases. I sought relief at famous springs, the ozone of
Florida, and the pure air of Colorado, but in vain. My life was one
ceaseless torture.

During all this time, however, I was an earnest seeker after Truth. I
examined every religious teaching with a calm and unprejudiced
attention. From an orthodox Protestant I became a skeptic, and a
follower of Voltaire, Tom Paine, and Ingersoll; yet all the while I
retained faith in a supreme intelligent Being who made all. Sick, weary,
doubting, and despairing, I accidentally went into a Christian Science
church in New York City, on a Wednesday evening, not knowing what kind
of a place it was. Seeing a large number of people going into the
building, I followed, supposing that a marriage ceremony had attracted
the crowd. Being informed it was their regular Wednesday evening
service, I inquired as to the denomination. I concluded that it was
another new fad, but after investigation I procured a copy of Science
and Health, promising I would read it carefully. I began

<span id="pg_622">p. 622</span>

reading the book on Tuesday and finished on Friday of the same week. I
was still in the dark. I laid the book down, involuntarily closed my
eyes, and silently prayed to God.

I remained in that attitude a few moments, when I felt like the mariner
who had been tossed for days upon a boisterous sea, the clouds bending
low, the billows rolling high, all nature wrapped in darkness; in his
despair he kneels and commits his soul to God, when he suddenly beholds
the North Star breaking through the clouds, enabling him to guide his
ship to the shores of safety. Many things were made plain to me. I saw
that there is one Fatherhood of God and one brotherhood of man; that
though "once I was blind, now I see;" that there was no more pain, nor
aches, no fear, nor indigestion. I slept that night like a babe and
awoke next morning refreshed. There are now no traces whatever of my
former complaint and I feel like a new being.--L. P., New York, N. Y.

HEALTH AND PEACE GAINED

About nine years ago I was drawn to Christian Science by a relative
whose many afflictions had given place to health and harmony, and whose
loving gratitude was reflected in every word and deed. The thought came
to me, God indeed healeth all our diseases.

My first reading of Science and Health was without understanding. I was
full of darkness and gloom, and it was laid aside for a time. The good
seed had been sown, however, and erelong the reading was resumed,

<span id="pg_623">p. 623</span>

and with such interest that my afflictions disappeared "like mist before
the morning sun." Asthma (thought to be hereditary), neuralgia in an
aggravated form, and besides these, the tobacco and liquor habit of many
years' standing left me. Bless the Lord, "He sent his word" and healed
me,--for the reading of Science and Health brought to my consciousness
the truth that makes free.--S., Shellman, Ga.

CONSUMPTION QUICKLY CURED

I became interested in Christian Science nearly five years ago through
the healing of my wife of what the doctors called consumption in its
last stages. I had tried everything that I could get in the way of
materia medica, and every doctor would tell me nearly the same story
about the case. At last they recommended for her only a higher, drier
climate, and when she would be at her worst to give her something to
quiet her.

I tried different climates, but she was no better, indeed worse. At last
she struggled along until the first of March, 1899. She had taken to her
bed again. For two days and nights she suffered, and I called a
physician. He came and diagnosed the case, and said that he could do
nothing for her but give her some morphine tablets to make her rest. I
gave her two of them according to direction, and just before the time to
give her the third, she called me to her bedside, and said, " Don't give
me any more of that stuff, for it does me more harm than good," so I
turned and placed them in the fire, though I did not then know anything
about Christian Science. We had heard of it, but

<span id="pg_624">p. 624</span>

that was all. I gave her the last tablet at eight o'clock that night,
and about nine o'clock the next day a lady who had been healed in
Christian Science visited her, and introduced her to this great truth.
She accepted it and thought she would try it. The lady loaned her
Science and Health. She got the book about ten o'clock that day and read
it until dinner was called. She ate a hearty dinner, the first in about
three days, and that same evening she dressed herself, walked into the
dining-room, ate a hearty supper and enjoyed it. She slept well that
night. She borrowed this lady's copy of Science and Health two hours
each day for eight days, and was healed. The first day that she read
Science and Health she weighed about ninety-five pounds. Three months
later she weighed one hundred and thirty-five pounds.--A. J. D.,
Houston, Tex.

A PROFITABLE STUDY

It may help others to know that some one was really healed of severe
illness through Christian Science. It is over nine years since we first
became interested in the Science, and it would be hard to find a
healthier person than I am now. I can go all day, from morning till
night, upheld by the thought that "they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength." I can truly say that I scarcely know what
physical weariness is any more. Before I came into Science the
physicians said that one lung was gone, and that the other was affected
with tuberculosis; so, from their standpoint, there was little left for
me to hope for. We had tried every remedy that they had suggested. I had

<span id="pg_625">p. 625</span>

gone to the mountains, but could not stay there on account of the
altitude; and when they did not know what else to do, they said we would
better go to England--that the ocean air would be beneficial. So we
spent three months in the British Isles, and when I came back I seemed
much better, but this only lasted a short time. In little more than a
month I was worse than ever, and my mother was told that I had but a few
weeks, or at most months, to live.

At that time, a lady, a stranger to us, suggested that we try Christian
Science. There was no prejudice against it, as we did not even know what
it was. We knew of no Scientists in the Western town where we were
living, and when we were told that we could send to Kansas City for
absent treatment, we thought it was absurd. We were then told that many
people had been healed through the reading of the Christian Science
textbook, Science and Health, and to us this seemed a little worse than
the absent treatment, but as we had tried everything we had heard of up
to that time, my mother sent for the book.

It came in the middle of October and we began to read it together. It
seemed to me from the first that it was something I had always believed,
but did not know how to express--it seemed such a natural thing. My
improvement was very gradual, but I felt I was recovering. After the
Christmas holidays I started in at school and went the whole term
without missing a day,--something I had never done before. I finished my
school course without missing a day--in fact, I have not spent a day in
bed since that time. I feel absolutely certain that I have two sound,
healthy lungs now. The hollows

<span id="pg_626">p. 626</span>

in my chest have filled out, and I breathe perfectly on both sides;
rarely have a cold to meet, and have not a sign of a cough.

People sometimes say, "Oh, well, maybe you never had consumption." Well,
I had all the symptoms, and they are every one gone through the reading
of Science and Health.--E. L. B., Chicago, Ill.

HEALED OF INFIDELITY AND MANY PHYSICAL ILLS

I feel compelled to write my testimony and hope that I may be accepted
as one more witness to the Truth as contained in Science and Health with
Key to the Scriptures.

In the year 1883 I first heard of Christian Science. I was sitting in a
saloon in Leadville, Col., reading a daily paper of that place. My eyes
lighted upon an article which spoke of some peculiar people in Boston
who claimed to have discovered how to heal as Jesus healed. I do not
remember much of the article, but those words stayed with me.

I had drifted out to Colorado from New York City (my home), where I had
been under the treatment of many leading physicians. The last one, who
was too honest to take my money knowing that he could not cure me,
advised me to keep away from doctors and quit taking medicine, as
nothing but death could cure me. My trouble was pronounced by some to be
Bright's disease, by others gravel on the kidneys with very acute
inflammation of the bladder and prostate gland.

In the spring of 1888 my wife and myself were spending the evening at
the house of a gentleman whose wife had been healed in the East by
Christian Science. The

<span id="pg_627">p. 627</span>

gentleman took a book from its bookcase saying, "Here is a work on
Christian Science." It proved to be Science and Health. I knew as soon
as I had read the title-page that this was the very book we wanted. We
immediately sent for the book, and when it arrived we obeyed the angel
and feasted on it. I was very much prejudiced against the Bible, and my
first demonstration over self was to consent to read the four Gospels.
My wife bought me a New Testament and I began to read it. What a change
came over me! All my prejudice was gone in an instant! When I read the
Master's words, I caught his meaning and the lesson he tried to convey.
It was not difficult for me to accept the whole Bible, for I could not
help myself, I was just captured. The disease with which I had been
troubled for years tormented me worse than ever for about six months, as
if trying to turn me aside; but I lost all fear of it.

I kept up my study of Science and Health and the disease disappeared. I
can honestly say that Science and Health was my only healer, and it has
been my only teacher.--R. A. C., Los Angeles, Cal.

DISEASED EYES CURED

Christian Science came to me when I was a wreck, my body being
completely covered with sores. My eyes were very bad, so that I sat in a
darkened room for weeks together, most of the time in bed under opiates.
The home doctor and a specialist said the disease of the eyes could not
be cured, though they might help me for a while. I had one operation,
and the doctor said if I took cold I would become totally blind. My
suffering was beyond telling.

<span id="pg_628">p. 628</span>

A clergyman called almost every day, and sat by my bed and wept, and my
good, kind doctor shed tears many times. Finally, after a year of this
terrible suffering, I was sent to Indiana, to a sister who had been
healed of lung trouble by Christian Science. The first day I was there
she read to me from the Bible and from "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy, and I was healed. I knew that God was no
respecter of persons, and when I saw what had been done for my sister,
who was changed from being a mere frame to a strong, robust, healthy,
rosy-cheeked woman, the cough all gone, I said, "God has as much for me,
if I will accept it." I was healed instantaneously by Christian Science,
and am thankful to God for giving us this understanding through Mrs.
Eddy, our beloved Leader. I am now in perfect health.--Mrs. F. S.,
Laurel, Miss.

THE TEXTBOOK HEALED ME

For twelve years previous to the fall of 1897 I had been under the care
of a physician much of the time. Different opinions were given by them,
as to the nature of the trouble, some diagnosing it as an abnormal
growth, etc. I was healed through reading" Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy. It was a clear case of transformation
of the body by the renewal of the mind. I am perfectly well at the
present time.--J. M. H., Omaha, Neb.

OBSTINATE STOMACH TROUBLE HEALED

There is no doubt that by far the greater number come to Christian
Science by the way of physical healing, but

<span id="pg_629">p. 629</span>

there are those to whom this does not particularly appeal. In the hope
that it may be of benefit to some such, and in gratitude for help
received, I submit my own experience. Three years ago I knew nothing of
Christian Science, aside from the knowledge gathered from the daily
papers and current literature. When I thought of the subject at all, it
was to class Christian Science with various human theories with which I
could not be in sympathy, for they seemed to rely upon both good and
evil. I had never known of a case of healing, had never read the
textbook or heard of the Journal or Sentinel, but I would sometimes see
people going into the Christian Science church. I was tired of trying to
find anything satisfactory in religious belief, for it seemed as if God
either could not or would not bring into harmony the terrible conditions
existing in human society. I had quit using any form of prayer except
the Lord's Prayer, and even then omitted the words "lead us not into
temptation." How I longed to know just a little of the "why?" and
"wherefore?" of it all.

Here is where Christian Science found me. I was thrown in contact with a
dear friend of whom I had seen very little for a year or more, a
thoroughly educated woman and a thinker. She told me she had taken some
treatments in Christian Science for a physical trouble, and had become
very much interested in the study of "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy. She asked me if I would like to look at the
book, and I said I would be glad to do so. The first chapter, "Prayer,"
appealed to me from the first, and when I came to Mrs. Eddy's spiritual
sense of the Lord's Prayer (Science and Health, p. 17), my interest was
fully aroused. I knew that in a dim way I was learning what it means to
"pray

<span id="pg_630">p. 630</span>

without ceasing." Very soon I bought a book of my own, and with the help
of our Lesson-Sermons, as given in the Quarterly, I began in earnest the
study of Science and Health, in connection with the Bible.

I stood very much in need of physical healing at this time, having
suffered for several years from an obstinate form of stomach trouble. So
far as I know, I gave no thought to the benefits I might derive
physically from the study, but I did believe this Science held the truth
of things, and I was so absorbed in getting an understanding of the
Principle that I thought very little of myself. After about three or
four months' study I realized that the stomach trouble was gone, and
with it went other physical troubles, which have never returned. This
healing was brought about by the earnest, conscientious seeking for the
truth, as contained in the Bible and interpreted by our Leader in our
textbook, Science and Health. I have since learned more of the Science
of healing and have been able in a small way to help others in need. I
have also learned that in living and loving is healing realized, and in
reflecting divine Love I have the "signs following."

When we think of the pure, loving, unselfish life Mrs. Eddy must have
lived in order to become conscious of this truth and give it to us,
words are a poor medium through which to express the gratitude which her
followers feel for her. It is best expressed by obediently following
her, even as she is following Christ.--H. T., Omaha, Neb.

DYSPEPSIA QUICKLY HEALED

It has occurred to me that I have had ample time to meditate on the many
blessings which I have received

<span id="pg_631">p. 631</span>

through Christian Science, as it is now more than six years since I was
entirely healed of dyspepsia as well as constipation in its worst form
by the reading of Science and Health. So aggravated were the conditions
that for three years or more I was unable to drink a glass of cold
water. Everything that I drank had to be hot, and my only means of
relief from the bowel trouble was hot water injections, for a period of
more than three years.

I can truthfully say that I was permanently, and I might say instantly,
healed of those two ailments by reading Science and Health as before
stated, and in fact I do not think I had read more than thirty pages of
this book when I ignored entirely the most rigid kind of diet. I ate and
drank everything I wished without a single harmful effect from that time
to this date, and there has not been a drop of medicine in our home for
more than six years, in a family of five.

I have also seen the power of Truth manifested in our home by having our
youngest child relieved of the most excruciating pain, and changed to
his most playful mood, immediately upon notifying one of the faithful
practitioners of this city. For all this I am endeavoring to be thankful
to God and to our faithful Leader, Mrs. Eddy, whose pure and undefiled
life enabled her to discover this precious truth for the benefit of all
mankind.--M. C. McK., Denver, Col.

AFTER TWENTY YEARS' SUFFERING

From early girlhood I was considered an invalid, having been injured by
a hard fall while playing. The pain was intense for some time and for
several hours I was un

<span id="pg_632">p. 632</span>

able to walk or stand alone. Later, a growing weakness of the back
accompanied with sharp pains alarmed my parents, who called a physician,
and he pronounced it spinal trouble. Then followed nearly twenty years
of increased suffering, at times very severe. As years went by and I
became a wife and mother, my suffering increased. Everything that
medical skill could do was done, but finding no lasting benefit from
anything, I lost hope of recovery.

When Christian Science found me I was under the doctor's sentence that
if I lived the week through I would become entirely helpless, not able
to move hand or foot. My husband was a travelling man, and being
urgently called home, he met an old friend on the train who asked why we
did not try Christian Science. The reply, We know nothing of it, was
followed by a brief explanation of its healing power and the benefit his
family had received. This inspired my husband with new hope, and on his
arrival at home he called on a practitioner, who recommended our getting
Science and Health, which we did, but ignorance and the prejudice of old
education produced such fear that I hid the book under the covers of the
bed whenever the children came into the room, fearing that it was not of
God and would injure them. God's dear love was, however, more potent
than these foolish fears, and the first day I read from its sacred pages
I was convinced its teachings were the same truths as Jesus Christ had
taught centuries ago. W en I had read a few pages, I reached out and
threw my medicine from the open window at the head of my bed. I then
turned back to the book and began reading again, when, lo, the
Christ-idea dawned upon me, and I was healed instantaneously.

<span id="pg_633">p. 633</span>

I first noticed the spot in my back cooling, and soon I got out of bed.
I continued to read eagerly; I felt as if I wanted to devour the healing
truth, and drank it in as a thirsty plant does the gentle rain. When
dinner was prepared, I walked out and ate a hearty meal with the family,
to the amazement of all. We shall never forget what a joyful meal this
was. How we did thank God for Christian Science!

As year after year has gone by, till twenty years have passed and the
healing has remained perfect, I have grown to thank God with deeper
sincerity that one brave woman was found pure enough to bring forth this
Christ-healing again, to remain forever among men and to save suffering
humanity from all disease and sin.--Mrs. P. L. H., Fairmont, Minn.

FROM DESPAIR TO HOPE AND JOY

I have often had a desire to make public what Christian Science has done
for me, but I never could tell of all my blessings, they are so many.
From childhood I was always sick, never knew one hour of rest, and was
under the doctor's care most of the time. I was living in the East at
that time, and was advised to try change of climate, which I did. I came
West with my family in the spring of the year, but instead of growing
better I grew steadily worse, until at last I was obliged to keep my bed
for nearly three years,--a great sufferer. My ailments were, it seemed,
all that flesh is heir to, and were called incurable by the doctors;
viz., Bright's disease, and many others,--in the last stages. My case
was known among physicians, many of whom were prominent

<span id="pg_634">p. 634</span>

specialists, as a most extreme one. Many, upon looking at me, would turn
away with a wise shake of the head and say, "What keeps her alive?" My
physicians, who were exceedingly kind and did all that lay within their
power for me, gave me up and the death sentence was pronounced on me by
all who attended me.

It was then I realized that "man's extremity is God's opportunity." The
"little book" was handed me at this hour of great need. I read it, not
thinking it would heal me, but, like a drowning man, I grasped at it. I
read it, read it again, and soon found myself growing stronger; then I
kept on reading and was perfectly healed of all the supposedly incurable
diseases.--L. B., Austin, Minn.

TRUTH MAKES FREE

As the son of a physician, a graduate in pharmacy, and an ex-druggist, I
had a perfect contempt for what I thought Christian Science to be. About
six and a half years ago, however, having exhausted all material means
at my command,--materia medica, electricity, gymnastics, cycling, and so
on,--and being in a hopeless state, the study of Christian Science was
taken up. I had been a sufferer from catarrh and sore throat for over
thirty years, and in the last five were added several others, including
dyspepsia, and bronchitis, and a loss in flesh of sixty pounds. I was
completely healed, and regained health, strength, and flesh through the
spiritual understanding of Christian Science, the result of about six
weeks' study. This good and perfect gift came to me through the careful
and prayerful study of Christian Science, as revealed to the world
to-day through Science

<span id="pg_635">p. 635</span>

and Health. The promise of Christ Jesus, "the truth shall make you
free," was fulfilled, and the past six years of health and harmony have
been spent in striving to "hold fast that which is good."

While most grateful for the physical healing, my gratitude for the
mental and spiritual regeneration is beyond expression. When I learned
that Jesus' mission of healing sickness as well as sin did not end with
his short stay upon earth, but is practical in all ages, my joy was
unbounded. Having spent thousands in the old way, it seemed wonderful to
be healed at such small cost as the price of the "little book" and a few
weeks' study. Every thought of prejudice immediately vanished before the
proofs that Christian Science is indeed the elucidation and practical
application of Jesus' teachings, which are demonstrable truth, "The same
yesterday, and to-day, and forever."--C. N. C., Memphis, Tenn.

DEAF EARS UNSTOPPED

As a mother of a family my heart goes out in love and gratitude to that
good woman we are privileged to call our Leader, for all she has done
through her book for me and mine.

Ten years ago I was healed of hereditary deafness and catarrh of the
head, simply through reading the book, Science and Health. For years
previous I had consulted and taken treatment from some of the best
specialists for the ear and throat, both in England and America, but
grew worse all the time. I was then urged by a lady who had been healed
through Christian Science to buy this book and study it. I did so very
reluctantly, but

<span id="pg_636">p. 636</span>

had not read fifty pages before I felt I had indeed found the truth
which makes free, and can truly say, from that time I have never had a
return of the ailment.

That for which I am, however, most grateful, is the daily help it is to
me in my household of young children. I am sure if mothers only knew
what Christian Science truly means they would give all they possess to
know it. We have seen croup, measles, fever, and various other
children's complaints, so-called, disappear like dew before the morning
sun, through the application of Christian Science,--the understanding of
God as ever-present and omnipotent. It has been proven to me without a
doubt that God is a very present help in trouble, and what a blessed
help this wonderful truth is in the training of our children, and how
quickly the child grasps it.

Some time ago my little girl, then three years old, dislocated her
shoulder. I was alone in the house at the time. The pain was so intense
that she became faint. I treated her the best I knew how, but kept
holding the thought that just as soon as some one came I would run for
help. She seemed to grow worse and cried very much. I undressed her and
tried to twist the arm into place, but it caused such suffering that I
began to get afraid. Then like a flash came the thought, What would you
do if you were out of the reach of a practitioner? Now is your time to
prove God's power and presence. With these thoughts came such a sense of
calm and trustfulness that I lost all fear. I then asked the child if I
should read to her; she said "Yes, mamma, read the truth-book." I began
reading aloud to her from Science and Health. In about half an hour I
noticed

<span id="pg_637">p. 637</span>

she tried to lift the arm but screamed and became very pale. I continued
to read aloud and again she made an effort to put some candy into her
mouth. This time I noticed with joy that she almost reached her mouth
before she felt the pain. I kept reading aloud to her until my sister
and two boys came in, when she jumped off her bed, so delighted to see
her brothers that she forgot her arm. She then began to tell her aunt
that she had broken her arm and mamma treated it with the truth-book.
When this happened, it was about 10.30 A. M. and by 3 P. M. she was
playing out doors as though nothing had ever happened.--Mrs. M. G.,
Winnipeg, Man.

SAVED FROM INSANITY AND SUICIDE

A few years ago, while under a sense of darkness and despair caused by
ill health and an unhappy home, Science and Health was loaned me with a
request that I should read it.

At that time my daughter was given up by materia medica to die of
lingering consumption, supposed to have been inherited. My own condition
seemed even more alarming, as insanity was being manifested, and rather
than go to an insane asylum, it seemed to me the only thing to do was to
commit suicide. Heart trouble, kidney complaint, and continual headaches
caused from female trouble were some of the many ailments I had to
contend with. My doctor tried to persuade me to undergo an operation as
a means of relief, but I had submitted to a severe operation ten years
previous, and found only additional suffering as a result, so I would
not consent.

<span id="pg_638">p. 638</span>

When I began with Science and Health, I read the chapter on "Prayer"
first, and at that time did not suppose it possible for me to remember
anything I read, but felt a sweet sense of God's protection and power,
and a hope that I should at last find Him to be what I so much
needed,--a present help in time of trouble. Before that chapter on
"Prayer" was finished, my daughter was downstairs eating three meals a
day, and daily growing stronger. Before I had finished reading the
textbook she was well, but never having heard that the reading of
Science and Health healed any one, it was several months before I gave
God the glory.

One by one my many ailments left me, all but the headaches; they were
less frequent, until at the end of three years the fear of them was
entirely overcome.

Neither myself nor my daughter have ever received treatments, but the
study of the Bible and Science and Health, the Christian Science
textbook by Mrs. Eddy, has healed us and keeps us well.

While Christian Science was very new to me, I attended an experience
meeting in First Church of Christ, Scientist, Chicago. A gentleman told
of an unhappy woman who was about to separate from her husband. This
gentleman had asked her if she did not love her husband. She replied,
"No; when I married him I did, but not now." He told her God made man in
His image and likeness, and that He is perfect. He said to her, "Go home
and see only God's perfect man; you don't need to love a sinful mortal
such as you have been looking upon." The lady followed his advice, as he
told her there is no separation in divine Mind. In a short time peace
and harmony were in her home, and

<span id="pg_639">p. 639</span>

both husband and wife became members of a Christian Science church.

This testimony was like a message from heaven to me. I had received many
benefits from the study of Science and Health, but it had never dawned
upon my darkened consciousness till then how wonderful our God is. I
knew what had taken place in that home could take place in my unhappy
home where there was neither rest nor peace.

I hopefully took up my cross, and step by step my burden grew lighter,
as I journeyed along, realizing the presence of the Christ, Truth, that
indeed makes us free. Not all at once did any outward change appear, but
at the end of three years all was peace, all the members of the family
attending church together and realizing that there is but one Mind.--E.
J. B., Superior, Wis.

STOMACH TROUBLE HEALED

I was healed of stomach trouble of many years' standing by reading
Science and Health. My condition had reached the stage in which I had
periodical attacks, that came on with greater frequency. I was a
travelling salesman, and it was a common occurrence for me to have to
call a physician to my hotel to administer morphine for an acute form of
this disease. This became a regular thing at certain places, and these
attacks always left me worse than before. As a result of the last one I
lost a great deal in weight. I had tried many physicians and most of the
usual remedies during these years of suffering, without any good result.
Finally, as a last resort, I

<span id="pg_640">p. 640</span>

decided to try Christian Science, and I was healed by reading "Science
and Health with Key to the Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy.

My health has been of the best since I was healed, now six years ago. In
the family we have depended entirely on Christian Science for our
healing, and have ever found it efficacious. We consider the physical
healing, however, only incidental to the understanding of God and His
goodness. This, together with our increased love for the Bible, is
proving most valuable to us. We are humbly trying to live the lives that
will prove our gratitude to God, and to our beloved Leader, Mrs.
Eddy.--Charles E. Peck, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

FREED FROM MANY YEARS OF SUFFERING

In the spring of 1880 I was taken down with a severe attack of stomach
trouble, was bedfast for three months, and not able to drive out for
nearly six months. During this time I had three good doctors treating
me. I gained a little in strength, but had very little relief from the
stomach trouble. I was recommended to try mineral springs and did so,
but with the same disappointment. I went to a sanitarium, but yet the
stomach trouble prevailed. I had some friends who recommended patent
medicines, but no healing came.

I worried along in this way for several years. Finally I read medicine
nearly two years with a good doctor friend, especially for my own
benefit, and during this time I had a severe attack of bladder trouble,
and for fifteen years I suffered so severely at times that I thought
life was not really worth living. In connection with these

<span id="pg_641">p. 641</span>

troubles I suffered every winter with rheumatism and the grip. I also
had a growth coming on both eyes called cataract, which caused my eyes
to be inflamed nearly all the time, and this growth had made such
progress that it was causing my vision to be very dim when reading.
Corns were not forgotten, as I was reminded of them very frequently, and
for all these troubles I had tried every remedy I heard of that I was
able to get, specialists included, without relief.

Thanks to a friend who took me in this hopeless, discouraged condition
and led me to the light that never knows darkness, I got a copy of
Science and Health by Mrs. Eddy and was healed in a short time by
reading this work.--D. W. L., Anderson, Ind.

RELIEF FROM INTENSE SUFFERING

I became interested in Christian Science in 1901. For four or five years
I had suffered with severe attacks which nothing but an opiate seemed to
relieve. After one which I think was the worst I ever had, I consulted
our family physician, who diagnosed my case as a dangerous kidney
disease and said that no medicine could help me but that I must undergo
a surgical operation. I continued to grow worse and went to see the
physician again, and he advised me to consult a doctor who was connected
with the city hospital of Augusta. This doctor made an examination and
diagnosed the difficulty as something different but quite as serious.
Meanwhile a friend offered me a copy of Science and Health. I said I did
not care to read the book, but she was so urgent that I finally promised
to do so. I received the book on Satur

<span id="pg_642">p. 642</span>

day, and on Sunday morning I sat down to read it. When I reached the
place where Mrs. Eddy says she found this truth in the Bible, I began
comparing the two books. I read passages which looked very reasonable to
me, and said to myself, This is nearer to the truth than anything I have
ever seen. I continued to read all day, stopping only long enough to eat
my dinner. As I read on, everything became clearer to me, and I felt
that I was healed. During the evening a neighbor came in, and I said, "I
am healed, and that book has healed me." I read on and was certainly
healed. Eight days after my healing I did my own washing. This occurred
in February, 1901. About six weeks after, I was called to care for my
mother, who was under the care of my former physician. I again let him
examine my side, as he wished to see if the trouble was still there. He
said, "It is certainly gone." I said to him, "Doctor, you told me I
would never be a well woman unless I was operated upon; what has healed
me?" He replied, "God has h aled you."--S. H. L., North Pittston, Me.

GRATEFUL FOR MANY BLESSINGS

It is with sincere gratitude for the many blessings Christian Science
has brought me, that I give this testimony. I first heard of Christian
Science about fifteen years ago. A friend of mine was taking treatment
for physical troubles, and was reading the textbook of Christian
Science, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures. The title of the
book appealed to me very strongly. I said to my friend, "If that is a
Key to the Scriptures, I must have it."

<span id="pg_643">p. 643</span>

I had long been a member of a Bible class in an orthodox Sabbath school,
but I never felt satisfied with that which was taught; there was
something lacking, I did not understand then what it was. I purchased a
copy of Science and Health and began to study it. I wish I could express
in words what that book brought me. It illumined the Bible with a
glorious light and I began to understand some of the Master's sayings,
and tried to apply them.

I had had a longing to live a better Christian life for many years, and
often wondered why I failed so utterly to understand the Bible. Now I
knew; it was lack of spiritual apprehension.

I did not know at first that people were healed of disease and sin by
simply reading Science and Health, but found after a while that such was
the case. At that time I had many physical troubles, and one after
another of these ills simply disappeared and I found that I had no
disease,--I was perfectly free. The spiritual uplifting was glorious,
too, and as I go on in the study of this blessed Science, I find I am
gaining surely an understanding that helps me to overcome both sin and
disease in myself and in others. My faith in good is increased and I
know I am losing my belief in evil as a power equal to good. The pathway
is not wearisome, because each victory over self gives stronger faith
and a more earnest desire to press on.--E. J. R., Toledo, Ohio.

GRATEFUL FOR MORAL AND SPIRITUAL AWAKENING

About four years ago, after I had tried different ways and means to be
relieved from bodily suffering, a faith

<span id="pg_644">p. 644</span>

ful friend called my attention to the teaching of Christian Science.
After some opposition, I decided to investigate it, with the thought
that if this teaching would be helpful, it was meant for me as well as
for others; if it did not afford any help, I could put it aside again,
but that I would find out and be convinced.

After I had read Mrs. Eddy's work, Science and Health, a few days, I
found that my ailments had disappeared, and a rest had come to me which
I had never before known. I had smoked almost incessantly, although I
had often determined to use my will power and never smoke again, but had
always failed. This desire as well as the desire for drink simply
disappeared, and I wish to say here, that I received all these benefits
before I had gained much understanding of what I was reading. Like a
prisoner, who had been in chains for years, I was suddenly set free. I
did not then know how the chain had been removed, but I had to
acknowledge that it came through the reading of this book. I then felt
an ardent desire to read more, and to know what this power was that had
freed me in a few days of that which I had been trying for years to
shake off and had failed. It then became clear to me that this was the
truth which Jesus Christ taught and preached to free humanity almost two
thousand years ago. It did not, however, o cur to me to apply it in my
business affairs; on the contrary, I first thought that if I continued
in my study I would have to retire from business.

This did not happen, however, for I gradually found that the little
understanding of this wonderful teaching which I had acquired became a
great help to me in my business. I became more friendly, more honest,

<span id="pg_645">p. 645</span>

more loving to my fellow-men; and I also acquired better judgment and
was able to do the right thing at the right time. As a natural result my
business improved. Before I knew anything of Christian Science my
business had often been a burden to me, fear and worry deprived me of my
rest. How different it is now! Through the study of the Bible, which now
possesses unmeasurable treasures for me, and for our textbook, Science
and Health, and the other works of our Leader, I receive peace and
confidence in God and that insight into character which is necessary for
the correct management of any business.--W. H. H., Bloomfield, Neb.

HEREDITARY DISEASE OF THE LUNGS CURED

For a long time I have been impelled to contribute a testimony of the
healing power of Truth. As I read other testimonies and rejoice in them,
some one may rejoice in mine. I was healed by reading Science and
Health. By applying it, I found it to be the truth that Jesus
taught,--the truth that sets free.

From childhood I had never known a well day. I was healed of lung
trouble of long standing. Consumption was hereditary in our family, my
mother and three brothers having passed on with it. The law of materia
medica said that in a short time I must follow them. I also had severe
stomach trouble of over eight years' standing, during which time I
always retired without supper, as the fear of suffering from my food was
so great that I denied myself food when hungry. For over twenty years I
had ovarian trouble, which was almost unbearable at times. It dated from

<span id="pg_646">p. 646</span>

the birth of my first child, and at one time necessitated an operation.
I suffered with about all the ills that flesh is heir to: I had trouble
with my eyes from a child; wore glasses for fourteen years, several
oculists saying I would go blind, one declaring I would be blind in less
than a year if I did not submit to an operation, which I refused to do.

But thanks be to God whose Truth reached me through the study of our
textbook. Words fail to express what Christian Science has done for me
in various ways, for my children, my home, my all. The physical healing
is but a small part; the spiritual unfolding and uplifting is the "pearl
of great price," the half that has never been told.--Mrs. J. P. M.,
Kansas City, Mo.

TEXTBOOK APPRECIATED

It has been my privilege to have interviews with representatives of more
than sixty per cent of the nations of this earth, under their own vine
and fig-tree. I had never heard a principle understandingly advanced
that would enable mankind to obey the apostolic command, "prove all
things," until Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures was placed
in my hands. I believe that the honest study of this book in connection
with the Bible will enable one to "prove all things."

I make this unqualified statement because of what my eyes have seen and
my ears heard from my fellow-men of unquestioned integrity, and the
positive proofs I have gained by the study of these books. Many supposed
material laws that had been rooted and

<span id="pg_647">p. 647</span>

grounded in my mentality from youth have been overcome. It required some
time for me to wake up to our Leader's words in Miscellaneous Writings,
p. 206: "The advancing stages of Christian Science are gained through
growth, not accretion." I had many disappointments and falls before I
was willing to do the scientific work required to prove this statement;
yet notwithstanding the cost to ourselves, I am convinced that we cannot
do much credit to the cause we profess to love until we place ourselves
in a position to prove God as He really is to us individually, and our
relation to Him, by scientific work.

I wish to express loving gratitude to our Leader for the new edition of
Science and Health. In studying this new edition one cannot help seeing
the wisdom, love, and careful and prayerful thought expressed in the
revision. Often the changing of a single word in a sentence makes the
scientific thought not only more lucid to him who is familiar with the
book, but also to those just coming into the blessed light. All honor to
that God-loving, God-fearing woman, Mary Baker G. Eddy, whose only work
is the work of love in the helping of mankind to help themselves; who
has placed before her fellow-men understandingly, what man's divine
rights are, and what God really is.--H. W. B., Hartford, Conn.

RUPTURE AND OTHER SERIOUS ILLS HEALED

When I took up the study of Christian Science nearly three years ago, I
was suffering from a very bad rupture of thirty-two years' standing.
Sometimes the pain was so severe that it seemed as if I could not endure
it. These spells would last four or five hours,

<span id="pg_648">p. 648</span>

and while everything was done for me that could be done, no permanent
relief came to me until I commenced reading Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures. After I had once looked into it I wanted to read all
the time. I was so absorbed in the study of the "little book" that I
hardly realized when the healing came, but I was healed, not only of the
rupture, but also of other troubles,--inflammatory rheumatism, catarrh,
corns, and bunions.

I would never part with the book if I could not get another. I am
seventy-seven years old, and am enjoying very good health.--Mrs. M. E.
P., St. Johnsbury, Vt.

MOTHER AND DAUGHTER HEALED

When Christian Science came to me, I had been taking medicine every day
for twenty years, on account of constipation. I had been treated by
doctors and specialists; had taken magnetic treatments and osteopathy;
had tried change of climate; had an operation in a hospital, and when I
came out was worse than before. I was so discouraged, after I had tried
everything I ever heard of, and was no better but rather grew worse,
that it seemed as though I must give up trying to get well, when a
friend suggested that I try Christian Science. I had heard that
Christian Scientists healed by prayer, and I thought this must be the
way Jesus had healed. I felt that this was all there was left for me to
try. I sent for the book, Science and Health, and commenced to read it
out of curiosity, not thinking or knowing that I could be helped by the
reading, but thinking I must still take medicine and that I must also
have treatment by a Scientist. I,

<span id="pg_649">p. 649</span>

however, dropped my medicine and read for three days; then a light began
to shine in the darkness. I was healed of the trouble and have never had
to take medicine since. I have studied Science and Health faithfully
ever since, and other ailments have disappeared. My little daughter has
also been healed and has learned to use this knowledge in her school
work.--Mrs. O. R., Leadville, Col.

LIVER COMPLAINT HEALED

As my thoughts go back to the time when I believed I had nothing to live
for, and when each morning's awaking from sleep brought a sense of
disappointment to find myself still among the living (for I had hoped
each night that I closed my eyes in sleep that it would be the last
time), my heart overflows with love and gratitude to God for our dear
Leader who discovered this blessed truth and to the dear ones who have
helped me so lovingly and patiently over many rough places.

Twelve years ago, I consulted a physician because I had noticed some
odd-looking spots on one of my arms. He said they were liver spots, but
that it was not worth while prescribing for those few, that I should
wait until I was covered with them. About three months later, with the
exception of my face and hands, I was covered with them. Then I became
alarmed and called on another physician who prescribed for me, but be
finally said he could do no more for me. Other physicians were consulted
with no better results. Six years ago, friends advised me to see their
family physician, and when I called on him he said he was positive he
could cure me, so I asked him to prescribe for me. At the

<span id="pg_650">p. 650</span>

end of two years, after prescribing steadily, he said I was so full of
medicine that he was afraid to have me take any more, and advised a
rest. After having paid out a small fortune, I was no better, and very
much discouraged.

Two years ago, having failed in business, I applied to one of my patrons
for a furnished room where I could meet the few I still had left. This
lady, who is a Christian Scientist, loaned me Science and Health, and
because she asked me so often how I was getting on with the book, I
began reading it. I also attended the Wednesday evening meetings which I
found very interesting. After hearing the testimonies at the meetings, I
decided to speak to some practitioner about these spots, but not until I
had at least a hundred dollars on hand, because I thought I would
require that amount for treatments, as I had been accustomed to paying
high prices. I had not inquired about prices, and in fact did not speak
to any one about my intentions, because I felt sensitive on this
subject. When I had read about half of Science and Health, I missed the
spots, and upon searching could find no trace of them. They had entirely
disappeared without treatment. In a few weeks the reading of that book
had accomplished what materia m dica had failed to accomplish in ten
years. It is impossible to express the feeling of relief and happiness
which came over me then.--C. K., Astoria, N. Y.

A CONVINCING INVESTIGATION

While I have testified to those around me and in many localities, of my
healing in Christian Science, I feel that

<span id="pg_651">p. 651</span>

it is high time I put the candle in the candlestick where all who will
may see. My earliest recollection was a day of suffering,--a physical
inheritance from my mother, which gave simple interest for a time until
years advanced and compound interest was added. My father was a
physician, and material remedies were used for my mother without avail,
consequently his confidence in them for me was shaken,--in fact he often
told me it was better to suffer without medicine than become a chronic
doser, without pain.

I began teaching in early life and continued for more than twenty years,
and during that time not a day passed without pain, or fear of pain, and
only for my innate love of life it would have become an intolerable
burden. For five years oatmeal was my chief food and I became almost as
attached to it as Kaspar Hauser to his crust. I was early taught to have
faith in God, and many times was relieved of pain only to have it appear
again in an aggravated form.

At last my heart cried out for the living God, and the answer came by
one of His messengers, who told me of Christian Science. I replied that
I believed God could heal, but that I had no faith in the healing of
Christian Science, but would like to investigate its theology, as it
might aid in giving me some clue to the meaning of life. For three years
I had searched the works of the most scientific writers to find the
origin of life; many times I would think I had traced it to the
beginning, but it would elude my grasp every time. One day in talking
with my friend, she said she would like to loan me the textbook, Science
and Health, which I very willingly accepted. Not long afterward I felt a
severe

<span id="pg_652">p. 652</span>

attack of suffering. I opened the book for the first time and found a
paragraph near the middle which attracted my attention. I read the same
paragraph over and over for nearly two hours. When the tea bell rang I
closed the book and I shall never forget my perception of the new heaven
and the new earth,--everything in nature that I could see seemed to have
been washed and made clean. The flowers that I have always loved so
much, and that from childhood had told me such sweet stories, now spoke
to me of the All-in-all, the hearts of my friends seemed kinder,--I had
touched the hem of the garment of healing.

I ate my supper that evening forgetful of the preparations I had made
for suffering, and when the next day began I was more zealous of good
work than ever before. Since closing Science and Health at my first
reading I have never been able to find the paragraph which I had read so
many times over, the words seemed to have slipped away from me, but my
joy knew no bounds at having found the pearl of great price. By the
continued reading of the book I was entirely healed, and for fourteen
years I have not seen a day of physical suffering.--Miss L. M., Rome, N.
Y.

DEAFNESS AND DROPSY HEALED

I had been deaf from childhood. I suffered intensely after eating, and
dropsy was another of my complaints. This, with consumption, caused one
doctor to say, " It puzzles me; I have never seen such a case before as
yours."

I met a friend who had been cured in Christian

<span id="pg_653">p. 653</span>

Science, and she said, "Try Christian Science." I got a copy of Science
and Health and in three weeks I was entirely cured. I felt uplifted. It
seemed as if God's arms were around and about me. I felt as if heaven
had come down to earth for me. After five years of suffering can any one
wonder at my unspeakable gratitude?--A. B., Pittsburg, Pa.

GRATEFUL FOR MANY BLESSINGS

In 1894 I began the study of Christian Science. At that time I was
greatly in need of its healing truth. For a number of years previous I
had been a semi-invalid with no hope of ever being well and strong
again. Several years before this time I had undergone an operation which
resulted in peritonitis. For three years previous to my study of Science
and Health by Mrs. Eddy, I was scarcely ever free from headache caused
by the weakened and diseased condition of the internal organs. At the
time I began the study of Christian Science I was taking five kinds of
medicine.

I began to read Science and Health, and did not take treatment, for I
thought, "If this is truth, I shall be healed; if it is not, I shall be
able to detect it, and will have nothing to do with it." I became a
devoted student and gradually my bodily diseases left me,--I was free,
and since that time, nearly ten years ago, neither my two children nor
myself have taken any medicine; and our understanding of truth has been
able to meet and overcome any suggestion of illness.

I was a devoted member of an orthodox church,

<span id="pg_654">p. 654</span>

but as I grew older I began to question my beliefs, and to my questions
I could find no satisfactory answer. I became dissatisfied and finally
ceased attending church. I could not accept the idea of God taught
there, and at last my friends looked sadly upon me as an atheist. There
I stood until I learned to know God as revealed in Science and Health,
and then all my questionings were answered. In my girlhood I had always
prayed to the God I held in mind, and when the shadows of sickness pain,
and death came to my family, I prayed as only those can who know that if
He helps not, there is none; but my prayers were unanswered. Then I
closed my Bible, saying, "There is a mistake somewhere, perhaps some
time I may know."

Only those who know the attitude of mind that I was in can understand
the joy that came to me as I began to learn of God in Christian Science,
and of my relation to Him.

Many proofs of the healing power of Truth and of His protecting care
throng my thoughts. Seven years ago, when we were in a far distant
country, where Christian Science was then unknown, my little daughter
came in one morning from her school, saying, "Mother, I have measles;
twenty of the girls are sick in bed and I am afraid they will put me
there also." Her face, hands, and chest were covered with a deep red
rash, throat sore, and eyes inflamed. We began immediately to do our
work in Science and at night, when I left her at the door of the
college, her face was clear, her eyes bright, and all fear destroyed.
That was the end of the disease.--F. M. P., Boston, Mass.

<span id="pg_655">p. 655</span>

A JOYFUL EXPERIENCE

In love and gratitude to God, and to Mrs. Eddy, the interpreter of
Jesus' beautiful teachings, I wish to tell of some of the benefits which
I have received from Christian Science. It is a little over a year since
Science found me in a deplorable condition, physically as well as
mentally. I had ailments of many years' standing,--chronic stomach
trouble, severe eye trouble, made almost unbearable from the constant
fear of losing any sight (a fate which had befallen my mother), also a
painful rupture of twenty-five years' standing. These ailments, combined
with unhappy conditions in my home, made me very despondent. I had
entirely lost my belief in an all-merciful God, and I did not know where
to turn for help. At that time Christian Science was brought to my
notice, and I shall never forget the sublime moment when I perceived
that an all-loving Father is always with me. Forgotten was all sorrow
and worry, and after four weeks' reading in Science and Health all my
ailments had disappeared. I am today a healt y, contented woman.

All this has come to pass in one short year, and my earnest desire is to
be more and more worthy to be called a child of God. This is in loving
gratitude for an understanding of this glorious truth.--Mrs. R. J.,
Chicago, Ill.

AN EVER-PRESENT HELP

It is a year since I began to read Science and Health, and I will now
try to outline what a knowledge of its teachings has done for me.

<span id="pg_656">p. 656</span>

My condition was then very trying; my eyes, which had caused me much
trouble since childhood, were very painful. For these I had been treated
by some of the best specialists in my native land, and after coming to
the United States I had been doctored much and had worn glasses for four
years. I also had catarrh, for which I had taken much medicine without
being relieved. In addition to this I was an excessive smoker, using
tobacco in some form almost constantly. I had contracted a smoker's
heart, and used liquors freely.

The one who brought to me that which I now prize so highly, was a book
agent. I told him that I should be forced to leave my trade on account
of my eyes. He then told me of having been healed of a cancer, through
Christian Science treatment. He showed me a copy of Science and Health,
which had the signs of much use, and after being assured that if I did
my part I would be healed of all my diseases, I sent for a copy of the
book.

My recovery was very rapid, for after reading the book only three weeks
I was completely healed of the tobacco habit. I will say, in regard to
this healing, that it did not require even as much as a resolution on my
part. I was smoking a cigar, while reading Science and Health, when all
the desire to continue smoking left me, and I have never had a desire to
use tobacco in any form since then. My eyes were the next to manifest
the influence of the new knowledge gained, and had soon so far recovered
that I could go about my work with ease, and I have had no more use for
glasses. To-day my heart is normal, the catarrh

<span id="pg_657">p. 657</span>

has totally disappeared, and I am not addicted to the use of liquor.

Christian Science has proved to be an ever-present help, not only in
overcoming physical ailments, but in business and daily life. It has
also overcome a great sense of fear. The Bible, which I regarded with
suspicion, has become my guide, and Christianity has become a sweet
reality, because the Christian Science textbook has indeed been a "Key
to the Scriptures" and has breathed through the Gospel pages a sweet
sense of harmony.--A. F., Sioux City, Iowa.

SEVERE EYE TROUBLE OVERCOME

After hearing Christian Science lightly spoken of, from a Christian
pulpit, I decided to go to one of the services and hear for myself. From
infancy I had been devoted to my church, and as soon as I was old enough
I was ever active in the work. Feeling it to be my duty to attend every
service held in my own church, I took advantage of the Wednesday evening
meetings. My first visit was not my last, I am thankful to say, for I
saw immediately that these people not only preached Christianity, but
practised and lived it. At that time I was wearing glasses and had worn
them for sixteen years. At times I suffered the most intense pain, and
for this phase of the trouble, one specialist after another had been
consulted. All gave me very much the same advice; each one urged extreme
carefulness and gave me glasses that seemed to relieve for a time. None
of them held out any hope that my sight would ever be restored, saying
that the

<span id="pg_658">p. 658</span>

defect had existed since infancy, and that in time I should be blind.

The thought of blindness was very distressing to me, but I tried to bear
it with Christian resignation, since I thought that God had seen fit to
afflict me; but since I have learned that He is a loving Father, who
gives only good, I regret that I ever charged Him with my affliction. I
had no treatment, but I read Science and Health, and my eyes were healed
and glasses laid aside. I can never find words to express my thanks to
our dear Leader, through whose teachings my sight has been regained. I
can truthfully say that "whereas I was blind, now I see"--through an
understanding of Truth I have found my sight perfect as God gave
it.--Miss B. S., Wilmington, N. C.

A TESTIMONY FROM IRELAND

It is with a heart full of love and gratitude to God, and to our dear
Leader, that I send this testimony to the Field. I had never been a
strong girl; had always been subject to colds and chills, and suffered
all my life from a delicate throat. Seven years ago I had a very severe
attack of rheumatic fever and subsequently two less severe ones. These
left all sorts of evils behind them,--debility, chronic constipation,
and several others, so that with these ills my life was often a burden
to me and I used to think I never should receive relief or health. I had
also lost all love for God and faith in Him. I could not accept a God
who, as I then believed, visited sickness and sorrow upon His children
as a means for drawing them to Him.

<span id="pg_659">p. 659</span>

I was in this state of mind and body when Christian Science found me. A
dear friend, seeing my suffering, presented the truth to me, and though
at first I did not believe that there could be healing for me, the
Christian Scientists' God seemed to be the one I had been looking for
all my life. I began to read Science and Health, and shall never forget
my joy at finding that I could love and trust God. I took to studying
the Bible, and read nothing but Science and Health and other Christian
Science literature for a year. After studying the "little book" for
about six weeks, I one day realized that I was a well woman, that I had
taken no medicine for three weeks, and that my body was perfectly
harmonious. The reading of Science and Health had healed me. The
wonderful joy and spiritual uplifting which came to me then no words of
mine can describe. I had also suffered from astigmatism and had for
several years been obliged to use special glasses when reading or
working, and could never use my eyes for more than half an hour; but
from the first reading of Science and Health I found that I could read
in any light and for any length of time without the slightest
discomfort. I am not only grateful for the physical healing but for the
mental regeneration. I rejoice that I am now able to help others who are
sick and sorrowing.--E. E. L., Curragh Camp, County Kildare, Ireland.

THE TEXTBOOK MAKES OPERATION UNNECESSARY

In the early part of the year 1895 my physician said I must undergo a
surgical operation in order ever to be well.

<span id="pg_660">p. 660</span>

While in great fear, and dreading the operation, a kind neighbor called,
and after telling me of Christian Science gave me a copy of Science and
Health. She said I must put aside all medicine, and by reading
faithfully she knew I could be healed. The book became my constant
companion, and in a short time I was healed. Besides the relief from an
operation, I was completely healed of severe headaches and stomach
trouble. Physicians could give me no help for either of these ailments.
For ten years I have not used medicine of any kind, and have not missed
a Christian Science service on account of sickness during this period. I
am perfectly well. To say that I am grateful to God for all this does
not express my feelings. The physical healing was wonderful, but the
understanding given me of God, and the ability to help others outweigh
all else. I also love our dear Leader.--Mrs. V. I. B., Concord, N. H.

KIDNEY DISEASE AND EYE TROUBLE HEALED

Early in 1904 I was teaching in a private boarding-school. I was a very
unhappy, discontented woman; I had kidney disease, besides sore eyes,
and my general health was very bad. The doctor said that the climate did
not suit me, and that I certainly should have a change. The best thing,
he said, was to go back to France (my own country); but I did not like
to leave the school, so I struggled on until July, when we went
travelling for a month, but I came home worse than ever. I had a lot of
worry, one disappointment after another, and I often thought that life
was not worth living. In September, 1904, we heard for the first time of
Christian Science

<span id="pg_661">p. 661</span>

through a girl who was attending our boarding-school, and who was healed
through Christian Science treatment. We bought the textbook, "Science
and Health with Key to the Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy, and what a
revelation it was and is to us; it is indeed the fountain of Truth. I
had read Science and Health but a very short time when I took off my
glasses, began to sleep well, and soon found myself well in mind and
body. Besides this, it has brought harmony into our school, where there
had been discord, and everything is changed for the better. I cannot
describe the happiness that has come to me through Christian Science; I
can only exclaim with the psalmist: "Bless the Lord, O my soul;" and may
God bless Mrs. Eddy.

My one aim now is to live Christian Science, not in words only, but in
deeds; loving God more and my neighbor as myself, and following meekly
and obediently all our Leader's teachings. Words cannot express my
gratitude to Mrs. Eddy for Christian Science.--S. A. K., Vancouver, B.
C.

DISEASE OF BOWELS HEALED

When I first heard of Christian Science I had been afflicted for nine
years with a very painful disease of the bowels, which four physicians
failed even to diagnose, all giving different causes for the dreadful
sufferings I endured. The last physician advised me to take no more
medicine for these attacks, as drugs would not reach the cause, or do
any good. About this time I heard of Christian Science, and had the
opportunity of reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures"
by Mrs. Eddy, a few minutes every day for about a week, and I

<span id="pg_662">p. 662</span>

was thereby healed. In looking back I found I had not suffered in the
least from the time I began reading this book. It has been nearly
seventeen years since this wonderful healing, and I have had no return
of the disease. My gratitude is endless and can be best expressed by
striving mightily to walk in the path our Leader has so lovingly shown
us in Science and Health.--Mrs. J. W. C., Scranton, Pa.

HEALED BY READING THE TEXTBOOK

After doctoring about a year, I was obliged to give up school and was
under medical care for two years; but grew worse instead of better. I
was then taken to specialists, who pronounced my case incurable, saying
I was in the last stages of kidney disease and could live only a short
time. Shortly afterward my uncle gave me a copy of "Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures," and asked me to study it. After studying a
short time I was able to walk a distance of several miles, which I had
not been able to do for three years. I also laid aside glasses which I
had worn seven years, having been told I would become blind if my eyes
did not receive proper care. It is over a year since I received God's
blessing, and I am now enjoying perfect health and happiness. I have
never had my glasses on since I first began reading Science and Health,
and I have not used any medicine.--L. R., Spring Valley, Minn.

A TESTIMONY FROM SCOTLAND

I came to Christian Science purely for physical healing. I was very ill
and unhappy; very cynical and disbelieving in regard to what I heard of
God and religion.

<span id="pg_663">p. 663</span>

I tried to live my life in my own way and put religion aside. I was a
great believer in fate and in will-power, and thought to put them in the
place of God, with the consequence that I was led to do many rash and
foolish things. I am now thankful to say that my outlook on life is
entirely changed; I have proved God's wisdom and goodness so often that
I am willing and thankful to know my future is in His hands and that all
things must work out for the best. I have found a God whom I can love
and worship with my whole heart, and I now read my Bible with interest
and understanding.

I was healed of very bad rheumatism simply by reading Science and
Health. I had tried many medicines, also massage, with no result, and
the doctors told me that I would always suffer from this disease, as it
was inherited, and also because I had rheumatic fever when a child. I
suffered day and night, and nothing relieved me until Science proved to
me the falseness of this belief by removing it. I gave up all the
medicines I was taking and have never touched any since, and that is
more than two years ago. Before this I had often tried to do without a
medicine that I had taken every day for ten years, but was always ill
and had to return to it, until I found out that one Mind is the only
medicine, and then I was freed from the suffering.

I had also suffered constantly from bilious attacks, colds, and a weak
chest, and had been warned not to be out in wet weather, etc., but now,
I am glad to say, I am quite free from all those material laws and go
out in all sorts of weather.--R. D. F., Edinburgh, Scotland.

<span id="pg_664">p. 664</span>

CURING BETTER THAN ENDURING

For eight years I was a great sufferer from weak lungs and after being
treated by ten different physicians, in the States of Illinois,
Missouri, and Colorado, I was told there was no hope of my recovery from
what they pronounced tuberculosis, which was hereditary, my father
having been afflicted with it. I was greatly emaciated and hardly able
to be about. My general condition was aggravated by what the doctors
said was paralysis of the bowels. Three physicians so diagnosed it at
different times, and assured my husband that I could never get more than
temporary relief. This indeed I found difficult to obtain, in spite of
my almost frantic efforts. At times I was nearly insane from suffering,
and after eight years of doctoring I found myself steadily growing
worse. For four years I did not have a normal action of the bowels, and
it was only by extreme effort and by resort to powerful drugs or
mechanical means, with resultant suffering, that any action whatever
could be brought about.

I had heard nothing of the curative power of Christian Science, and only
to oblige a friend I went one night, about three years ago, to one of
their mid-week testimonial meetings, in Boulder, Colorado. I was much
impressed by what I heard there, and determined at once to investigate
this strange religion, in the hope that it might have something good for
me. I bought the textbook, Science and Health, and from the first I
found myself growing stronger and better, both physically and mentally,
as I acquired a better understanding and endeavored to put into practice
what I learned. In one week

<span id="pg_665">p. 665</span>

I was able to get along better without drugs than I had for years with
them, and before three months had passed I was better than I had been
any time in my life, for I had always suffered more or less from bowel
trouble. Since that time I have taken no medicine whatever, and rely
wholly upon Christian Science. My lungs are now sound, my bowels
normally active, my general health excellent, and I am able to endure
without fatigue tasks that before would have prostrated me. The study of
our textbook was the sole means of my healing.--L. M. St. C., Matachin,
Canal Zone, Panama.

SEVERE ECZEMA DESTROYED

It is only two years since I came from darkness into the light of
Christian Science, and to me the spiritual uplifting has been wonderful,
to say nothing of the physical healing. Words cannot express my
gratitude for benefits I have received in that time. For five years I
suffered with that dreaded disease, eczema, all over my body. Five
doctors said there was no help for me. The suffering seemed as terrible
as the hell fire that I had been taught to believe in. When Christian
Science came to me two years ago through a dear friend, she gave me a
copy of Science and Health and asked me to read it. I told her that I
would, for I was like a drowning man grasping at a straw. I had been a
Bible student for twenty-eight years, but when I commenced reading
Science and Health with the Bible I was healed in less than a week. I
never had a treatment. A case of measles was also destroyed in
twenty-four hours after it appeared.--Mrs. M. B. G., Vermilion, Ohio.

<span id="pg_666">p. 666</span>

SCIENCE AND HEALTH A PRICELESS BOON

I am a willing witness to the healing power of Christian Science, having
had a lifetime's battle with disease and medical experiments. Various
doctors finally admitted that they had exhausted their resources, and
could only offer me palliatives, saying that a cure was impossible. I
had paralysis of the bowels, frequent sick headaches with unutterable
agony, and my mortal career was nearly brought to an end by a malignant
type of yellow fever. Many were the attending evils of this physical
inharmony, but God confounds the wisdom of men, for while studying
Science and Health two years ago, the veil of ignorance was lifted and
perfect health was shown to me to be my real condition, and to such
there is no relapse. The constant use of glasses, which were apparently
a necessity to me for years, was proven needless, and they were laid
aside. Mrs. Eddy has made Scripture reading a never-failing well of
comfort to me. By her interpretation "the way of the Lord" is made
straight to me and mine. It aids us in ou daily overcoming of the
tyranny of the flesh and its rebellion against the blessed leading of
Christ, Truth. The daily study of the Bible and our textbook is bringing
more and more into our consciousness the power of God unto
salvation.--J. C., Manatee, Fla.

A CRITIC CONVINCED

With gratitude to God I acknowledge my lifelong debt to Christian
Science. In 1895 I attended my first

<span id="pg_667">p. 667</span>

Christian Science meeting, and was deeply impressed with the earnestness
of the people and the love reflected, but as for the spiritual healing
of the physical body, I did not believe such a thing to be possible. I
bought Science and Health and studied it to be able to dispute
intelligently with the supposedly deluded followers of Christian
Science. I pursued the study carefully and thoroughly, and I have had
abundant reason since to be glad that I did, for through this study, and
the resultant understanding of my relation to God, I was healed of a
disease with which I had been afflicted since childhood and for which
there was no known remedy. Surely my experience has been the fulfilling
in part of the Scripture: "He sent His Word and healed them, and
delivered them from their destructions." I believe that Science and
Health reveals the Word referred to by David.--C. A. B. B., Kansas City,
Mo.

BORN AGAIN

It was in April, 1904, that I first heard the "still, small voice" of
the Christ and received healing through Christian Science; and the
blessings have been so many since, that it would take too much space to
name them. Reared from childhood in an intellectual atmosphere, my
paternal grandfather having been an orthodox minister of the old school
for forty years, and my father a deep student, ever seeking for the
truth of all things, I began early to ponder and to study into the
meaning of life, and came to the conclusion before I was twenty that
though God probably

<span id="pg_668">p. 668</span>

existed in some remote place, still it was impossible to connect Him
with my present living. My highest creed, therefore, became, "Do right
because it is right and not for fear of being punished." Then began the
suffering. Sorrow after sorrow followed each other in rapid succession;
for ten long years there was no rest, the road was indeed long and hard
and had no turning, until finally the one thing that had stood by me all
through the trials, namely, my health, gave way, and with that went my
last hope. But the last hour of the night had come, the dawn of day was
at hand; a dear friend left Science and Health upon my piano one day,
saying that I would gain much good by reading it.

Glad to get away from my own poor thoughts, I opened the "little book"
and began to read. I had read only a short time when such a wonderful
transformation took place! I was renewed; born again. Mere words cannot
tell the story of the mighty up-lifting that carried me to the very
gates of heaven. When I began to read the book, life was a burden, but
before I had finished reading it the first time, I was doing all my
housework and doing it easily; and since that glorious day I have been a
well woman. My health is splendid, and I am striving to let my light so
shine that others may be led to the truth. There have been some mighty
struggles with error, and I have learned that we cannot reach heaven
with one long stride or easily drift inside the gate, but that the
"asking" and the "seeking" and the "knocking" must be earnest and
persistent.

For a long time I was always looking back to see if

<span id="pg_669">p. 669</span>

the error had gone, until one day when I realized that to catch a
glimpse of what spiritual sense means I must put corporeal sense behind
me. I then set to work in earnest to find the true way. I opened Science
and Health and these words were before me, "If God were understood,
instead of being merely believed, this understanding would establish
health" (p. 203). I saw that I must get the right understanding of God!
I closed the book and with head bowed in prayer I waited with longing
intensity for some answer. How long I waited I do not know, but
suddenly, like a wonderful burst of sunlight after a storm, came clearly
this thought, "Be still, and know that I am God." I held my breath--deep
into my hungering thought sank the infinite meaning of that "I." All
self-conceit, egotism, selfishness, everything that constitutes the
mortal "I," sank abashed out of sight. I trod, as it were, on holy
ground. Words are inadequate to convey the fullness of that spiritual
uplifting, but others who have had similar xperiences will understand.

From that hour I have had an intelligent consciousness of the
ever-presence of an infinite God who is only good.--C. B. G., Hudson,
Mass.

A RESTLESS SENSE OF EXISTENCE DESTROYED

Through reading Science and Health and the illumination which followed,
I was healed of ulceration of the stomach and kindred troubles, a
restless sense of existence, agnosticism, etc. The torture I endured
with the stomach trouble I will not attempt to describe. The attending
physician declared that I could live but a short

<span id="pg_670">p. 670</span>

time, and I felt there would be a limit to my endurance of the torture,
but the disease was dissipated into nothingness through Christian
Science, which brought me peace.

Like many others I had been seemingly lost in the sea of error, without
a compass, yet earnestly and honestly seeking a haven. I had
investigated all kinds of religions and philosophies that came under my
notice, with the exception of Christian Science, which was not then
deemed worthy of inquiry, and yet it held the very truth I was searching
for--the light which "shineth in the darkness; and the darkness
comprehended it not." Three years of stubborn resistance to Truth, with
increasing suffering, followed--then the light came, and with it a new
experience. Now, after nine years of Christian Science experience, under
severe tests, it can be truthfully said that it has not failed me in any
hour of need.--J. F. J., Cincinnati, Ohio.

MORALLY AND PHYSICALLY HEALED

I did not accept Christian Science on account of any healing of my own,
but after seeing my mother, who was fast drifting toward helplessness
with rheumatism, restored to perfect health with only a few treatments
in Christian Science, I thought surely this must be the truth as Jesus
taught and practised it, and if so it was what I had been longing for.

This was about ten years ago and was the first I had ever heard of
Christian Science. We soon got a copy of Science and Health and I began
in the right way to

<span id="pg_671">p. 671</span>

see if Christian Science were the truth. I had no thought of studying it
for bodily healing; in fact, I did not think I needed it for that, but
my soul cried out for something I had not yet found. This book was
indeed a key to the Scriptures.

It was not long after I began reading before I discovered that my eyes
were good and strong, I could read as much as I wished, and at any time,
which was something I could not do before, as my eyes had always been
weak. The doctors said they never would be very strong, and that if I
did not wear glasses, I might lose my sight altogether. I never gave up
to wearing glasses, and now, thanks to Christian Science, I do not need
them, my work for the past two years as a railway mail clerk being a
good test. At the same time my eyes were healed, I also noticed that I
was entirely healed of another ailment which had been with me all my
life, and which was believed to be inherited. Since that time my growth
has seemed to me slow, yet when I look back and view myself as I was
before Christian Science found me, and compare it with my life as it now
is, I can only close my eyes to the picture and rejoice that I have been
"born again" and that I have daily been putting off "the old man with
his deeds," and putting on " he new man."

Some of the many things that have been overcome through the study of
Science and Health, and through realizing and practising the truth it
teaches, are profanity, the use of tobacco, a very quick temper, which
made both myself and those around me at times very miserable, and such
thoughts as malice, revenge, etc.--O. L. R., Fort Worth, Tex.

<span id="pg_672">p. 672</span>

HEALTH AND UNDERSTANDING GAINED

Most of my boyhood days were spent in the hands of physicians. From
birth I was considered a very weakly child, but my mother was brave, and
being much devoted to me did everything within her knowledge and power
for my comfort. Sickness and medicine were continually before me, and by
the time I reached my teens I thought I knew a material remedy for every
ill. I continued in my delusion, because I was never told the real cause
of my trouble. Besides being under a leading specialist for two years, I
was also an outdoor patient at a noted hospital, but I was not healed.
It is wonderful how the "little ones" are cared for in the face of all
these seeming difficulties. I always used the prayers that I had been
taught, and as I grew older I began to ask for wisdom. Little by little
I gained a desire for freedom, and my prayers finally led me to the
truth. The first week that I heard of Christian Science, I visited the
home of dear Christian Science friends, and was at once refreshed by
their purity of thought nd example. I bought a copy of Science and
Health, and, after studying it a little while with the Bible, I saw that
if the Bible was true, Science and Health must also be true. I began to
demonstrate over my physical and mental condition, and as soon as the
fear and pain began to leave me I felt encouraged to go on. I was
healed, and stopped complaining. I kept on studying our textbook, and
when I got an understanding in a small degree of the Science of Mind, my
first thought was to help others. I was guided where I could pro

<span id="pg_673">p. 673</span>

gress in Science, and was no longer "carried about with every wind of
doctrine," but held to Principle as closely as possible. From the time
the healing came into my consciousness, the desire for material remedies
left me, because Christian Science at once pointed out the way to get at
the cause of discord and disease. All that I had to give up were the
false beliefs of mortal mind. Christian Science then taught me to love
the church, and to appreciate what it had already done for mankind. I
often thought of the old adage, "Charity begins at home," and after
three years' preparation I felt able to take Christian Science to my
home, where it found, in due time, ready acceptance and willing
disciples. This gave me even greater joy than my own healing. The more
good I saw accomplished, the more love I had for the truth. Christian
Science changed my course from the first, and gave me a nobler aim and
purpose in life. I was not so easily influenced by other people's
shortcomings, when I learned that evil has nei her personality nor
place. I was not so ready to take offence, when I found out the way to
work unselfishly for the upbuilding of the Cause.--A. E. J., Toledo,
Ohio.

AN EVER-PRESENT HELP FOUND

On the 23rd of March, 1900, I received from one of my daughters a copy
of Science and Health on my seventy-first birthday. Although a constant
reader of all kinds of papers and books, I had never heard anything of
Christian Science, except a short notice that spring in a San Francisco
newspaper, from an orthodox clergyman, referring to the Christian
Science people in not very complimentary style.

<span id="pg_674">p. 674</span>

In Mrs. Eddy's book I came across a great deal of thought that was not
readily understood at the first reading, but by continued and careful
study, and a good deal of help from my knowledge of chemistry and
natural philosophy, I soon shook off the belief of sensation in
matter,--the so-called elementary substance. One afternoon I put the
belt on my circular saw to cut blocks of firewood and also to split a
small stick of frame timber. In doing this the stick closed and pinched
the saw. I picked up a small wooden wedge and tried to drive it into the
saw kerf, but a bit of ice let the stick on to the back of the saw and
instantly it flew, with heavy force, into my face, and bouncing off my
left cheek fell about twenty feet off on the snow. The blood spattered
on the snow next the saw table, and on feeling with my hand there were
two wounds, one on the lock of the jaw and another forward, as big as a
dollar, on the cheek bone. "Now," I thought to myself, "there is a case
of surgery for you," and without furth r ceremony, I began to treat the
case to the best of my knowledge, with the result that the bleeding
stopped almost instantly, and so did a thumping pain, which had
commenced. I paid no more attention to the matter, but finished my work,
and then went to supper. When I washed my face, I felt a big lump on the
jawbone where the block of wood struck, but after my usual reading I
went to bed and slept all night until near daylight, when a pain on the
right side awoke me. On feeling with my hand there was another big lump
on the right side, but I treated it and went to sleep again. I never
lost an hour from the hurt, although I found out that my jaw was broken.
There is no scar, only a little red spot on

<span id="pg_675">p. 675</span>

the cheek, and the lumps on the bone have long since disappeared.

In summing up the benefits I have received from the reading of Science
and Health, I can but refer to a condition of sickness dating back to
the war (1862), when chronic and malignant diarrhea came near making an
end of my material existence. My hearing, also, was seriously impaired
from the effect of cannon firing at Shiloh, but it has come back to me,
and where I formerly dared not eat an orange, or grapes, I can now eat
anything without being hurt. My peace of mind is giving me a rest which
I never experienced before during my life, and I have ceased to look
away off for the divine presence that was always near, though I did not
know it.--L. B., Baldy, N. M.

MANY PHYSICAL AND MENTAL TROUBLES OVERCOME

Less than a year ago, when nothing but trouble seemed to encompass me, I
was led to Christian Science. My mother's copy of Science and Health was
always lying on the table, but I scarcely ever read it. One day,
however, the mental conflict was so great I commenced reading in the
hope of obtaining peace. Every day since then my companions have been
the Bible and Science and Health. At that time I had a very serious
eruption on my face, which had been there two years. We had consulted
several physicians, and used every remedy suggested to eradicate it, but
they proved useless. I had given up all hopes of its ever being healed,
as the physician we last consulted pronounced it tuberculosis of the
skin and incurable. A few weeks after I com

<span id="pg_676">p. 676</span>

menced reading, I was amazed to see it almost healed over, and to-day my
cheek is perfectly smooth, while the scar is disappearing.

In April my baby was born with only the practitioner and a woman friend
present. I suffered little pain, and the third day I went down-stairs. I
am able to nurse him,--a privilege of which I was deprived with my first
child. He is a picture of health, having never been sick a day since he
was born.--K. E. W. L., Mt. Dora, Fla.

A NEW LIFE GAINED

leaving home when a young man, I carried with me a protection against
the temptation of a great city,--a mother's prayers and a small Bible.
For a time I read the Bible and prayed, but without understanding. This
did not suffice, and evil seemed to gain the victory. I soon omitted to
read my Bible; forgot to go to God in prayer for guidance and help, and
looked to the world for that which it never has and never can
give,--health, peace, and joy.

Thus, years later, when Christian Science came into my home, it found me
prayerless, churchless, godless; a home discordant, and with no thought
or knowledge of spiritual things. Up to this time, my wife had for years
been seeking health through the physicians, but without success, and as
a last resort had been sent to Christian Science. The help received was
so wonderful that I commenced the study of Science and Health. The first
effect which I realized from the reading of our textbook, was a great
love for the Bible and a desire to read it, something which I had not
done

<span id="pg_677">p. 677</span>

for years. I went in silent prayer to God, that I might see the light
and truth which would enable me to be-come a better man. "Ye must be
born again." Thus again, and as a child, was I taught to pray "the
effectual fervent prayer" which "availeth much." In a few weeks' study
of Science and Health together with the Bible, and without other help, I
was healed of a desire for liquor, of years' standing, and of the use of
tobacco. Ten years have passed and these appetites have never returned.
I have never used either liquor or tobacco in any form from that time to
the present. Surely this Scripture is fulfilled in our home: "Old things
are passed away; behold, all things are become new." How can we estimate
the value of a book, the study of which brings such transformation and
regeneration? Only as we endeavor to live, and strive to practise what
it teaches, can we begin to pay our debt to God, and to her whom He has
sent to make plain to human understanding the life and teaching of
Christ Jesus.--W. H. P., B ston, Mass.

A VOICE FROM ENGLAND

For a number of years I was a weary woman, not ill enough in health to,
be called an invalid, but suffering more than could be told with fatigue
and weakness. Feeling that this was God's will, I did not ask to be
healed, although I was constantly doctoring. I suffered with dyspepsia,
congestion of the liver, and many other things, including weak eyesight.
With all the medicine, and with different changes for rest, I never
regained health, and thought I never should, so I prayed for grace to
bear my cross patiently for others' sake. One day, while

<span id="pg_678">p. 678</span>

lying on my couch exhausted, which had become a frequent experience, the
words came to me, "Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive." I rose, knelt down and said, O God, make me well. I was
telling a friend this and she kindly gave me a Sentinel. Imagine my joy
when I saw the testimonies of healing! I believed them, remembering our
Lord's words, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed." I obtained a copy of Science and Health and before a week had
passed I realized that if God was my all I needed no glasses. My eyes
were healed in a few days, and since then I have never thought of
glasses. I was also cured of dyspepsia, and nothing that I have eaten
has hurt me since then. The belief in health laws was next destroyed, by
knowing that our heavenly Father did not make them, and from this has
come the beautiful experience of the overcoming of fatigue.

For this alone I can never be thankful enough. True indeed are the
words, "They shall run, and not be weary." This was more than a year
ago, and I can say that not once have I felt inclined to lie on the
couch, nor have I had a headache, although I am doing more work than
ever before. Fear has also been overcome in many ways.--A. L.,
Chelmsford, England.

DEPRAVED APPETITES OVERCOME

When Christian Science first came to me, or rather, when I first came to
Christian Science, I did not have a very bad opinion of myself. I
thought I was a pretty good fellow. I had no religious views. I seemed
to be getting along as well as, if not better than, some who

<span id="pg_679">p. 679</span>

professed Christianity. So I drifted along until I was led to
investigate Christian Science.

As I progressed in the understanding as gained from the study of both
Science and Health and the Bible, and commenced to know myself, I found
that a great change had been wrought in me. For fifteen years I had used
tobacco, both chewing and smoking; for ten years I had been a victim of
the drink habit, sometimes to excess; I was also addicted to profanity.
Christian Science removed these appetites. A stomach trouble and other
lesser ills, such as headache, a bad temper, an inordinate love of
money, etc., disappeared under the same benign influence. Those things
that seemed to be pleasure do not give me pleasure now. They were not
real pleasure. I have lost nothing, I have sacrificed nothing; but I
have gained everything, and not yet the whole, for I can see plenty yet
to be done.

The condition of mind before investigating and after is as different as
black and white. As Mrs. Eddy says, "Not matter, but Mind,
satisfieth.--G. B. P., Henry, S. D.

CATARRH OF THE STOMACH HEALED

I should like to express my gratitude for the many benefits I have
received through Christian Science, and to mention the great joy brought
to me in the thought that man is not the helpless victim of sin,
disease, and death. Through its teachings I have been able to overcome
many errors.

When Christian Science found me, one year ago last April, in Chicago, I
was suffering from catarrh

<span id="pg_680">p. 680</span>

of the stomach, which had been very persistent, and I had been a slave
to the cigarette habit for eighteen years. Pain and weakness had robbed
me of all that one holds dear. The first symptoms of the disease
appeared about five years ago in the form of severe cramps of the
stomach, which finally developed into other symptoms of that painful
disease. I doctored continually, my diet daily becoming more rigid,
until three slices of toast became my daily allowance of food.

In this condition I left the East for my home in Chicago, hoping that a
change of climate might benefit me. After spending six weeks there and
finding no relief, I concluded to return East. The Sunday morning before
leaving I picked up a Sunday paper, and glancing through the religious
items my eyes fell on the notices of Christian Science church services.
Curiosity led me to a service and I shall never forget that morning or
the surprise and joy it gave me to find that beautiful church, and to
know that so great a number actually believed that God does heal the
sick to-day. This brought a first ray of hope. The evening service found
me there again. Among the notices read was that of a reading room,
giving the location and time of opening. Monday morning found me there
promptly, and the first book I picked up was Science and Health which
opened a new world to me.

I had dieted so long and suffered so much that I had a morbid fear of
food. When I had reached and read of "neither food nor the stomach,
without the consent of mortal mind, can make one suffer" (Science and
Health, p. 221), I left the reading room for something to eat. I found a
bakery near by, and bought a bag of cakes

<span id="pg_681">p. 681</span>

which I ate, and shortly after I had a hearty dinner without the least
complaint from my stomach.

From that time until now I have eaten anything that I wished, and the
craving for cigarettes, which I had for many years, has entirely
vanished. The understanding of Truth, which entirely relieved the
diseased stomach, healed also the morbid appetite for smoking. After
coming back East, I bought a copy of Science and Health, which I have
read daily, and find it a continual help in all the affairs of life.

In my home and at work I find this Science a comfort and source of
strength. I have had many difficulties in the way, but it has helped me
out of them all.--W. E. B., New Britain, Conn.

SPINAL DISEASE HEALED

When I first heard of Christian Science, seven years ago, I supposed
that it was some old fad under a new name. In the little Texas town
where we then lived there were two or three Christian Scientists who met
at the home of one of their number to read the Lesson-Sermon. Meeting
one of them one day, I asked if unbelievers could come to their
meetings. She said that they could if they wanted to. I went, expecting
them to do something that I could laugh at when telling my friends about
it. How surprised I was to find out that they didn't do anything but
read the Bible and another book which they called Science and Health. I
still thought it all foolishness, but resolved to go to their meetings
until I found out all they believed. I continued to go until I began to
understand a little of what they knew,

<span id="pg_682">p. 682</span>

not what they believed; and instead of spending my time telling others
what a silly thing Christian Science is, I am now trying to find words
to tell what a great and wonderful thing it is. I have been healed of
so-called incurable spinal disease of ten years' standing by studying
the Bible and Science and Health. Science and Health has been my only
teacher, and I wish to send my thanks to our dear Leader.

There are no other Scientists near where we now live, but I have the
Quarterly and study the lessons by myself. I have five small children,
and Christian Science is invaluable to me in controlling them, and in
overcoming their common ills. They often help themselves and each other
to destroy their little hurts and fears.--Mrs. M. H., Oleta, Okla.

MANY TROUBLES OVERCOME

In the second chapter of First Peter, ninth verse, I read "that ye
should show forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness
into his marvellous light." The periodicals so wisely established by our
Leader give us one means of showing forth the praises of Truth.

From the darkness of physical pain and weariness into the light of
wholeness and joyousness in work and living,--from the darkness of a
clouded sight into the light of clearer vision,--from the darkness of
doubt and discord into the marvellous light of the reality of
good,--this is what a reading of the Christian Science textbook has done
for me.

At the time the book was lent to me, I was teach

<span id="pg_683">p. 683</span>

ing in the public schools of Chicago, and absences from my work on
account of illness were of frequent occurrence. For five weeks I had
been under the care of a specialist for an organic trouble, and he said
I would have to come as many more months before a cure could be
effected. At this time, Science and Health was brought to my notice. I
never thought of such a thing as being healed by the reading of the
book, but my thought was so changed that I was healed, not only of the
organic trouble, but of blurred eyesight, fatigue, and a train of other
discordant manifestations. I did not go back to the physician until four
months later to pay my bill (which, by the way, was more than five times
the price of the Science and Health I had purchased). From the time I
read the book I taught steadily without losing time from my work. I was
helped, too, with my work in many other ways.

Through reading the textbook I learned that God has given us strength to
do all we have to do, and that it is the things we do not have to do
(the envying, strife, emulating, vainglorying, and so on) that leave in
their wake fatigue and discord.

Gratitude to our beloved Leader, Mrs. Eddy, and to her faithful
students, with whom I afterwards became associated, can be expressed
only by daily efforts to put into practice what has been taught.-- T. H.
A., Madison, Wis.

PREJUDICE OVERCOME

I became interested in Christian Science somewhat over three years ago
when in much need of help. I had never been strong, and as I grew older
I grew

<span id="pg_684">p. 684</span>

weaker and at last became so ill that life was a burden to me. Science
and Health by Mrs. Eddy was sent to me, in answer to prayer, as I
thought. I was a little afraid of all these new fads, as I thought them,
but I had not read far before I felt that I had found the truth which
makes us free. I was healed of stomach trouble, inward weakness, and
bilious attacks.

One physician said I might have to undergo an operation before I could
get well, but, thanks to this Truth, I have found that the only
operation needed was the regeneration of this so-called human mind by
learning to know God. In many cases I have been able to help myself and
others.

Words cannot express my thanks to Mrs. Eddy, and to all who are bringing
these great truths to the help of the whole world.--E. E. M.,
Huntington, W. Va.

A CONVINCING TESTIMONY

I became interested in Christian Science some five years ago, the
practical nature of its statements appealing to me, and I must say, at
the outset, that with my little experience I have found it all and more
than I ever dreamt of realizing on this plane of existence. I am
satisfied that I have found Truth. God is indeed to me an ever-present
help.

My little girl, some ten months old, was afflicted with constipation. It
was so severe I dreaded to go out anywhere with her, as I knew not when
she would be taken with a convulsion. I had tried all the usual remedies
in such cases, but it seemed to grow more obstinate. There was a
Christian Scientist living in

<span id="pg_685">p. 685</span>

the same house with us, a Scientist who let her light shine, and while
she said little, I felt the reflection of Love. I had no knowledge of
the teachings of Christian Science, save that God was the physician at
all times. In my own way I believed He was all-powerful, and I said to
my husband one day, "I am through with medicine for baby. I am just
going to leave her in God's care and see what He will do. I have done
all I can." I did as I said, laid my burden at God's feet, and did not
pick it up again. In two days the child was perfectly natural, and has
since been free from the trouble. She is now six years of age. Some
months later a second test came. She woke up at nine o'clock at night
crying and holding her ear. There was to sense a gathering. I was alone.
I took up my Science and Health and Bible, but the more I worked the
louder she screamed. Error kept suggesting material remedies, but I said
firmly: "No; I shall not go back to error. God will help me." Just then
I thought of my own fear, how excessive it was, and a conversation I had
with the Scientist who first voiced the truth to me, came to mind. She
said she always found it helpful to treat herself and cast out her own
fear before treating a patient. I put baby down and again took up my
Science and Health, and these were the words I read:

"Every trial of our faith in God makes us stronger. The more difficult
seems the material condition to be overcome by Spirit, the stronger
should be our faith and the purer our love. The Apostle John says:
'There is no fear in Love, but perfect Love casteth out fear'" (Science
and Health, p. 410). I looked up, the crying

<span id="pg_686">p. 686</span>

had ceased, the child was smiling, and in a few minutes asked to be put
to bed. There has been no further trouble of that kind.

I have since seen the power of Truth overcome error of many forms,
including croup, whooping-cough, tonsilitis, etc. I am thankful for all
these proofs, but far more grateful am I for the spiritual teaching to
love, to forgive, to curb my tongue, and cease my criticism.--M. A. H.,
Brockton, Mass.

HEALED PHYSICALLY AND SPIRITUALLY

I had been taking medicine continually for many years. Finally I was
taken suddenly ill and could not leave my room for about two months,
then I went away for three months, thinking that I should come back and
be able to continue my work. I improved very much, but the fear of quick
consumption was with my doctor and my family and friends, and I was
warned about the coming winter. Only too soon the fear manifested
itself. I had worked just three weeks when all the pains and aches
returned, and I had to go to bed as soon as I got home, so there was no
pleasure in living. My employer advised me to see my physician, and said
perhaps I should not work that winter. I then and there turned to
Christian Science. I could not afford to give up work and live away from
home, neither did I want to depend on doctors and medicine any longer. I
took the book and read it on my way to work, and at noon I lay down on a
couch instead of going out for luncheon and fell asleep. When I awoke I
was a different person, all pains an aches had gone, and I was free. I
was so

<span id="pg_687">p. 687</span>

happy I could hardly contain myself; to material sense it was wonderful.
As I walked I kept saying, "Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful," and tried
to understand "the scientific statement of being" by repeating portions
at a time, then pondering over them. I read the book four times in
succession, and every time I found more and more to aid in the
understanding.

This healing was in October, 1901, with no other help than Science and
Health, and soon I was relieved of other chronic ailments. In February I
was able to put away eyeglasses, which I had worn ten years and a half
for astigmatism. Oculists told me I would always have to wear them. A
month later my father asked me to help him, as he was suffering so much
from constipation, dyspepsia, and neuralgia. He had been subsisting on
bran, nearly starving himself until be was most miserable, and his limbs
seemed so cold that they were kept wrapped in blankets. I felt very
humble as he asked me, and told him I would have a practitioner help
him, as I had never treated any one; but he would not consent to have
any one but myself, and I finally told him I would try, but that he must
not hold Science responsible if he were not benefited, for my lack of
understanding, and not Science, would be at fault. At my request he read
Science and Health, ate whatever he wanted, and used no medicine in any
form. After two treatmen s I received word from him that he was healed
of that bondage of thirty years' standing. In view of all these signs
which followed my acceptance of Christian Science, I knew it must be
true.--R. L. A., Chicago, Ill.

<span id="pg_688">p. 688</span>

A VOICE FROM THE SOUTH

I was delicate from childhood, and my parents did not think it was
possible for me to live more than a few years. I lived, however,
although there was not much improvement in my health. Travel and change
of climate brought only temporary relief, and the physicians gave me no
hope that I would ever be well.

As a last resort I began the study of Science and Health, and before I
had finished reading the book I realized that its author was divinely
commissioned to bring this spiritual message to a waiting world. Through
this reading my health was restored, and I was healed of one disease
that has been called incurable by all physicians.

For this, together with the greater and higher blessing of having the
spiritual fact of being unfolded to me, I am most grateful.

What shall be rendered for such benefits received and made possible by
the consecrated life of our revered Leader? Only by following the
teachings of our textbook, and by loving obedience to her gentle and
timely admonitions can we show our true sense of gratitude.--F. H. D.,
De Funiak Springs, Fla.

HEALED AFTER MUCH SUFFERING

A testimony given in the Journal led me to investigate Christian
Science, and I hope in return to be the means of leading some one else
to see the beauty of this saving truth, and to learn to know God aright
and man's relationship to Him. I know from experience

<span id="pg_689">p. 689</span>

that it is prejudice and misapprehension of what Christian Science is,
that keeps many from enjoying the blessings it bestows.

I had been taking patent medicines for several years, and had been to
one of the best sanitariums in this country, but was not healed,
although I received some benefit, for which I shall always feel
grateful, for I know the physicians did all they could for me. I
sometimes thought I had exhausted all remedies, but did not give up, for
I felt there must be something to heal me if I could find it.

When in this state of mind Christian Science came to my notice, and
after reading several Journals, I purchased a copy of Science and
Health. I read for several days at odd times. I commenced to improve,
and in about a week I was healed of most of my ills, among which were
dyspepsia and nervous debility.

Although I had heard about Christian Science before, I had never heard
that the reading of the Christian Science textbook had ever effected the
healing of anybody. I commenced reading to find out what Christian
Science was, but was surprised to find myself improving, and was soon
assured that it was the theology of Science and Health that healed me,
just as it was the theology of Jesus that healed the sick.

It has also proved to me that there can be no Christian Science Church
that does not heal the sick and sinful, for healing follows as the
natural result of the teaching of Christian Science. The Bible has
become a new revelation to me, and I can read it much more
understandingly by the light received through the reading of Science and
Health.--A. F. M., Fairmont, Minn.

<span id="pg_690">p. 690</span>

THROUGH GREAT TRIBULATIONS

When I attempt to make plain what Christian Science has done for me,
words fail me. For twenty years I was a constant sufferer, my spine
having been injured when I was very young. As a little child I suffered
so much that I would look up to the stars and beg God, who I thought
might be up there somewhere, to take me away from the earth,--I was so
tired. A great wall of pain seemed to separate me from the pleasures
enjoyed by others, and I could not explain how I felt, because no one
could understand. Years passed, and I saw my earthly happiness swept
away; my heart was broken and I did not know what to do. I cried for
help, day after day and night after night, although I was not sure what
God was, nor where He was. I only knew that I suffered, and was in need
of help, and that there was no earthly help for either mind or body. I
loved purity, truth, and right always, and this made evil seem a most
terrible reality. I was unable to cope with it, and so found myself in
despair. This was my condition when I ommenced reading Science and
Health. I was ready for its message, and in about ten days there came a
wonderful insight into the truth which heals the sick and binds up the
broken-hearted. All pain left me, I had a glimpse of the new heavens and
the new earth, and was beginning to be fed by Love divine.

I had suffered for years with insomnia. That night I rested like a
child, and awoke the next morning well and happy. A flood of light daily
illumined the pages of the "little book," and the revelation it holds
for all

<span id="pg_691">p. 691</span>

came to my waiting heart. " The peace which passeth all understanding "
rested upon me, and joy too deep for words transformed my life. My
prayers were answered, for I had found God in Christian Science.

The Bible, which I knew very little about, became my constant study, my
joy, and my guide. The copy which I bought at the time of my healing is
marked from Genesis to Revelation. It was so constantly in my hands for
three years that the cover became worn and the leaves loose, so it has
been laid away for a new one. Two and three o'clock in the morning often
found me poring over its pages, which grew more and more sacred to me
every day, and the help I received therefrom was wonderful, for which I
can find no words to express iny gratitude.--I. L., Los Angeles, Cal.

A HELPFUL TESTIMONY

Words cannot express my gratitude to God for Christian Science. When I
first read Science and Health, I had tried every remedy I had ever heard
of. I felt no change in mind or body that I was conscious of until I
read page 16 of the chapter on " Prayer," in Science and Health. The
first words of the "spiritual sense of the Lord's Prayer," telling of
our Father-Mother God, gave me a glimpse of heavenly light. I stopped
and reasoned, and remembered the teachings of Jesus. The truth of man's
spiritual being dawned on my consciousness. I realized I was not subject
to mortal laws, as I had been taught all my life. I could not explain
how I knew this, but I knew it. Through Christian Science, Mrs. Eddy had
given me what

<span id="pg_692">p. 692</span>

I had longed for all my life,--a Mother, a perfect "Father-Mother God."
I had known there was a great lack, and at that time I believe the
orthodox world had but half of the truth which Jesus came to establish.
When I read, "Give us this day our daily bread," and its spiritual
interpretation, my tears began to flow; all the years of bitterness,
hate, and fear melted away. I knew then, as I know now, that nothing
satisfies but Love. That day began the outward and inward conscious
healing,--mental and physical. There never came a doubt! I absolutely
knew that Christian Science was and is the truth. Money, friends,
materiality, are nothing beside the conscious knowledge of God, man, and
the universe.

I did not need treatment from any one,--Science and Health was so clear
and beautiful. I could not understand the Bible before, but I found it
illumined now that I had a little understanding of Christian Science.
For ten years I have not had to lie down in the daytime from any
sickness. I am now, and have been all these years, the picture of
perfect health. When I first read Science and Health I weighed one
hundred and four pounds; I now weigh over one hundred and sixty. This
physical health is not to be compared to my happiness,--my harmony that
nothing can take away,--because it is the gift of God. Nothing has shown
me the perversity of the human mind more than in its conclusions in
regard to my healing. Even when I felt and knew that I was healed,
people constantly said, because I was thin and delicate looking, " You
are not well, any one could look at you and know it." Now that I am
fleshy, they say, "You don't look

<span id="pg_693">p. 693</span>

as if you ever had a pain in all your life. You could not have had
consumption."

When I think what my life was before I had Christian Science, of the six
years of colds, suffering, and coughing, not to mention the unhappiness,
I want to "work, watch, and pray " for the Mind of Christ, that I may
work rightly in God's vineyard, and to know that in truth, what belongs
to one belongs to all,--that one God, one Life, Truth, and Love is
all.--A. C. L., Kansas City, Kans.

DESIRE FOR LIQUOR AND TOBACCO DISAPPEARED

I first heard of Christian Science four years ago. At that time drinking
and smoking were my comforters. I had no other companionship. I had
lived almost constantly from childhood in an evil atmosphere. Though I
was far from being satisfied with my condition, I failed to see how to
better it until I read Science and Health. I used occasionally to listen
to a sermon, but sermons did not give me any more comfort than I derived
from my pipe, hence I concluded that church-going could not satisfy me
and I preferred drinking and smoking. When I began to read Science and
Health, I saw it offered something substantial. After a few months'
study all desire for drinking and smoking disappeared. I did not give
them up; I made no sacrifices, I simply found something better. I might
mention that I had smoked ever since I can remember. I used to smoke
years before I left school, and, like most Englishmen, loved my pipe,
and would almost prefer to miss a meal rather than to go without my
smoke. I used to think it gave me comfort.

During my four years' study of Christian Science I

<span id="pg_694">p. 694</span>

have not spent a cent for doctors or medicine, neither have I lost a day
from my work on account of sickness, which compares wonderfully with the
previous four years. I take a great interest and pleasure in reading the
Bible and studying the lessons in the Quarterly. The Bible used to be a
most mysterious book to me, but Science and Health makes it a most
precious book, making its meaning clearer, plainer, and simpler.

I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to Mrs. Eddy and to the
friend who invited me to attend the service held in the Auditorium years
ago. I also wish to acknowledge the benefit I have had from the Journal
and the Sentinel. They have helped me wonderfully. If the value of
Science and Health and these publications were measured as business men
value things, by the results or benefits they bring, they certainly
would be priceless to me. It would be impossible to measure their value,
as I have got something from Science and Health that all the money in
the world could not buy.--H. P. H., Chicago, Ill.

AN EXPRESSION OF LOVING GRATITUDE

In the spring of 1893, while studying for the ministry, Science and
Health was placed in my hands, and the truth contained therein at once
became to me the pearl of great price. I literally devoured the book,
reading it about eighteen hours a day. Its originality was startling,
upsetting my preconceived opinions of God, man, and creation. Two
sentences especially appealed to me: "The foundation of mortal discord
is a false sense of man's origin" (p. 262), and, "For right

<span id="pg_695">p. 695</span>

reasoning, there should be but one fact before the thought, namely,
spiritual existence " (p. 492). I had found the keynote to the Science
of being as taught in this marvellous book, and persevered until a
glimpse of the new heavens and new earth came, for the old were passing
away. With this spiritual uplifting came also physical health.

All my life had been spent in semi-invalidism, and I seemed destined to
a life of suffering. In three weeks after beginning Science and Health,
to my joyful surprise I found myself a well man, sound physically, and
uplifted spiritually. Life was being lived from a new basis, the old
things of personal sense were passing away and all things becoming new.
I learned that the infinite good is the one Friend upon whom we can call
at all times, an all-powerful, ever-present help in every time of
trouble; that His children are really governed in peace and harmony by
spiritual law, and as the right understanding of it is gained, the other
things soon follow, bringing a peace the human concept can never know.

For the last twelve years my whole time has been devoted to Christian
Science practice, and I have seen nearly every so-called incurable
disease healed by its beneficent influence. God bless our dear Leader!
She has set before us an open door, which no man can shut, and it is but
a question of time when the world will know her better and love her
more.--E. E. N., Washington, D. C.

HEALED OF BRIGHT'S DISEASE

August 18, 1902, I was taken down with what three doctors pronounced
Bright's disease, and they stated

<span id="pg_696">p. 696</span>

that I would not live a year, or if I did succeed in living longer, I
would be mentally unbalanced. On December 6, 1902, my wife presented me
with Science and Health as a birthday gift, and it was indeed the best
present I ever received. Since that time I have been reading it and
attending the Second Church here. I have not used any medicine since,
nor has any one in our home. I am in the finest of health and have lost
all my bad habits. This truth has brought a great spiritual uplifting to
all of us, and words cannot express my gratitude to Mrs. Eddy and to all
who have helped me to the same.--T. V., Chicago, Ill.

FIBROID TUMOR DESTROYED

When quite young I was impressed that the Bible was not properly
interpreted by the preachers, for I could not conceive of a God of wrath
who was unjust enough to allow His little ones to suffer pain, misery,
and death. I had hope, however, that some day the truth would be
revealed to an awakening world, but little did I dream that even then
there was one of God's noble women who reflected sufficient purity and
holiness to entertain the "angel of his presence," and commune with the
true God.

I was believed to be predisposed to scrofula, so that I was not a strong
or attractive child, and my girlhood and womanhood were scarcely ever
free from dread of the laws of matter and lack of strength. The climax
was reached when a physician informed me, after weeks of treatment, that
I had a fibroid tumor, which required an operation. The conditions were
most trying and I

<span id="pg_697">p. 697</span>

was heartsick and discouraged when, in January, 1893, I heard of
Christian Science through a letter from a dear sister who had been
greatly benefited thereby, and I resolved to go at once to a
practitioner, for I believed it to be the long-lost truth that would
make me free. It meant a great effort and sacrifice for me to go to
Chicago at that time, but divine Love opened the way and I reached there
in March. I had been in my sister's home but a few days, reading Science
and Health almost constantly, when I asked her if I had not better have
treatment for the tumor, which had given me so much trouble. She said to
me, "You feel well, do you not?" I assured her that I never had felt so
well as I had since reaching there. "Well," she said with decision,
"your tumor is gone, for God never made it," and her statements were
true, for it has never been heard of from that day. Since then I have
been healed of chronic sore throat, hay fever, and other troubles, and I
know that Christian Science is the truth.--B. W. S., Coldwater, Mich.

LIGHT OUT OF DARKNESS

I have received so much benefit from the testimonies in the Sentinel and
Journal that I send mine, hoping it may cheer some struggling heart. I
was reared by kind and loving Christian parents and was a member of an
orthodox church for over twenty years, but I was never satisfied. I was
filled with fear and bound down by the false gods of this world,--sin,
disease, and poverty; consequently every way I turned, and in everything
I attempted to do, I was met with disappointment and failure; but God
was leading me into a different life.

<span id="pg_698">p. 698</span>

My interest was first awakened to Christian Science about thirteen years
ago, and I have been a willing disciple ever since. Through the reading
of Science and Health I was healed of chronic catarrh and laryngitis,
and it also enabled me to lay off my glasses. Christian Science has not
only helped me mentally, morally, and physically, but the greatest
blessing of all is the spiritual uplifting which enabled me to know that
God is both able and willing to care for His children, if we are but
willing to do our part and bear the cross which, though it seems heavy
at times, always brings a sure reward. Christian Science has not only
helped me, but it has enabled me to help others.

The Bible is a new book to me. I now see what Jesus meant when he said,
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest."

My heart goes out in gratitude to Mrs. Eddy for the work she has done
and is still doing for the world, and to God I am most grateful that He
has guided me into the truth, that I may have life, and have it more
abundantly.--Mrs. M. M., Chicago, Ill.

A PRICELESS BOON

I have long desired to express my gratitude for what Christian Science
has done, through reading Science and Health, for me and my family. I
was healed of profanity, the tobacco habit, and a bad temper, through
the understanding that man is the image and likeness of God. I was also
healed of kidney disease and rheumatism. What surprised me most,
however, was this; I had had one finger thrown out of place some fifteen
years

<span id="pg_699">p. 699</span>

before. It was crooked, but it became straight and useful. A bone in my
foot had also been broken, leaving a bunch, which disappeared after I
studied Christian Science and received class instruction. I am an
entirely well man and for this I am very grateful. I am also glad that I
have learned enough of Truth and Love to be able to heal others. I wish
to express my thankful appreciation of our Leader, also of the Sentinel
and the Journal.--N. R. F., Salina, Kans.

HEALED OF CONSUMPTION AND ASTHMA

It is a pleasure to acknowledge the great benefits which have come to me
through Christian Science. It is nearly ten years since I began the
investigation of the subject by borrowing a copy of Science and Health.
I had become a hopeless sufferer from asthma,--the disease being so
aggravated at times as to make breathing almost impossible. I was also a
victim of that dread disease, consumption. It was hereditary, nearly all
my family on both sides having passed away with it. I took up Christian
Science very much as a drowning man catches at a straw. However, I was
much interested as soon as I began to understand it, and having read the
book nearly all my waking hours for a few weeks, I became so much better
and so convinced of its truth, that myself and wife destroyed all the
medicines in the home, and have never since used any remedy except
Christian Science. I continued to study and to put into practice the
teaching as best I knew, and was restored to health in a few months.

Prior to my investigation of Christian Science I had been from boyhood
an outspoken infidel, had read that

<span id="pg_700">p. 700</span>

class of literature extensively, and had no desire for anything of a
religious nature,--the orthodox teaching never having appealed to me as
a rational exposition of an all-wise God. I now have no more doubt of
the truth of the teaching of the great Way-shower, Jesus of Nazareth,
than I doubt the correctness of the basic law of mathematics or music. I
have no doubt whatever that Christian Science saved me from the grave,
and thus proved a most practicable and efficient help in time of
greatest need. However great my physical suffering has been, I can but
feel glad that through it the door of consciousness was opened to let in
the light of Truth. Thus I have progressed a little way in the knowledge
of God, good, as revealed in Christian Science.--C. B., Webb City, Mo.

A GRATEFUL TESTIMONY

"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. "

This has been proven to me in every way. When Christian Science came to
me, I was a wreck, physically, mentally, and financially; but since the
reading of Science and Health turned my thought toward the light, I have
found that, as far as I am willing to receive the word and live it, all
comforts are supplied me. I am especially grateful for the spiritual
help. I know that things which I did and thought last year I would not
do or think this year, and am satisfied. Through the careful and
prayerful study of Science and Health I have been lifted from sickness
to health, from sorrow to peace, from lack to plenty, and, the most
beautiful of all, from darkness to light.--Mrs. H. S. C., Seattle, Wash.
