[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah10)  [Next](sah12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter XI - Some Objections Answered

<span id="pg_341">p. 341</span>

And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you
convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe
me?--JESUS.

But if the spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by His spirit that dwelleth in you.--PAUL.

THE strictures on this volume would condemn to oblivion the truth, which
is raising up thousands from helplessness to strength and elevating them
from a theoretical to a practical Christianity. These criticisms are
generally based on detached sentences or clauses separated from their
context. Even the Scriptures, which grow in beauty and consistency from
one grand root, appear contradictory when subjected to such usage. Jesus
said, "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God" \[Truth\].

Supported by facts

In Christian Science mere opinion is valueless. Proof is essential to a
due estimate of this subject. Sneers at the application of the word
Science to Christianity cannot prevent that from being scientific which
is based on divine Principle, demonstrated according to a divine given
rule, and subjected to proof. The facts are so absolute and numerous in
support of Christian Science, that misrepresentation and denuncia

<span id="pg_342 ">p. 342</span>

tion cannot overthrow it. Paul alludes to "doubtful disputations." The
hour has struck when proof and demonstration, instead of opinion and
dogma, are summoned to the support of Christianity, "making wise the
simple."

Commands of Jesus

In the result of some unqualified condemnations of scientific
Mind-healing, one may see with sorrow the sad effects on the sick of
denying Truth. He that decries this Science does it presumptuously, in
the face of Bible history and in defiance of the direct command of
Jesus, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel," to which
command was added the promise that his students should cast out evils
and heal the sick. He bade the seventy disciples, as well as the twelve,
heal the sick in any town where they should be hospitably received.

Christianity scientific

If Christianity is not scientific, and Science is not of God, then there
is no invariable law, and truth becomes an accident. Shall it be denied
that a system which works according to the Scriptures has Scriptural
authority?

Argument of good works

Christian Science awakens the sinner, reclaims the infidel, and raises
from the couch of pain the helpless invalid. It speaks to the dumb the
words of Truth, and they answer with rejoicing. It causes the deaf to
hear, the lame to walk, and the blind to see. Who would be the first to
disown the Christliness of good works, when our Master says, "By their
fruits ye shall know them"?

If Christian Scientists were teaching or practising pharmacy or
obstetrics according to the common theories, no denunciations would
follow them, even if their treatment resulted in the death of a patient.
The people

<span id="pg_343">p. 343</span>

are taught in such cases to say, Amen. Shall I then be smitten for
healing and for teaching Truth as the Principle of healing, and for
proving my word by my deed? James said: "Show me thy faith without thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works."

Personal experience

Is not finite mind ignorant of God's method? This makes it doubly unfair
to impugn and misrepresent the facts, although, without this
cross-bearing, one might not be able to say with the apostle, "None of
these things move me." The sick, the halt, and the blind look up to
Christian Science with blessings, and Truth will not be forever hidden
by unjust parody from the quickened sense of the people.

Proof from miracles

Jesus strips all disguise from error, when his teachings are fully
understood. By parable and argument he explains the impossibility of
good producing evil; and he also scientifically demonstrates this great
fact, proving by what are wrongly called miracles, that sin, sickness,
and death are beliefs - illusive errors which he could and did destroy.

It would sometimes seem as if truth were rejected because meekness and
spirituality are the conditions of its acceptance, while Christendom
generally demands so much less.

Example of the disciples

Anciently those apostles who were Jesus' students, as well as Paul who
was not one of his students, healed the sick and reformed the sinner by
their religion. Hence the mistake which allows words, rather than works,
to follow such examples! Whoever is the first meekly and conscientiously
to press along the line of gospel-healing, is often accounted a heretic.

<span id="pg_344 ">p. 344</span>

Strong position

It is objected to Christian Science that it claims God as the only
absolute Life and Soul, and man to be His idea,--that is, His image. It
should be added that this is claimed to represent the normal, healthful,
and sinless condition of man in divine Science, and that this claim is
made because the Scriptures say that God has created man in His own
image and after His likeness. Is it sacrilegious to assume that God's
likeness is not found in matter, sin, sickness, and death?

Efficacy may be attested

Were it more fully understood that Truth heals and that error causes
disease, the opponents of a demonstrable Science would perhaps
mercifully withhold their misrepresentations, which harm the sick; and
until the enemies of Christian Science test its efficacy according to
the rules which disclose its merits or demerits, it would be just to
observe the Scriptural precept, "Judge not."

The one divine method

There are various methods of treating disease, which are not included in
the commonly accepted systems; but there is only one which should be
presented to the whole world, and that is the Christian Science which
Jesus preached and practised and left to us as his rich legacy.

Why should one refuse to investigate this method of treating disease?
Why support the popular systems of medicine, when the physician may
perchance be an infidel and may lose ninety-and-nine patients, while
Christian Science cures its hundred? Is it because allopathy and
homoeopathy are more fashionable and less spiritual?

Omnipotence set forth

In the Bible the word Spirit is so commonly applied

<span id="pg_345">p. 345</span>

to Deity, that Spirit and God are often regarded as synonymous terms;
and it is thus they are uniformly used and understood in Christian
Science. As it is evident that the likeness of Spirit cannot be
material, does it not follow that God cannot be in His unlikeness and
work through drugs to heal the sick? When the omnipotence of God is
preached and His absoluteness is set forth, Christian sermons will heal
the sick.

Contradictions not found

It is sometimes said, in criticising Christian Science, that the mind
which contradicts itself neither knows itself nor what it is saying. It
is indeed no small matter to know one's self; but in this volume of mine
there are no contradictory statements,--at least none which are apparent
to those who understand its propositions well enough to pass judgment
upon them. One who understands Christian Science can heal the sick on
the divine Principle of Christian Science, and this practical proof is
the only feasible evidence that one does understand this Science.

Anybody, who is able to perceive the incongruity between God's idea and
poor humanity, ought to be able to discern the distinction (made by
Christian Science) between God's man, made in His image, and the sinning
race of Adam.

The apostle says: "For if a man think himself to be something, when he
is nothing, he deceiveth himself." This thought of human, material
nothingness, which Science inculcates, enrages the carnal mind and is
the main cause of the carnal mind's antagonism.

God's idea the ideal man

It is not the purpose of Christian Science to "educate the idea of God,
or treat it for disease," as is alleged

<span id="pg_346 ">p. 346</span>

by one critic. I regret that such criticism confounds man with Adam.
When man is spoken of as made in God's image, it is not sinful and
sickly mortal man who is referred to, but the ideal man, reflecting
God's likeness.

Nothingness of error

It is sometimes said that Christian Science teaches the nothingness of
sin, sickness, and death, and then teaches how this nothingness is to be
saved and healed. The nothingness of nothing is plain; but we need to
understand that error is nothing, and that its nothingness is not saved,
but must be demonstrated in order to prove the somethingness - yea, the
allness of Truth. It is self-evident that we are harmonious only as we
cease to manifest evil or the belief that we suffer from the sins of
others. Disbelief in error destroys error, and leads to the discernment
of Truth. There are no vacuums. How then can this demonstration be
"fraught with falsities painful to behold"?

Truth antidotes error

We treat error through the understanding of Truth, because Truth is
error's antidote. If a dream ceases, it is self-destroyed, and the
terror is over. When a sufferer is convinced that there is no reality in
his belief of pain,--because matter has no sensation, hence pain in
matter is a false belief,--how can he suffer longer? Do you feel the
pain of tooth-pulling, when you believe that nitrous-oxide gas has made
you unconscious? Yet, in your concept, the tooth, the operation, and the
forceps are unchanged.

Serving two masters

Material beliefs must be expelled to make room for spiritual
understanding. We cannot serve both God and mammon at the same time; but
is not this what frail mortals are trying to do? Paul says:

<span id="pg_347">p. 347</span>

"The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh." Who is ready to admit this?

It is said by one critic, that to verify this wonderful philosophy
Christian Science declares that whatever is mortal or discordant has no
origin, existence, nor realness. Nothing really has Life but God, who is
infinite Life; hence all is Life, and death has no dominion. This writer
infers that if anything needs to be doctored, it must be the one God, or
Mind. Had he stated his syllogism correctly, the conclusion would be
that there is nothing left to be doctored.

Essential element of Christianity

Critics should consider that the so-called mortal man is not the reality
of man. Then they would behold the signs of Christ's coming. Christ, as
the spiritual or true idea of God, comes now as of old, preaching the
gospel to the poor, healing the sick, and casting out evils. Is it error
which is restoring an essential element of Christianity, namely,
apostolic, divine healing? No; it is the Science of Christianity which
is restoring it, and is the light shining in darkness, which the
darkness comprehends not.

If Christian Science takes away the popular gods, sin, sickness, and
death, - it is Christ, Truth, who destroys these evils, and so proves
their nothingness.

The dream that matter and error are something must yield to reason and
revelation. Then mortals will behold the nothingness of sickness and
sin, and sin and sickness will disappear from consciousness. The
harmonious will appear real, and the inharmonious unreal. These critics
will then see that error is indeed the nothingness, which they chide us
for

<span id="pg_348 ">p. 348</span>

naming nothing and which we desire neither to honor nor to fear.

Medical theories virtually admit the nothingness of hallucinations, even
while treating them as disease; and who objects to this? Ought we not,
then, to approve any cure, which is effected by making the disease
appear to be--what it really is--an illusion?

All disease a delusion

Here is the difficulty: it is not generally understood how one disease
can be just as much a delusion as another. It is a pity that the medical
faculty and clergy have not learned this, for Jesus established this
foundational fact, when devils, delusions, were cast out and the dumb
spake.

Elimination of sickness

Are we irreverent towards sin, or imputing too much power to God, when
we ascribe to Him almighty Life and Love? I deny His cooperation with
evil, because I desire to have no faith in evil or in any power but God,
good. Is it not well to eliminate from so-called mortal mind that which,
so long as it remains in mortal mind, will show itself in forms of sin,
sickness, and death? Instead of tenaciously defending the supposed
rights of disease, while complaining of the suffering, disease brings,
would it not be well to abandon the defence, especially when by so doing
our own condition can be improved and that of other persons as well?

Full fruitage yet to come

I have never supposed the world would immediately witness the full
fruitage of Christian Science, or that sin, disease, and death would not
be believed for an indefinite time; but this I do aver, that, as a
result of teaching Christian Science, ethics and temperance have
received all impulse, health has been restored, and longevity increased.
If such are the pres

<span id="pg_349">p. 349</span>

ent fruits, what will the harvest be, when this Science is more
generally understood?

Law and gospel

As Paul asked of the unfaithful in ancient days, so the rabbis of the
present day ask concerning our healing and teaching, "Through breaking
the law, dishonorest thou God?" We have the gospel, however, and our
Master annulled material law by healing contrary to it. We propose to
follow the Master's example. We should subordinate material law to
spiritual law. Two essential points of Christian Science are, that
neither Life nor man dies, and that God is not the author of sickness.

Language inadequate

The chief difficulty in conveying the teachings of divine Science
accurately to human thought lies in this, that like all other languages,
English is inadequate to the expression of spiritual conceptions and
propositions, because one is obliged to use material terms in dealing
with spiritual ideas. The elucidation of Christian Science lies in its
spiritual sense, and this sense must be gained by its disciples in order
to grasp the meaning of this Science. Out of this condition grew the
prophecy concerning the Christian apostles, "They shall speak with new
tongues."

Speaking of the things of Spirit while dwelling on a material plane,
material terms must be generally employed. Mortal thought does not at
once catch the higher meaning, and can do so only as thought is educated
up to spiritual apprehension. To a certain extent this is equally true
of all learning, even that which is wholly material.

Substance spiritual

In Christian Science, substance is understood to be Spirit, while the
opponents of Christian Science believe

<span id="pg_350">p. 350</span>

substance to be matter. They think of matter as something and almost the
only thing, and of the things which pertain to Spirit as next to
nothing, or as very far removed from daily experience. Christian Science
takes exactly the opposite view.

Both words and works

To understand all our Master's sayings as recorded in the New Testament,
sayings infinitely important, his followers must grow into that stature
of manhood in Christ Jesus which enables them to interpret his spiritual
meaning. Then they know how Truth casts out error and heals the sick.
His words were the offspring of his deeds, both of which must be
understood. Unless the works are comprehended which his words explained,
the words are blind.

The Master often refused to explain his words, because it was difficult
in a material age to apprehend spiritual Truth. He said: "This people's
heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes
they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should
be converted, and I should heal them."

The divine life-link

"The Word was made flesh." Divine Truth must be known by its effects on
the body as well as on the mind, before the Science of being can be
demonstrated. Hence its embodiment in the incarnate Jesus,--that
life-link forming the connection through which the real reaches the
unreal, Soul rebukes sense, and Truth destroys error.

Truth a present help

In Jewish worship the Word was materially explained, and the spiritual
sense was scarcely perceived. The

<span id="pg_351">p. 351</span>

religion which sprang from half-hidden Israelitish history was pedantic
and void of healing power. When we lose faith in God's power to heal, we
distrust the divine Principle which demonstrates Christian Science, and
then we cannot heal the sick. Neither can we heal through the help of
Spirit, if we plant ourselves on a material basis.

The author became a member of the orthodox Congregational Church in
early years. Later she learned that her own prayers failed to heal her
as did the prayers of her devout parents and the church; but when the
spiritual sense of the creed was discerned in the Science of
Christianity, this spiritual sense was a present help. It was the
living, palpitating presence of Christ, Truth, which healed the sick.

Fatal premises

We cannot bring out the practical proof of Christianity, which Jesus
required, while error seems as potent and real to us as Truth, and while
we make a personal devil and an anthropomorphic God our
starting-points,--especially if we consider Satan as a being coequal in
power with Deity, if not superior to Him. Because such starting-points
are neither spiritual nor scientific, they cannot work out the
Spirit-rule of Christian healing, which proves the nothingness of error,
discord, by demonstrating the all-inclusiveness of harmonious Truth.

Fruitless worship

The Israelites centred their thoughts on the material in their attempted
worship of the spiritual. To them matter was substance, and Spirit was
shadow. They thought to worship Spirit from a material standpoint, but
this was impossible. They might appeal to Jehovah, but their prayer
brought down no

<span id="pg_352 ">p. 352</span>

proof that it was heard, because they did not sufficiently understand
God to be able to demonstrate His power to heal,--to make harmony the
reality and discord the unreality.

Spirit the tangible

Our Master declared that his material body was not spirit, evidently
considering it a mortal and material belief of flesh and bones, whereas
the Jews took a diametrically opposite view. To Jesus, not materiality,
but spirituality, was the reality of man's existence, while to the
rabbis the spiritual was the intangible and uncertain, if not the
unreal.

Ghosts not realities

Would a mother say to her child, who is frightened at imaginary ghosts
and sick in consequence of the fear: "I know that ghosts are real. They
exist, and are to be feared; but you must not be afraid of them"?

Children, like adults, ought to fear a reality which can harm them and
which they do not understand, for at any moment they may become its
helpless victims; but instead of increasing children's fears by
declaring ghosts to be real, merciless, and powerful, thus watering the
very roots of childish timidity, children should be assured that their
fears are groundless, that ghosts are not realities, but traditional
beliefs, erroneous and man-made.

In short, children should be told not to believe in ghosts, because
there are no such things. If belief in their reality is destroyed,
terror of ghosts will depart and health be restored. The objects of
alarm will then vanish into nothingness, no longer seeming worthy of
fear or honor. To accomplish a good result, it is certainly not
irrational to tell the truth about ghosts.

<span id="pg_353">p. 353</span>

The real and the unreal

The Christianly scientific real is the sensuous unreal. Sin, disease,
whatever seems real to material sense, is unreal in divine Science. The
physical senses and Science have ever been antagonistic, and they will
so continue, till the testimony of the physical senses yields entirely
to Christian Science. How can a Christian, having the stronger evidence
of Truth which contradicts the evidence of error, think of the latter as
real or true, either in the form of sickness or of sin? All must admit
that Christ is "the way, the truth, and the life," and that omnipotent
Truth certainly does destroy error.

Superstition obsolete

The age has not wholly outlived the sense of ghostly beliefs. It still
holds them more or less. Time has not yet reached eternity, immortality,
complete reality. All the real is eternal. Perfection underlies reality.
Without perfection, nothing is wholly real. All things will continue to
disappear, until per- fection appears and reality is reached. We must
give up the spectral at all points. We must not continue to admit the
somethingness of superstition, but we must yield up all belief in it and
be wise. When we learn that error is not real, we shall be ready for
progress, "forgetting those things which are behind."

The grave does not banish the ghost of materiality. So long as there are
supposed limits to Mind, and those limits are human, so long will ghosts
seem to continue. Mind is limitless. It never was material. The true
idea of being is spiritual and immortal, and from this it follows that
whatever is laid off is the ghost, some unreal belief. Mortal beliefs
can neither demonstrate Christianity nor apprehend the reality of Life.

<span id="pg_354">p. 354</span>

Christian warfare

Are the protests of Christian Science against the notion that there can
be material life, substance, or mind "utter falsities and absurdities,"
as some aver? Why then do Christians try to obey the Scriptures and war
against "the world, the flesh, and the devil"? Why do they invoke the
divine aid to enable them to leave all for Christ, Truth? Why do they
use this phraseology, and yet deny Christian Science, when it teaches
precisely this thought? The words of divine Science find their
immortality in deeds, for their Principle heals the sick and
spiritualizes humanity.

Healing omitted

On the other hand, the Christian opponents of Christian Science neither
give nor offer any proofs that their Master's religion can heal the
sick. Surely it is not enough to cleave to barren and desultory dogmas,
derived from the traditions of the elders who thereunto have set their
seals.

Scientific consistency

Consistency is seen in example more than in precept. Inconsistency is
shown by words without deeds, which are like clouds without rain. If our
words fail to express our deeds, God will redeem that weakness, and out
of the mouth of babes He will perfect praise. The night of materiality
is far spent, and with the dawn Truth will waken men spiritually to hear
and to speak the new tongue.

Sin should become unreal to every one. It is in itself inconsistent, a
divided kingdom. Its supposed realism has no divine authority, and I
rejoice in the apprehension of this grand verity.

Spiritual meaning

The opponents of divine Science must be charitable, if they would be
Christian. If the letter of Christian Science appears inconsistent, they
should

<span id="pg_355">p. 355</span>

gain the spiritual meaning of Christian Science, and then the ambiguity
will vanish.

Practical arguments

The charge of inconsistency in Christianly scientific methods of dealing
with sin and disease is met by something practical,--namely, the proof
of the utility of these methods; and proofs are better than mere verbal
arguments or prayers which evince no spiritual power to heal.

As for sin and disease, Christian Science says, in the language of the
Master, "Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead." Let discord of
every name and nature be heard no more, and let the harmonious and true
sense of Life and being take possession of human consciousness.

What is the relative value of the two conflicting theories regarding
Christian healing? One, according to the commands of our Master, heals
the sick. The other, popular religion, declines to admit that Christ's
religion has exercised any systematic healing power since the first
century.

Conditions of criticism

The statement that the teachings of Christian Science in this work are
"absolutely false, and the most egregious fallacies ever offered for
acceptance," is an opinion wholly due to a misapprehension both of the
divine Principle and practice of Christian Science and to a consequent
inability to demonstrate this Science. Without this understanding, no
one is capable of impartial or correct criticism, because demonstration
and spiritual understanding are God's immortal keynotes, proved to be
such by our Master and evidenced by the sick who are cured and by the
sinners who are reformed.

Weakness of material theories

Strangely enough, we ask for material theories in sup

<span id="pg_356 ">p. 356</span>

port of spiritual and eternal truths, when the two are so antagonistic
that the material thought must become spiritualized before the spiritual
fact is attained. So-called material existence affords no evidence
theories of spiritual existence and immortality. Sin, sickness, and
death do not prove man's entity or immortality. Discord can never
establish the facts of harmony. Matter is not the vestibule of Spirit.

Irreconciliable differences

Jesus reasoned on this subject practically, and controlled sickness,
sin, and death on the basis of his spirituality. Understanding the
nothingness of material things, he spoke of flesh and Spirit as the two
opposites, - as error and Truth, not contributing in any way to each
other's happiness and existence. Jesus knew, "It is the spirit that
quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing."

Copartnership impossible

There is neither a present nor an eternal copartnership between error
and Truth, between flesh and Spirit. God is as incapable of producing
sin, sickness, and death as He is of experiencing these errors. How then
is it possible for Him to create man subject to this triad of
errors,--man who is made in the divine likeness?

Does God create a material man out of Himself, Spirit? Does evil proceed
from good? Does divine Love commit a fraud on humanity by making man
inclined to sin, and then punishing him for it? Would any one call it
wise and good to create the primitive, and then punish its derivative?

Two infinite creators absurd

Does subsequent follow its antecedent? It does. Was there original
self-creative sin? Then there must have been more than one creator, more
than one God.

<span id="pg_357">p. 357</span>

In common justice, we must admit that God will not punish man for doing
what He created man capable of doing, and knew from the outset that man
would do. God is "of purer eyes than to behold evil." We sustain Truth,
not by accepting, but by rejecting a lie. Jesus said of personified
evil, that it was "a liar, and the father of it." Truth creates neither
a lie, a capacity to lie, nor a liar. If mankind would relinquish the
belief that God makes sickness, sin, and death, or makes man capable of
suffering on account of this malevolent triad, the foundations of error
would be sapped and error's destruction ensured; but if we theoretically
endow mortals with the creativeness and authority of Deity, how dare we
attempt to destroy what He hath made, or even to deny that God made man
evil and made evil good?

Anthropomorphism

History teaches that the popular and false notions about the Divine
Being and character have originated in the human mind. As there is in
reality but one God, one Mind, wrong notions about God must have
originated in a false supposition, not in immortal Truth, and they are
fading out. They are false claims, which will eventually disappear,
according to the vision of St. John in the Apocalypse.

One supremacy

If what opposes God is real, there must be two powers, and God is not
supreme and infinite. Can Deity be almighty, if another mighty and
self-creative cause exists and sways mankind? Has the Father "Life in
Himself," as the Scriptures say, and, if so, can Life, or God, dwell in
evil and create it? Can matter drive Life, Spirit, hence, and so defeat
omnipotence?

<span id="pg_358 ">p. 358</span>

Matter impotent

Is the woodman's axe, which destroys a tree's so-called life, superior
to omnipotence? Can a leaden bullet deprive a man of Life,--that is, of
God, who is man's Life? If God is at the mercy of matter, then matter is
omnipotent. Such doctrines are "confusion worse confounded." If two
statements directly contradict each other and one is true, the other
must be false. Is Science thus contradictory?

Scientific and Biblical facts

Christian Science, understood, coincides with the Scriptures, and
sustains logically and demonstratively every point it presents.
Otherwise it would not be Science, and could not present its proofs.
Christian Science is neither made up of contradictory aphorisms nor of
the inventions of those who scoff at God. It presents the calm and clear
verdict of Truth against error, uttered and illustrated by the prophets,
by Jesus, by his apostles, as is recorded throughout the Scriptures.

Why are the words of Jesus more frequently cited for our instruction
than are his remarkable works? Is it not because there are few who have
gained a true knowledge of the great import to Christianity of those
works?

Personal confidence

Sometimes it is said; "Rest assured that whatever effect Christian
Scientists may have on the sick, comes through rousing within the sick a
belief that in the removal of disease these healers have wonderful
power, derived from the Holy Ghost." Is it likely that church-members
have more faith in some Christian Scientist, whom they have perhaps
never seen and against whom they have been warned, than they have in
their own accredited and orthodox

<span id="pg_359">p. 359</span>

pastors, whom they have seen and have been taught to love and to trust?

Let any clergyman try to cure his friends by their faith in him. Will
that faith heal them? Yet Scientists will take the same cases, and cures
will follow. Is this because the patients have more faith in the
Scientist than in their pastor? I have healed infidels whose only
objection to this method was, that I as a Christian Scientist believed
in the Holy Spirit, while they, the patients, did not.

Even though you aver that the material senses are indispensable to man's
existence or entity, you must change the human concept of life, and must
at length know yourself spiritually and scientifically. The evidence of
the existence of Spirit, Soul, is palpable only to spiritual sense, and
is not apparent to the material senses, which cognize only that which is
the opposite of Spirit.

True Christianity is to be honored wherever found, but when shall we
arrive at the goal which that word implies? From Puritan parents, the
discoverer of Christian Science early received her religious education.
In childhood, she often listened with joy to these words, falling from
the lips of her saintly mother, "God is able to raise you up from
sickness;" and she pondered the meaning of that Scripture she so often
quotes: "And these signs shall follow them that believe; . . . they
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

Two different artists

A Christian Scientist and an opponent are like two artists. One says: "I
have spiritual ideals, indestructible and glorious. When others see them
as I do, in their true light and loveliness,--and

<span id="pg_360">p. 360</span>

know that these ideals are real and eternal because drawn from
Truth,--they will find that nothing is lost, and all is won, by a right
estimate of what is real."

The other artist replies: "You wrong my experience. I have no
mind-ideals except those which are both mental and material. It is true
that materiality renders these ideals imperfect and destructible; yet I
would not exchange mine for thine, for mine give me such personal
pleasure, and they are not so shockingly transcendental. They require
less self-abnegation, and keep Soul well out of sight. Moreover, I have
no notion of losing my old doctrines or human opinions."

Choose ye to-day

Dear reader, which mind-picture or externalized thought shall be real to
you,--the material or the spiritual? Both you cannot have. You are
bringing out your own ideal. This ideal is either temporal or eternal.
Either Spirit or matter is your model. If you try to have two models,
then you practically have none. Like a pendulum in a clock, you will be
thrown back and forth, striking the ribs of matter and swinging between
the real and the unreal.

Hear the wisdom of Job, as given in the excellent translation of the
late Rev. George R. Noyes, D.D.:

   Shall mortal man be more just than God?  
   Shall man be more pure than his Maker?  
   Behold, He putteth no trust in His ministering spirits,  
   And His angels He chargeth with frailty.  

Of old, the Jews put to death the Galilean Prophet, the best Christian
on earth, for the truth he spoke and demonstrated, while to-day, Jew and
Christian can unite in doctrine and denomination on the very basis of
Jesus' words and works. The Jew believes that the Messiah or

<span id="pg_361">p. 361</span>

Christ has not yet come; the Christian believes that Christ is God. Here
Christian Science intervenes, explains these doctrinal points, cancels
the disagreement, and settles the question. Christ, as the true
spiritual idea, is the ideal of God now and forever, here and
everywhere. The Jew who believes in the First Commandment is a
monotheist; he has one omnipresent God. Thus the Jew unites with the
Christian's doctrine that God is come and is present now and forever.
The Christian who believes in the First Commandment is a monotheist.
This he virtually unites with the Jew's belief in one God, and
recognizes that Jesus Christ is not God, as Jesus himself declared, but
is the Son of God. This declaration of Jesus, understood, conflicts not
at all with another of his sayings: "I and my Father are one,"--that is,
one in quality, not in quantity. As a drop of water is one with the
ocean, a ray of light one with the, sun, even so God and man, Father and
son, are one in being. The Scripture reads: "For in Him we live, and
move, and have our being."

I have revised Science and Health only to give a clearer and fuller
expression of its original meaning. Spiritual ideas unfold as we
advance. A human perception of divine Science, however limited, must be
correct in order to be Science and subject to demonstration. A germ of
infinite Truth, though least in the kingdom of heaven is the higher hope
on earth, but it will be rejected and reviled until God prepares the
soil for the seed. That which when sown bears immortal fruit, enriches
mankind only when it is understood,--hence the many readings given the
Scriptures, and the requisite revisions of Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII - Christian Science Practice](sah12) 
