[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sah11)  [Next](sah13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter XII - Christian Science Practice

<span id="pg_362">p. 362</span>

Why art thou cast down, O my soul \[sense\]? And why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, Who is the
health of my countenance and my God.--PSALMS.

And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they
cast out devils: they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.--JESUS.

A gospel narrative

IT is related in the seventh chapter of Luke's Gospel that Jesus was
once the honored guest of a certain Pharisee, by name Simon, though he
was quite unlike Simon the disciple. While they were at meat, an unusual
incident occurred, as if to interrupt the scene of Oriental festivity. A
"strange woman" came in. Heedless of the fact that she was debarred from
such a place and such society, especially under the stern rules of
rabbinical law, as positively as if she were a Hindoo pariah intruding
upon the household of a high-caste Brahman, this woman (Mary Magdalene,
as she has since been called) approached Jesus. According to the custom
of those days, he reclined on a couch with his head towards the table
and his bare feet away from it. It was therefore easy for the Magdalen
to come behind

<span id="pg_363">p. 363</span>

the couch and reach his feet. She bore an alabaster jar containing
costly and fragrant oil,--sandal oil perhaps, which is in such common
use in the East. Breaking the sealed jar, she perfumed Jesus' feet with
the oil, wiping them with her long hair, which hung loosely about her
shoulders, as was customary with women of her grade.

Parable of the creditor

Did Jesus spurn the woman? Did he repel her adoration? No! He regarded
her compassionately. Nor was this all. Knowing what those around him
were saying in their hearts, especially his host, - that they were
wondering why, being a prophet, the exalted guest did not at once detect
the woman's immoral status and bid her depart,--knowing this, Jesus
rebuked them with a short story or parable. He described two debtors,
one for a large sum and one for a smaller, who were released from their
obligations by their common creditor. "Which of them will love him
most?" was the Master's question to Simon the Pharisee; and Simon
replied, "He to whom he forgave most." Jesus approved the answer, and so
brought home the lesson to all, following it with that remarkable
declaration to the woman, "Thy sins are forgiven."

Divine insight

Why did he thus summarize her debt to divine Love? Had she repented and
reformed, and did his insight detect this unspoken moral uprising? She
bathed his feet with her tears before she anointed them with the oil. In
the absence of other proofs, was her grief sufficient evidence to
warrant the expectation of her repentance, reformation, and growth in
wisdom? Certainly there was encouragement in the mere fact that she was
showing her affection for a man

<span id="pg_364">p. 364</span>

of undoubted goodness and purity, who has since been rightfully regarded
as the best man that ever trod this planet. Her reverence was unfeigned,
and it was manifested towards one who was soon, though they knew it not,
to lay down his mortal existence in behalf of all sinners, that through
his word and works they might be redeemed from sensuality and sin.

Penitence or hospitality

Which was the higher tribute to such ineffable affection, the
hospitality of the Pharisee or the contrition of the Magdalen? This
query Jesus answered by rebuking self-righteousness and declaring the
absolution of the penitent. He even said that this poor woman had done
what his rich entertainer had neglected to do,--wash and anoint his
guest's feet, a special sign of Oriental courtesy.

Here is suggested a solemn question, a question indicated by one of the
needs of this age. Do Christian Scientists seek Truth as Simon sought
the Saviour, through material conservatism and for personal homage?
Jesus told Simon that such seekers as he gave small reward in return for
the spiritual purgation which came through the Messiah. If Christian
Scientists are like Simon, then it must be said of them also that they
love little.

Genuine repentance

On the other hand, do they show their regard for Truth, or Christ, by
their genuine repentance, by their broken hearts, expressed by meekness
and human affection, as did this woman? If so, then it may be said of
them, as Jesus said of the unwelcome visitor, that they indeed love
much, because much is forgiven them.

Compassion requisite

Did the careless doctor, the nurse, the cook, and the

<span id="pg_365">p. 365</span>

brusque business visitor sympathetically know the thorns they plant in
the pillow of the sick and the heavenly homesick looking away from
earth,--Oh, did they know!--this knowledge would do much more towards
healing the sick and preparing their helpers for the "midnight call,"
than all cries of "Lord, Lord!" The benign thought of Jesus, finding
utterance in such words as "Take no thought for your life," would heal
the sick, and so enable them to rise above the supposed necessity for
physical thought-taking and doctoring; but if the unselfish affections
be lacking, and common sense and common humanity are disregarded, what
mental quality remains, with which to evoke healing from the
outstretched arm of righteousness?

Speedy healing

If the Scientist reaches his patient through divine Love, the healing
work will be accomplished at one visit, and the disease will vanish into
its native nothingness like dew before the morning sunshine. If the
Scientist has enough Christly affection to win his own pardon, and such
commendation as the Magdalen gained from Jesus, then he is Christian
enough to practise scientifically and deal with his patients
compassionately; and the result will correspond with the spiritual
intent.

Truth desecrated

If hypocrisy, stolidity, inhumanity, or vice finds its way into the
chambers of disease through the would-be healer, it would, if it were
possible, convert into a den of thieves the temple of the Holy Ghost, -
the patient's spiritual power to resuscitate himself. The unchristian
practitioner is not giving to mind or body the joy and strength of
Truth. The poor suffering heart needs its rightful nutriment, such as
peace,

<span id="pg_366">p. 366</span>

patience in tribulation, and a priceless sense of the dear Father's
loving-kindness.

Moral evils to be cast out

In order to cure his patient, the metaphysician must first cast moral
evils out of himself and thus attain the spiritual freedom which will
enable him to cast physical evils out of his patient; but heal he
cannot, while his own spiritual barrenness debars him from giving drink
to the thirsty and hinders him from reaching his patient's thought, yea,
while mental penury chills his faith and understanding.

The true physician

The physician who lacks sympathy for his fellowbeing is deficient in
human affection, and we have the apostolic warrant for asking: "He that
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he
hath not seen?" Not having this spiritual affection, the physician lacks
faith in the divine Mind and has not that recognition of infinite Love
which alone confers the healing power. Such so-called Scientists will
strain out gnats, while they swallow the camels of bigoted pedantry.

Source of calmness

The physician must also watch, lest he be overwhelmed by a sense of the
odiousness of sin and by the unveiling of sin in his own thoughts. The
sick are terrified by their sick beliefs, and sinners should be
affrighted by their sinful beliefs; but the Christian Scientist will be
calm in the presence of both sin and disease, knowing, as he does, that
Life is God and God is All.

Genuine healing

If we would open their prison doors for the sick, we must first learn to
bind up the broken-hearted. If we would heal by the Spirit, we must not
hide the talent

<span id="pg_367">p. 367</span>

of spiritual healing under the napkin of its form, nor bury the morale
of Christian Science in the grave-clothes of its letter. The tender word
and Christian encouragement of an invalid, pitiful patience with his
fears and the removal of them, are better than hecatombs of gushing
theories, stereotyped borrowed speeches, and the doling of arguments,
which are but so many parodies on legitimate Christian Science, aflame
with divine Love.

Gratitude and humility

This is what is meant by seeking Truth, Christ, not "for the loaves and
fishes," nor, like the Pharisee, with the arrogance of rank and display
of scholarship, but like Mary Magdalene, from the summit of devout
consecration, with the oil of gladness and the perfume of gratitude,
with tears of repentance and with those hairs all numbered by the
Father.

The salt of the earth

A Christian Scientist occupies the place at this period of which Jesus
spoke to his disciples, when he said: "Ye are the salt of the earth."
"Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be
hid." Let us watch, work, and pray that this salt lose not its saltness,
and that this light be not hid, but radiate and glow into noontide
glory.

The infinite Truth of the Christ-cure has come to this age through a
"still, small voice," through silent utterances and divine anointing
which quicken and increase the beneficial effects of Christianity. I
long to see the consummation of my hope, namely, the student's higher
attainments in this line of light.

Real and counterfeit

Because Truth is infinite, error should be known as nothing. Because
Truth is omnipotent in goodness, error, Truth's opposite, has no might.
Evil is but the

<span id="pg_368 ">p. 368</span>

counterpoise of nothingness. The greatest wrong is but a supposititious
opposite of the highest right. The confidence inspired by Science lies
in the fact that Truth is real and error is unreal. Error is a coward
before Truth. Divine Science insists that time will prove all this. Both
truth and error have come nearer than ever before to the apprehension of
mortals, and truth will become still clearer as error is selfdestroyed.

Results of faith in Truth

Against the fatal beliefs that error is as real as Truth, that evil is
equal in power to good if not superior, and that discord is as normal as
harmony, even the hope of freedom from the bondage of sickness and sin
has little inspiration to nerve endeavor. When we come to have more
faith in the truth of being than we have in error, more faith in Spirit
than in matter, more faith in living than in dying, more faith in God
than in man, then no material suppositions can prevent us from healing
the sick and destroying error.

Life independent of matter

That Life is not contingent on bodily conditions is proved, when we
learn that life and man survive this body. Neither evil, disease, nor
death can be spiritual, and the material belief in them disappears in
the ratio of one's spiritual growth. Because matter has no consciousness
or Ego, it cannot act; its conditions are illusions, and these false
conditions are the source of all seeming sickness. Admit the existence
of matter, and you admit that mortality (and therefore disease) has a
foundation in fact. Deny the existence of matter, and you can destroy
the belief in material conditions. When fear disappears, the foundation
of disease is gone. Once let the mental physician believe in the

<span id="pg_369">p. 369</span>

reality of matter, and he is liable to admit also the reality of all
discordant conditions, and this hinders his destroying them. Thus he is
unfitted for the successful treatment of disease.

Man's entity

In proportion as matter loses to human sense all entity as man, in that
proportion does man become its master. He enters into a diviner sense of
the facts, and comprehends the theology of Jesus as demonstrated in
healing the sick, raising the dead, and walking over the wave. All these
deeds manifested Jesus' control over the belief that matter is
substance, that it can be the arbiter of life or the constructor of any
form of existence.

The Christ treatment

We never read that Luke or Paul made a reality of disease in order to
discover some means of healing it. Jesus never asked if disease were
acute or chronic, and he never recommended attention to laws of health,
never give drugs, never prayed to know if God were willing that a man
should live. He understood man, whose life is God, to be immortal, and
knew that man has not two lives, one to be destroyed and the other to be
made indestructible.

Matter not medicine

The prophylactic and therapeutic (that is, the preventive and curative)
arts belong emphatically to Christian Science, as would be readily seen,
if psychology, or the Science of Spirit, God, was understood.
Unscientific methods are finding their dead level. Limited to matter by
their own law, what have they of the advantages of Mind and immortality?

No healing in sin

No man is physically healed in wilful error or by it, any more than he
is morally saved in or by sin. It is error even to murmur or to be angry
over sin. To be

<span id="pg_370">p. 370</span>

every whit whole, man must be better spiritually as well as physically.
To be immortal, we must forsake the mortal sense of things, turn from
the lie of false belief to Truth, and gather the facts of being from the
divine Mind. The body improves under the same regimen which
spiritualizes the thought; and if health is not made manifest under this
regimen, this proves that fear is governing the body. This is the law of
cause and effect, or like producing like.

Like curing like

Homoeopathy furnishes the evidence to the senses, that symptoms, which
might be produced by a certain drug, are removed by using the same drug
which might cause the symptoms. This confirms my theory that faith in
the drug is the sole factor in the cure. The effect, which mortal mind
produces through one belief, it removes through an opposite belief, but
it uses the same medicine in both cases.

The moral and spiritual facts of health, whispered into thought, produce
very direct and marked effects on the body. A physical diagnosis of
disease - since mortal mind must be the cause of disease--tends to
induce disease.

Transient potency of drugs

According to both medical testimony and individual experience, a drug
may eventually lose its supposed power and do no more for the patient.
Hygienic treatment also loses its efficacy. Quackery likewise fails at
length to inspire the credulity of the sick, and then they cease to
improve. These lessons are useful. They should naturally and genuinely
change our basis from sensation to Christian Science, from error to
Truth, from matter to Spirit.

Diagnosis of matter

Physicians examine the pulse, tongue, lungs, to dis

<span id="pg_371">p. 371</span>

cover the condition of matter, when in fact all is Mind. The body is the
substratum of mortal mind, and this so-called mind must finally yield to
the mandate of immortal Mind.

Ghost-stories inducing fear

Disquisitions on disease have a mental effect similar to that produced
on children by telling ghost-stories in the dark. By those uninstructed
in Christian Science, nothing is really understood of material
existence. Mortals are believed to be here without their consent and to
be removed as involuntarily, not knowing why nor when. As frightened
children look everywhere for the imaginary ghost, so sick humanity sees
danger in every direction, and looks for relief in all ways except the
right one. Darkness induces fear. The adult, in bondage to his beliefs,
no more comprehends his real being than does the child; and the adult
must be taken out of his darkness, before he can get rid of the illusive
sufferings which throng the gloaming. The way in divine Science is the
only way out of this condition.

Mind imparts purity, health, and beauty

I would not transform the infant at once into a man, nor would I keep
the suckling a lifelong babe. No impossible thing do I ask when urging
the claims of Christian Science; but because this teaching is in advance
of the age, we should not deny our need of its spiritual unfoldment.
Mankind will improve through Science and Christianity. The necessity for
uplifting the race is father to the fact that Mind can do it; for Mind
can impart purity instead of impurity, strength instead of weakness, and
health instead of disease. Truth is an alterative in the entire system,
and can make it "every whit whole."

<span id="pg_372 ">p. 372</span>

Brain not intelligent

Remember, brain is not mind. Matter cannot be sick, and Mind is
immortal. The mortal body is only an erroneous mortal belief of mind in
matter. What you call matter was originally error in solution,
elementary mortal mind,--likened by Milton to "chaos and old night." One
theory about this mortal mind is, that its sensations can reproduce man,
can form blood, flesh, and bones. The Science of being, in which all is
divine Mind, or God and His idea, would be clearer in this age, but for
the belief that matter is the medium of man, or that man can enter his
own embodied thought, bind himself with his own beliefs, and then call
his bonds material and name them divine law.

Veritable success

When man demonstrates Christian Science absolutely, he will be perfect.
He can neither sin, suffer, be subject to matter, nor disobey the law of
God. Therefore he will be as the angels in heaven. Christian Science and
Christianity are one. How, then, in Christianity any more than in
Christian Science, can we believe in the reality and power of both Truth
and error, Spirit and matter, and hope to succeed with contraries?
Matter is not self-sustaining. Its false supports fail one after
another. Matter succeeds for a period only by falsely parading in the
vestments of law.

Recognition of benefits

"Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in heaven." In Christian Science, a denial of Truth is
fatal, while a just acknowledgment of Truth and of what it has done for
us is an effectual help. If pride, superstition, or any error prevents
the honest recognition of benefits received, this will be a hindrance to
the recovery of the sick and the success of the student.

<span id="pg_373">p. 373</span>

Disease far more docile than iniquity

If we are Christians on all moral questions, but are in darkness as to
the physical exemption which Christianity includes, then we must have
more faith in God on this subject and be more alive to His promises. It
is easier to cure the most malignant disease than it is to cure sin. The
author has raised up the dying, partly because they were willing to be
restored, while she has struggled long, and perhaps in vain, to lift a
student out of a chronic sin. Under all modes of pathological treatment,
the sick recover more rapidly from disease than does the sinner from his
sin. Healing is easier than teaching, if the teaching is faithfully
done.

Love frees from fear

The fear of disease and the love of sin are the sources of man's
enslavement. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom," but the
Scriptures also declare, through the exalted thought of John, that
"perfect Love casteth out fear."

The fear occasioned by ignorance can be cured; but to remove the effects
of fear produced by sin, you must rise above both fear and sin. Disease
is expressed not so much by the lips as in the functions of the body.
Establish the scientific sense of health, and you relieve the oppressed
organ. The inflammation, decomposition, or deposit will abate, and the
disabled organ will resume its healthy functions.

Mind circulates blood

When the blood rushes madly through the veins or languidly creeps along
its frozen channels, we call these conditions disease. This is a
misconception. Mortal mind is producing the propulsion or the languor,
and we prove this to be so when by mental means the circulation is
changed, and returns to that standard

<span id="pg_374">p. 374</span>

which mortal mind has decided upon as essential for health. Anodynes,
counter-irritants, and depletion never reduce inflammation
scientifically, but the truth of being, whispered into the ear of mortal
mind, will bring relief.

Mind can destroy all ills

Hatred and its effects on the body are removed by Love. Because mortal
mind seems to be conscious, the sick say: "How can my mind cause a
disease I never thought of and knew nothing about, until it appeared on
my body?" The author has answered this question in her explanation of
disease as originating in human belief before it is consciously apparent
on the body, which is in fact the objective state of mortal mind, though
it is called matter. This mortal blindness and its sharp consequences
show our need of divine metaphysics. Through immortal Mind, or Truth, we
can destroy all ills which proceed from mortal mind.

Ignorance of the cause or approach of disease is no argument against the
mental origin of disease. You confess to ignorance of the future and
incapacity to preserve your own existence, and this belief helps rather
than hinders disease. Such a state of mind induces sickness. It is like
walking in darkness on the edge of a precipice. You cannot forget the
belief of danger, and your steps are less firm because of your fear, and
ignorance of mental cause and effect.

Temperature is mental

Heat and cold are products of mortal mind. The body, when bereft of
mortal mind, at first cools, and afterwards it is resolved into its
primitive mortal elements. Nothing that lives ever dies, and vice versa.
Mortal mind produces animal heat, and then expels it through the
abandonment of a belief, or increases it to the point of
self-destruction. Hence it is

<span id="pg_375">p. 375</span>

mortal mind, not matter, which says, "I die." Heat would pass from the
body as painlessly as gas dissipates into the air when it evaporates but
for the belief that inflammation and pain must accompany the separation
of heat from the body.

Science versus hypnotism

Chills and heat are often the form in which fever manifests itself.
Change the mental state, and the chills and fever disappear. The
old-school physician proves this when his patient says, " I am better,"
but the patient believes that matter, not mind, has helped him. The
Christian Scientist demonstrates that divine Mind heals, while the
hypnotist dispossesses the patient of his individuality in order to
control him. No person is benefited by yielding his mentality to any
mental despotism or malpractice. All unscientific mental practice is
erroneous and powerless, and should be understood and so rendered
fruitless. The genuine Christian Scientist is adding to his patient's
mental and moral power, and is increasing his patient's spirituality
while restoring him physically through divine Love.

Cure for palsy

Palsy is a belief that matter governs mortals, and can paralyze the
body, making certain portions of it motionless. Destroy the belief, show
mortal mind that muscles have no power to be lost, for Mind is supreme,
and you cure the palsy.

Latent fear diagnosed

Consumptive patients always show great hopefulness and courage, even
when they are supposed to be in hopeless danger. This state of mind
seems anomalous except to the expert in Christian Science. This mental
state is not understood, simply because it is a stage of fear so
excessive that it amounts to fortitude. The belief in consumption
presents to mor

<span id="pg_376">p. 376</span>

tal thought a hopeless state, an image more terrifying than that of most
other diseases. The patient turns involuntarily from the contemplation
of it, but though unacknowledged, the latent fear and the despair of
recovery remain in thought.

Insidious concepts

Just so is it with the greatest sin. It is the most subtle, and does its
work almost self-deceived. The diseases deemed dangerous sometimes come
from the most hidden, undefined, and insidious beliefs. The pallid
invalid, whom you declare to be wasting away with consumption of the
blood, should be told that blood never gave life and can never take it
away,--that Life is Spirit, and that there is more life and immortality
in one good motive and act, than in all the blood which ever flowed
through mortal veins and simulated a corporeal sense of life.

Remedy for fever

If the body is material, it cannot, for that very reason, suffer with a
fever. Because the so-called material body is a mental concept and
governed by mortal mind, it manifests only what that so-called mind
expresses. Therefore the efficient remedy is to destroy the patient's
false belief by both silently and audibly arguing the true facts in
regard to harmonious being,--representing man as healthy instead of
diseased, and showing that it is impossible for matter to suffer, to
feel pain or heat, to be thirsty or sick. Destroy fear, and you end
fever. Some people, mistaught as to Mindscience, inquire when it will be
safe to check a fever. Know that in Science you cannot check a fever
after admitting that it must have its course. To fear and admit the
power of disease, is to paralyze mental and scientific demonstration.

<span id="pg_377">p. 377</span>

If your patient believes in taking cold, mentally convince him that
matter cannot take cold, and that thought governs this liability. If
grief causes suffering, convince the sufferer that affliction is often
the source of joy, and that he should rejoice always in ever-present
Love.

Climate harmless

Invalids flee to tropical climates in order to save their lives, but
they come back no better than when they went away. Then is the time to
cure them through Christian Science, and prove that they can be healthy
in all climates, when their fear of climate is exterminated.

Mind governs body

Through different states of mind, the body becomes suddenly weak or
abnormally strong, showing mortal mind to be the producer of strength or
weakness. A sudden joy or grief has caused what is termed instantaneous
death. Because a belief originates unseen, the mental state should be
continually watched that it may not produce blindly its bad effects. The
author never knew a patient who did not recover when the belief of the
disease had gone. Remove the leading error or governing fear of this
lower so-called mind, and you remove the cause of all disease as well as
the morbid or excited action of any organ. You also remove in this way
what are termed organic diseases as readily as functional difficulties.

The cause of all so-called disease is mental, a mortal fear, a mistaken
belief or conviction of the necessity and power of ill-health; also a
fear that Mind is helpless to defend the life of man and incompetent to
control it. Without this ignorant human belief, any circumstance is of
itself powerless to produce suffering. It is latent belief in disease,
as well as the fear of disease, which associates sick

<span id="pg_378">p. 378</span>

ness with certain circumstances and causes the two to appear conjoined,
even as poetry and music are reproduced in union by human memory.
Disease has no intelligence. Unwittingly you sentence yourself to
suffer. The understanding of this will enable you to commute this
self-sentence, and meet every circumstance with truth. Disease is less
than mind, and Mind can control it.

Latent power

Without the so-called human mind, there can be no inflammatory nor
torpid action of the system. Remove the error, and you destroy its
effects. By looking a tiger fearlessly in the eye, Sir Charles Napier
sent it cowering back into the jungle. An animal may infuriate another
by looking it in the eye, and both will fight for nothing. A man's gaze,
fastened fearlessly on a ferocious beast, often causes the beast to
retreat in terror. This latter occurrence represents the power of Truth
over error,--the might of intelligence exercised over mortal beliefs to
destroy them; whereas hypnotism and hygienic drilling and drugging,
adopted to cure matter, is represented by two material erroneous bases.

Disease powerless

Disease is not an intelligence to dispute the empire of Mind or to
dethrone Mind and take the government into its own hands. Sickness is
not a God-given, nor a self-constituted material power, which copes
astutely with Mind and finally conquers it. God never endowed matter
with power to disable Life or to chill harmony with a long and cold
night of discord. Such a power, without the divine permission, is
inconceivable; and if such a power could be divinely directed, it would
manifest less wisdom than we usually find displayed in human
governments.

<span id="pg_379">p. 379</span>

Jurisdiction of Mind

If disease can attack and control the body without the consent of
mortals, sin can do the same, for both are errors, announced as partners
in the beginning. The Christian Scientist finds only effects, where the
ordinary physician looks for causes. The real jurisdiction of the world
is in Mind, controlling every effect and recognizing all causation as
vested in divine Mind.

Power of imagination

A felon, on whom certain English students experimented, fancied himself
bleeding to death, and died because of that belief, when only a stream
of warm water was trickling over his arm. Had he known his sense of
bleeding was an illusion, he would have risen above the false belief.
Let the despairing invalid, inspecting the hue of her blood on a cambric
handkerchief, think of the experiment of those Oxford boys, who caused
the death of a man, when not a drop of his blood was shed. Then let her
learn the opposite statement of life as taught in Christian Science, and
she will understand that she is not dying on account of the state of her
blood, but is suffering from her belief that blood is destroying her
life. The so-called vital current does not affect the invalid's health,
but her belief produces the very results she dreads.

Fevers the effect of fear

Fevers are errors of various types. The quickened pulse, coated tongue,
febrile heat, dry skin, pain in the head and limbs, are pictures drawn
on the body by a mortal mind. The images, held in this disturbed mind,
frighten conscious thought. Unless the fever-picture, drawn by millions
of mortals and imaged on the body through the belief that mind is in
matter and discord is as real as harmony, is destroyed through

<span id="pg_380">p. 380</span>

Science, it may rest at length on some receptive thought, and become a
fever case, which ends in a belief called death, which belief must be
finally conquered by eternal Life. Truth is always the victor. Sickness
and sin fall by their own weight. Truth is the rock of ages, the
headstone of the corner, "but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder."

Misdirected contention

Contending for the evidence or indulging the demands of sin, disease, or
death, we virtually contend against the control of Mind over body, and
deny the power of Mind to heal. This false method is as though the
defendant should argue for the plaintiff in favor of a decision which
the defendant knows will be turned against himself.

Benefits of metaphysics

The physical effects of fear illustrate its illusion. Gazing at a
chained lion, crouched for a spring, should not terrify a man. The body
is affected only with the belief of disease produced by a so-called mind
ignorant of the truth which chains disease. Nothing but the power of
Truth can prevent the fear of error, and prove man's dominion over
error.

A higher discovery

Many years ago the author made a spiritual discovery, the scientific
evidence of which has accumulated to prove that the divine Mind produces
in man health, harmony, and immortality. Gradually this evidence will
gather momentum and clearness, until it reaches its culmination of
scientific statement and proof. Nothing is more disheartening than to
believe that there is a power opposite to God, or good, and that God
endows this opposing power with strength to be used against Himself,
against Life, health, harmony.

Ignorance of our rights

Every law of matter or the body, supposed to govern

<span id="pg_381">p. 381</span>

man, is rendered null and void by the law of Life, God. Ignorant of our
God-given rights, we submit to unjust decrees, and the bias of education
enforces this slavery. Be no more willing to suffer the illusion that
you are sick or that some disease is developing in the system, than you
are to yield to a sinful temptation on the ground that sin has its
necessities.

No laws of matter

When infringing some supposed law, you say that there is danger. This
fear is the danger and induces the physical effects. We cannot in
reality suffer from breaking anything except a moral or spiritual law.
The so-called laws of mortal belief are destroyed by the understanding
that Soul is immortal, and that mortal mind cannot legislate the times,
periods, and types of disease, with which mortals die. God is the
lawmaker, but He is not the author of barbarous codes. In infinite Life
and Love there is no sickness, sin, nor death, and the Scriptures
declare that we live, move, and have our being in the infinite God.

God-given dominion

Think less of the enactments of mortal mind, and you will sooner grasp
man's God-given dominion. You must understand your way out of human
theories relating to health, or you will never believe that you are
quite free from some ailment. The harmony and immortality of man will
never be reached without the understanding that Mind is not in matter.
Let us banish sickness as an outlaw, and abide by the rule of perpetual
harmony,--God's law. It is man's moral right to annul an unjust
sentence, a sentence never inflicted by divine authority.

Begin rightly

Christ Jesus overruled the error which would impose penalties for
transgressions of the physical laws of

<span id="pg_382">p. 382</span>

health; he annulled supposed laws of matter, opposed to the harmonies of
Spirit, lacking divine authority and having only human approval for
their sanction.

Hygiene excessive

If half the attention given to hygiene were given to the study of
Christian Science and to the spiritualization of thought, this alone
would usher in the milleninium. Constant bathing and rubbing to alter
the secretions or to remove unhealthy exhalations from the cuticle
receive a useful rebuke from Jesus' precept, "Take no thought . . . for
the body." We must beware of making clean merely the outside of the
platter.

Blissful ignorance

He, who is ignorant of what is termed hygienic law, is more receptive of
spiritual power and of faith in one God, than is the devotee of supposed
hygienic law, who comes to teach the so-called ignorant one. Must we not
then consider the so-called law of matter a canon "more honored in the
breach than the observance"? A patient thoroughly booked in medical
theories is more difficult to heal through Mind than one who is not.
This verifies the saying of our Master: "Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise enter therein."

One whom I rescued from seeming spiritual oblivion, in which the senses
had engulfed him, wrote to me: "I should have died, but for the glorious
Principle you teach, - supporting the power of Mind over the body and
showing me the nothingness of the so-called pleasures and pains of
sense. The treatises I had read and the medicines I had taken only
abandoned me to more hopeless suffering and despair. Adherence to
hygiene was useless. Mortal mind needed to be set right. The ailment was
not bodily,

<span id="pg_383">p. 383</span>

but mental, and I was cured when I learned my way in Christian Science."

A clean mind and body

We need a clean body and a clean mind,--a body rendered pure by Mind as
well as washed by water. One says: "I take good care of my body." To do
this, the pure and exalting influence of the divine Mind on the body is
requisite, and the Christian Scientist takes the best care of his body
when he leaves it most out of his thought, and, like the Apostle Paul,
is "willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with
the Lord."

A hint may be taken from the emigrant, whose filth does not affect his
happiness, because mind and body rest on the same basis. To the mind
equally gross, dirt gives no uneasiness. It is the native element of
such a mind, which is symbolized, and not chafed, by its surroundings;
but impurity and uncleanliness, which do not trouble the gross, could
not be borne by the refined. This shows that the mind must be clean to
keep the body in proper condition.

Beliefs illusive

The tobacco-user, eating or smoking poison for half a century, sometimes
tells you that the weed preserves his health, but does this make it so?
Does his assertion prove the use of tobacco to be a salubrious habit,
and man to be the better for it? Such instances only prove the illusive
physical effect of a false belief, confirming the Scriptural conclusion
concerning a man, "As he thinketh in his heart, so is he."

The movement-cure--pinching and pounding the poor body, to make it
sensibly well when it ought to be insensibly so--is another medical
mistake, resulting from the common notion that health depends on inert
matter

<span id="pg_384">p. 384</span>

instead of on Mind. Can matter, or what is termed matter, either feel or
act without mind?

Corporeal penalties

We should relieve our minds from the depressing thought that we have
transgressed a material law and must of necessity pay the penalty. Let
us reassure ourselves with the law of Love. God never punishes man for
doing right, for honest labor, or for deeds of kindness, though they
expose him to fatigue, cold, heat, contagion. If man seems to incur the
penalty through matter, this is but a belief of mortal mind, not an
enactment of wisdom, and man has only to enter his protest against this
belief in order to annul it. Through this action of thought and its
results upon the body, the student will prove to himself, by small
beginnings, the grand verities of Christian Science.

Not matter, but Mind

If exposure to a draught of air while in a state of perspiration is
followed by chills, dry cough, influenza, congestive symptoms in the
lungs, or hints of inflammatory rheumatism, your Mind-remedy is safe and
sure. If you are a Christian Scientist, such symptoms are not apt to
follow exposure; but if you believe in laws of matter and their fatal
effects when transgressed, you are not fit to conduct your own case or
to destroy the bad effects of your belief. When the fear subsides and
the conviction abides that you have broken no law, neither rheumatism,
consumption, nor any other disease will ever result from exposure to the
weather. In Science this is an established fact which all the evidence
before the senses can never overrule.

Benefit of philanthropy

Sickness, sin, and death must at length quail before the divine rights
of intelligence, and then the power of Mind over the entire functions
and organs of the

<span id="pg_385">p. 385</span>

human system will be acknowledged. It is proverbial that Florence
Nightingale and other philanthropists engaged in humane labors have been
able to undergo without sinking fatigues and exposures which ordinary
people could not endure. The explanation lies in the support which they
derived from the divine law, rising above the human. The spiritual
demand, quelling the material, supplies energy and endurance surpassing
all other aids, and forestalls the penalty which our beliefs would
attach to our best deeds. Let us remember that the eternal law of right,
though it can never annul the law which makes sin its own executioner,
exempts man from all penalties but those due for wrong-doing.

Honest toil has no penalty

Constant toil, deprivations, exposures, and all untoward conditions, if
without sin, can be experienced without suffering. Whatever it is your
duty to do, you can do without harm to yourself. If you sprain the
muscles or wound the flesh, your remedy is at hand. Mind decides whether
or not the flesh shall be discolored, painful, swollen, and inflamed.

Our sleep and food

You say that you have not slept well or have overeaten. You are a law
unto yourself. Saying this and believing it, you will suffer in
proportion to your belief and fear. Your sufferings are not the penalty
for having broken a law of matter, for it is a law of mortal mind which
you have disobeyed. You say or think, because you have partaken of salt
fish, that you must be thirsty, and you are thirsty accordingly, while
the opposite belief would produce the opposite result.

Doubtful evidence

Any supposed information, coming from the body or from inert matter as
if either were intelligent, is an illu

<span id="pg_386">p. 386</span>

sion of mortal mind,--one of its dreams. Realize that the evidence of
the senses is not to be accepted in the case of sickness, any more than
it is in the case of sin.

Climate and belief

Expose the body to certain temperatures, and belief says that you may
catch cold and have catarrh; but no such result occurs without mind to
demand it and produce it. So long as mortals declare that certain states
of the atmosphere produce catarrh, fever, rheumatism, or consumption,
those effects will follow,--not because of the climate, but on account
of the belief. The author has in too many instances healed disease
through the action of Truth on the minds of mortals, and the
corresponding effects of Truth on the body, not to know that this is so.

Erroneous despatch

A blundering despatch, mistakenly announcing the death of a friend,
occasions the same grief that the friend's real death would bring. You
think that your anguish is occasioned by your loss. Another despatch,
correcting the mistake, heals your grief, and you learn that your
suffering was merely the result of your belief. Thus it is with all
sorrow, sickness, and death. You will learn at length that there is no
cause for grief, and divine wisdom will then be understood. Error, not
Truth, produces all the suffering on earth.

Mourning causeless

If a Christian Scientist had said, while you were laboring under the
influence of the belief of grief, "Your sorrow is without cause," you
would not have understood him, although the correctness of the assertion
might afterwards be proved to you. So, when our friends pass from our
sight and we lament, that lamentation is needless and causeless. We
shall

<span id="pg_387">p. 387</span>

perceive this to be true when we grow into the understanding of Life,
and know that there is no death.

Mind heals brain-disease

Because mortal mind is kept active, must it pay the penalty in a
softened brain? Who dares to say that actual Mind can be overworked?
When we reach our limits of mental endurance, we conclude that
intellectual labor has been carried sufficiently far; but when we
realize that immortal Mind is ever active, and that spiritual energies
can neither wear out nor can so-called material law trespass upon
God-given powers and resources, we are able to rest in Truth, refreshed
by the assurances of immortality, opposed to mortality.

Right never punishable

Our thinkers do not die early because they faithfully perform the
natural functions of being. If printers and authors have the shortest
span of earthly existence, it is not because they occupy the most
important posts and perform the most vital functions in society. That
man does not pay the severest penalty who does the most good. By
adhering to the realities of eternal existence,--instead of reading
disquisitions on the inconsistent supposition that death comes in
obedience to the law of life, and that God punishes man for doing
good,--one cannot suffer as the result of any labor of love, but grows
stronger because of it. It is a law of socalled mortal mind, misnamed
matter, which causes all things discordant.

Christian history

The history of Christianity furnishes sublime proofs of the supporting
influence and protecting power bestowed on man by his heavenly Father,
omnipotent Mind, who gives man faith and understanding whereby to defend
himself, not only from temptation, but from bodily suffering.

<span id="pg_388">p. 388</span>

The Christian martyrs were prophets of Christian Science. Through the
uplifting and consecrating power of divine Truth, they obtained a
victory over the corporeal senses, a victory which Science alone can
explain. Stolidity, which is a resisting state of mortal mind, suffers
less, only because it knows less of material law.

The Apostle John testified to the divine basis of Christian Science,
when dire inflictions failed to destroy his body. Idolaters, believing
in more than one mind, had "gods many," and thought that they could kill
the body with matter, independently of mind.

Sustenance spiritual

Admit the common hypothesis that food is the nutriment of life, and the
follows the necessity for another admission in the opposite
direction,--that food has power to destroy Life, God, through a
deficiency or an excess, a quality or a quantity. This is a specimen of
the ambiguous nature of all material health-theories. They are
self-contradictory and self-destructive, constituting a "kingdom divided
against itself," which is "brought to desolation." If food was prepared
by Jesus for his disciples, it cannot destroy life.

God sustains man

The fact is, food does not affect the absolute Life of man, and this
becomes self-evident, when we learn that God is our Life. Because sin
and sickness are not qualities of Soul, or Life, we have hope in
immortality; but it would be foolish to venture beyond our present
understanding, foolish to stop eating until we gain perfection and a
clear comprehension of the living Spirit. In that perfect day of
understanding, we shall neither eat to live nor live to eat.

Diet and digestion

If mortals think that food disturbs the harmonious functions of mind and
body, either the food or this thought

<span id="pg_389">p. 389</span>

must be dispensed with, for the penalty is coupled with the belief.
Which shall it be? If this decision be left to Christian Science, it
will be given in behalf of the control of Mind over this belief and
every erroneous belief, or material condition. The less we know or think
about hygiene, the less we are predisposed to sickness. Recollect that
it is not the nerves, not matter, but mortal mind, which reports food as
undigested. Matter does not inform you of bodily derangements; it is
supposed to do so. This pseudo-mental testimony can be destroyed only by
the better results of Mind's opposite evidence.

Scripture rebukes

Our dietetic theories first admit that food sustains the life of man,
and then discuss the certainty that food can kill man. This false
reasoning is rebuked in Scripture by the metaphors about the fount and
stream, the tree and its fruit, and the kingdom divided against itself.
If God has, as prevalent theories maintain, instituted laws that food
shall support human life, He cannot annul these regulations by an
opposite law that food shall be inimical to existence.

Ancient confusion

Materialists contradict their own statements. Their belief in material
laws and in penalties for their infraction is the ancient error that
there is fraternity between pain and pleasure, good and evil, God and
Satan. This belief totters to its falling before the battle-axe of
Science.

A case of convulsions, produced by indigestion, came under my
observation. In her belief the woman had chronic liver-complaint, and
was then suffering from a complication of symptoms connected with this
belief. I cured her in a few minutes. One instant she spoke de

<span id="pg_390">p. 390</span>

spairingly of herself. The next minute she said, "My food is all
digested, and I should like something more to eat."

Ultimate harmony

We cannot deny that Life is self-sustained, and we should never deny the
everlasting harmony of Soul, simply because, to the mortal senses, there
is seeming discord. It is our ignorance of God, the divine Principle,
which produces apparent discord, and the right understanding of Him
restores harmony. Truth will at length compel us all to exchange the
pleasures and pains of sense for the joys of Soul.

Unnecessary prostration

When the first symptoms of disease appear, dispute the testimony of the
material senses with divine Science. Let your higher sense of justice
destroy the false process of mortal opinions which you name law, and
then you will not be confined to a sick-room nor laid upon a bed of
suffering in payment of the last farthing, the last penalty demanded by
error. "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way
with him." Suffer no claim of sin or of sickness to grow upon the
thought. Dismiss it with an abiding conviction that it is illegitimate,
because you know that God is no more the author of sickness than He is
of sin. You have no law of His to support the necessity either of sin or
sickness, but you have divine authority for denying that necessity and
healing the sick.

Treatment of disease

"Agree to disagree" with approaching symptoms of chronic or acute
disease, whether it is cancer, consumption, or smallpox. Meet the
incipient stages of disease with as powerful mental opposition as a
legislator would employ to defeat the passage of an inhuman law. Rise in
the conscious strength of the

<span id="pg_391">p. 391</span>

spirit of Truth to overthrow the plea of mortal mind, alias matter,
arrayed against the supremacy of Spirit. Blot out the images of mortal
thought and its beliefs in sickness and sin. Then, when thou art
delivered to the judgment of Truth, Christ, the judge will say, "Thou
art whole!"

Righteous rebellion

Instead of blind and calm submission to the incipient or advanced stages
of disease, rise in rebellion against them. Banish the belief that you
can possibly entertain a single intruding pain which cannot be ruled out
by the might of Mind, and in this way you can prevent the development of
pain in the body. No law of God hinders this result. It is error to
suffer for aught but your own sins. Christ, or Truth, will destroy all
other supposed suffering, and real suffering for your own sins will
cease in proportion as the sin ceases.

Contradict error

Justice is the moral signification of law. Injustice declares the
absence of law. When the body is supposed to say, "I am sick," never
plead guilty. Since matter cannot talk, it must be mortal mind which
speaks; therefore meet the intimation with a protest. If you say, "I am
sick," you plead guilty. Then your adversary will deliver you to the
judge (mortal mind), and the judge will sentence you. Disease has no
intelligence to declare itself something and announce its name. Mortal
mind alone sentences itself. Therefore make your own terms with
sickness, and be just to yourself and to others.

Sin to be overcome

Mentally contradict every complaint from the body, and rise to the true
consciousness of Life as Love,--as all that is pure, and bearing the
fruits of Spirit. Fear is the fountain of sickness,

<span id="pg_392">p. 392</span>

and you master fear and sin through divine Mind; hence it is through
divine Mind that you overcome disease. Only while fear or sin remains
can it bring forth death. To cure a bodily ailment, every broken moral
law should be taken into account and the error be rebuked. Fear, which
is an element of all disease, must be cast out to readjust the balance
for God. Casting out evil and fear enables truth to outweigh error. The
only course is to take antagonistic grounds against all that is opposed
to the health, holiness, and harmony of man, God's image.

Illusions about nerves

The physical affirmation of disease should always be met with the mental
negation. Whatever benefit is produced on the body, must be expressed
mentally, and thought should be held fast to this ideal. If you believe
in inflamed and weak nerves, you are liable to an attack from that
source. You will call it neuralgia, but we call it a belief. If you
think that consumption is hereditary in your family, you are liable to
the development of that thought in the form of what is termed pulmonary
disease, unless Science shows you otherwise. If you decide that climate
or atmosphere is unhealthy, it will be so to you. Your decisions will
master you, whichever direction they take.

Guarding the door

Reverse the case. Stand porter at the door of thought. Admitting only
such conclusions as you wish realized in bodily results, you will
control yourself harmoniously. When the condition is present which you
say induces disease, whether it be air, exercise, heredity, contagion,
or accident, then perform your office as porter and shut out these
unhealthy thoughts and fears. Exclude from mortal mind the offending
errors; then the body cannot suffer from them. The issues of pain or

<span id="pg_393">p. 393</span>

pleasure must come through mind, and like a watchman forsaking his post,
we admit the intruding belief, forgetting that through divine help we
can forbid this entrance.

The strength of Spirit

The body seems to be self-acting, only because mortal mind is ignorant
of itself, of its own actions, and of their results, - ignorant that the
predisposing, remote, and exciting cause of all bad effects is a law of
so-called mortal mind, not of matter. Mind is the master of the
corporeal senses, and can conquer sickness, sin, and death. Exercise
this God-given authority. Take possession of your body, and govern its
feeling and action. Rise in the strength of Spirit to resist all that is
unlike good. God has made man capable of this, and nothing can vitiate
the ability and power divinely bestowed on man.

No pain in matter

Be firm in your understanding that the divine Mind governs, and that in
Science man reflects God's government. Have no fear that matter can
ache, swell, and be inflamed as the result of a law of any kind, when it
is self-evident that matter can have no pain nor inflammation. Your body
would suffer no more from tension or wounds than the trunk of a tree
which you gash or the electric wire which you stretch, were it not for
mortal mind.

When Jesus declares that "the light of the body is the eye," he
certainly means that light depends upon Mind, not upon the complex
humors, lenses, muscles, the iris and pupil, constituting the visual
organism.

No real disease

Man is never sick, for Mind is not sick and matter cannot be. A false
belief is both the tempter and the tempted, the sin and the sinner, the
disease and its cause. It is well to be calm in sickness;

<span id="pg_394">p. 394</span>

to be hopeful is still better; but to understand that sickness is not
real and that Truth can destroy its seeming reality, is best of all, for
this understanding is the universal and perfect remedy.

Recuperation mental

By conceding power to discord, a large majority of doctors depress
mental energy, which is the only real recuperative power. Knowledge that
we can accomplish the good we hope for, stimulates the system to act in
the direction which Mind points out. The admission that any bodily
condition is beyond the control of Mind disarms man, prevents him from
helping himself, and enthrones matter through error. To those struggling
with sickness, such admissions are discouraging,--as much so as would be
the advice to a man who is down in the world, that he should not try to
rise above his difficulties.

Experience has proved to the author the fallacy of material systems in
general,--that their theories are sometimes pernicious, and that their
denials are better than their affirmations. Will you bid a man let evils
overcome him, assuring him that all misfortunes are from God, against
whom mortals should not contend? Will you tell the sick that their
condition is hopeless, unless it can be aided by a drug or climate? Are
material means the only refuge from fatal chances? Is there no divine
permission to conquer discord of every kind with harmony, with Truth and
Love?

Arguing wrongly

We should remember that Life is God, and that God is omnipotent. Not
understanding Christian Science, the sick usually have little faith in
it till they feel its beneficent influence. This shows that faith is not
the healer in such cases. The sick

<span id="pg_395">p. 395</span>

unconsciously argue for suffering, instead of against it. They admit its
reality, whereas they should deny it. They should plead in opposition to
the testimony of the deceitful senses, and maintain man's immortality
and eternal likeness to God.

Divine authority

Like the great Exemplar, the healer should speak to disease as one
having authority over it, leaving Soul to master the false evidences of
the corporeal senses and to assert its claims over mortality and
disease. The same Principle cures both sin and sickness. When divine
Science overcomes faith in a carnal mind, and faith in God destroys all
faith in sin and in material methods of healing, then sin, disease, and
death will disappear.

Aids in sickness

Prayers, in which God is not asked to heal but is besought to take the
patient to Himself, do not benefit the sick. An ill-tempered,
complaining, or deceitful person should not be a nurse. The nurse should
be cheerful, orderly, punctual, patient, full of faith,--receptive to
Truth and Love.

Mental quackery

It is mental quackery to make disease a reality--to hold it as something
seen and felt--and then to attempt its cure through Mind. It is no less
erroneous to believe in the real existence of a tumor, a cancer, or
decayed lungs, while you argue against their reality, than it is for
your patient to feel these ills in physical belief. Mental practice,
which holds disease as a reality, fastens disease on the patient, and it
may appear in a more alarming form.

Effacing images of disease

The knowledge that brain-lobes cannot kill a man nor affect the
functions of mind would prevent the brain from becoming diseased, though
a moral offence is indeed the

<span id="pg_396">p. 396</span>

worst of diseases. One should never hold in mind the thought of disease,
but should efface from thought all forms and types of disease, both for
one's own sake and for that of the patient.

Avoid talking disease

Avoid talking illness to the patient. Make no unnecessary inquiries
relative to feelings or disease. Never startle with a discouraging
remark about recovery, nor draw attention to certain symptoms as
unfavorable, avoid speaking aloud the name of the disease. Never say
beforehand how much you have to contend with in a case, nor encourage in
the patient's thought the expectation of growing worse before a crisis
is passed.

False testimony refuted

The refutation of the testimony of material sense is not a difficult
task in view of the conceded falsity of this testimony. The refutation
becomes arduous, not because the testimony of sin or disease is true,
but solely on account of the tenacity of belief in its truth, due to the
force of education and the overwhelming weight of opinions on the wrong
side,--all teaching that the body suffers, as if matter could have
sensation.

Healthful explanation

At the right time explain to the sick the power which their beliefs
exercise over their bodies. Give them divine and wholesome
understanding, with which to combat their erroneous sense, and so efface
the images of sickness from mortal mind. Keep distinctly in thought that
man is the offspring of God, not of man; that man is spiritual, not
material; that Soul is Spirit, outside of matter, never in it, never
giving the body life and sensation. It breaks the dream of disease to
understand that sickness is formed by the human mind, not by matter nor
by the divine Mind.

<span id="pg_397">p. 397</span>

Misleading methods

By not perceiving vital metaphysical points, not seeing how mortal mind
affects the body,--acting beneficially or injuriously on the health, as
well as on the morals and the happiness of mortals,--we are misled in
our conclusions and methods. We throw the mental influence on the wrong
side, thereby actually injuring those whom we mean to bless.

Remedy for accidents

Suffering is no less a mental condition than is enjoyment. You cause
bodily sufferings and increase them by admitting their reality and
continuance, as directly as you enhance your joys by believing them to
be real and continuous. When an accident happens, you think or exclaim,
"I am hurt!" Your thought is more powerful than your words, more
powerful than the accident itself, to make the injury real.

Now reverse the process. Declare that you are not hurt and understand
the reason why, and you will find the ensuing good effects to be in
exact proportion to your disbelief in physics, and your fidelity to
divine metaphysics, confidence in God as All, which the Scriptures
declare Him to be.

Independent mentality

To heal the sick, one must be familiar with the great verities of being.
Mortals are no more material in their waking hours than when they act,
walk, see, hear, enjoy, or suffer in dreams. We can never treat mortal
mind and matter separately, because they combine as one. Give up the
belief that mind is, even temporarily, compressed within the skull, and
you will quickly become more manly or womanly. You will understand
yourself and your Maker better than before.

<span id="pg_398">p. 398</span>

Naming maladies

Sometimes Jesus called a disease by name, as when he said to the
epileptic boy, "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of
him, and enter no more into him." It is added that "the spirit \[error\]
cried, and rent him sore and came out of him, and he was as one
dead,"--clear evidence that the malady was not material. These instances
show the concessions which Jesus was willing to make to the popular
ignorance of spiritual Life-laws. Often he gave no name to the distemper
he cured. To the synagogue ruler's daughter, whom they called dead but
of whom he said, "she is not dead, but sleepeth," he simply said,
"Damsel, I say unto thee, arise!" To the sufferer with the withered hand
he said, "Stretch forth thine hand," and it "was restored whole, like as
the other."

The action of faith

Homoeopathic remedies, sometimes not containing a particle of medicine,
are known to relieve the symptoms of disease. What produces the change?
It is the faith of the doctor and the patient, which reduces
self-inflicted sufferings and produces a new effect upon the body. In
like manner destroy the illusion of pleasure in intoxication, and the
desire for strong drink is gone. Appetite and disease reside in mortal
mind, not in matter.

So also faith, cooperating with a belief in the healing effects of time
and medication, will soothe fear and change the belief of disease to a
belief of health. Even a blind faith removes bodily ailments for a
season, but hypnotism changes such ills into new and more difficult
forms of disease. The Science of Mind must come to the rescue, to work a
radical cure. Then we understand the process. The great fact remains
that evil is not mind. Evil has

<span id="pg_399">p. 399</span>

no power, no intelligence, for God is good, and therefore good is
infinite, is All.

Corporeal combinations

You say that certain material combinations produce disease; but if the
material body causes disease, can matter cure what matter has caused?
Mortal mind prescribes the drug, and administers it. Mortal mind plans
the exercise, and puts the body through certain motions. No gastric gas
accumulates, not a secretion nor combination can operate, apart from the
action of mortal thought, alias mortal mind.

Automatic mechanism

So-called mortal mind sends its despatches over its body, but this
so-called mind is both the service and message of this telegraphy.
Nerves are unable to talk, and matter can return no answer to immortal
Mind. If Mind is the only actor, how can mechanism be automatic? Mortal
mind perpetuates its own thought. It constructs a machine, manages it,
and then calls it material. A mill at work or the action of a
water-wheel is but a derivative from, and continuation of, the primitive
mortal mind. Without this force the body is devoid of action, and this
deadness shows that so-called mortal life is mortal mind, not matter.

Mental strength

Scientifically speaking, there is no mortal mind out of which to make
material beliefs, springing from illusion. This misnamed mind is not an
entity. It is only a false sense of matter, since matter is not
sensible. The one Mind, God, contains no mortal opinions. All that is
real is included in this immortal Mind.

Confirmation in a parable

Our Master asked: "How can one enter into a strong man's house and spoil
his goods, except he first bind the strong man?" In other words: How can
I heal the body, without beginning with so-called

<span id="pg_400">p. 400</span>

mortal mind, which directly controls the body? When disease is once
destroyed in this so-called mind, the fear of disease is gone, and
therefore the disease is thoroughly cured. Mortal mind is "the strong
man," which must be held in subjection before its influence upon health
and morals can be removed. This error conquered, we can despoil "the
strong man" of his goods,--namely, of sin and disease.

Eradicate error from thought

Mortals obtain the harmony of health, only as they forsake discord,
acknowledge the supremacy of divine Mind, and abandon their material
beliefs. Eradicate the image of disease from the perturbed thought
before it has taken tangible shape in conscious thought, alias the body,
and you prevent the development of disease. This task becomes easy, if
you understand that every disease is an error, and has no character nor
type, except what mortal mind assigns to it. By lifting thought above
error, or disease, and contending persistently for truth, you destroy
error.

Mortal mind controlled

When we remove disease by addressing the disturbed mind, giving no heed
to the body, we prove that thought alone creates the suffering. Mortal
mind rules all that is mortal. We see in the body the images of this
mind, even as in optics we see painted on the retina the image which
becomes visible to the senses. The action of so-called mortal mind must
be destroyed by the divine Mind to bring out the harmony of being.
Without divine control there is discord, manifest as sin, sickness, and
death.

Mortal mind not a healer

The Scriptures plainly declare the baneful influence of sinful thought
on the body. Even our Master felt this. It is recorded that in certain
localities he did not many

<span id="pg_401">p. 401</span>

mighty works "because of their unbelief" in Truth. Any human error is
its own enemy, and works against itself; it does nothing in the right
direction and much in the wrong. If so-called mind is cherishing evil
passions and malicious purposes, it is not a healer, but it engenders
disease and death.

Effect of opposites

If faith in the truth of being, which you impart mentally while
destroying error, causes chemicalization (as when an alkali is
destroying an acid), it is because the truth of being must transform the
error to the end of producing a higher manifestation. This fermentation
should not aggravate the disease, but should be as painless to man as to
a fluid, since matter has no sensation and mortal mind only feels and
sees materially. What I term chemicalization is the upheaval produced
when immortal Truth is destroying erroneous mortal belief. Mental
chemicalization brings sin and sickness to the surface, forcing
impurities to pass away, as is the case with a fermenting fluid.

Medicine and brain

The only effect produced by medicine is dependent upon mental action. If
the mind were parted from the body, could you produce any effect upon
the brain or body by applying the drug to either? Would the drug remove
paralysis, affect organization, or restore will and action to cerebrum
and cerebellum?

Skilful surgery

Until the advancing age admits the efficacy and supremacy of Mind, it is
better for Christian Scientists to leave surgery and the adjustment of
broken bones and dislocations to the fingers of a surgeon, while the
mental healer confines himself chiefly to mental reconstruction and to
the prevention of inflammation.

<span id="pg_402">p. 402</span>

Christian Science is always the most skilful surgeon, but surgery is the
branch of its healing which will be last acknowledged. However, it is
but just to say that the author has already in her possession
well-authenticated records of the cure, by herself and her students
through mental surgery alone, of broken bones, dislocated joints, and
spinal vertebrae.

Indestructible life of man

The time approaches when mortal mind will forsake its corporeal,
structural, and material basis, when immortal Mind and its formations
will be apprehended in Science, and material beliefs will not interfere
with spiritual facts. Man is indestructible and eternal. Sometime it
will be learned that mortal mind constructs the mortal body with this
mind's own mortal materials. In Science, no breakage nor dislocation can
really occur. You say that accidents, injuries, and disease kill man,
but this is not true. The life of man is Mind. The material body
manifests only what mortal mind believes, whether it be a broken bone,
disease, or sin.

The evil of mesmerism

We say that one human mind can influence another and in this way affect
the body, but we rarely remember that we govern our own bodies. The
error, mesmerism--or hypnotism, to use the recent term - illustrates the
fact just stated. The operator would make his subjects believe that they
cannot act voluntarily and handle themselves as they should do. If they
yield to this influence, it is because their belief is not better
instructed by spiritual understanding. Hence the proof that hypnotism is
not scientific; Science cannot produce both disorder and order. The
involuntary pleasure or pain of the person under hypnotic control is
proved to be a belief without a real cause.

<span id="pg_403">p. 403</span>

Wrong-doer should suffer

So the sick through their beliefs have induced their own diseased
conditions. The great difference between voluntary and involuntary
mesmerism is that voluntary mesmerism is induced consciously and should
and does cause the perpetrator to suffer, while selfmesmerism is induced
unconsciously and by his mistake a man is often instructed. In the first
instance it is understood that the difficulty is a mental illusion,
while in the second it is believed that the misfortune is a material
effect. The human mind is employed to remove the illusion in one case,
but matter is appealed to in the other. In reality, both have their
origin in the human mind, and can be healed only by the divine Mind.

Error's power imaginary

You command the situation if you understand that mortal existence is a
state of self-deception and not the truth of being. Mortal mind is
constantly producing on mortal body the results of false opinions; and
it will continue to do so, until mortal error is deprived of its
imaginary powers by Truth, which sweeps away the gossamer web of mortal
illusion. The most Christian state is one of rectitude and spiritual
understanding, and this is best adapted for healing the sick. Never
conjure up some new discovery from dark forebodings regarding disease
and then acquaint your patient with it.

Disease-production

The mortal so-called mind produces all that is unlike the immortal Mind.
The human mind determines the nature of a case, and the practitioner
improves or injures the case in proportion to the truth or error which
influences his conclusions. The mental conception and development of
disease are not understood by the patient, but the physician should be
familiar

<span id="pg_404">p. 404</span>

with mental action and its effect in order to judge the case according
to Christian Science.

Appetites to be abandoned

If a man is an inebriate, a slave to tobacco, or the special servant of
any one of the myriad forms of sin, meet and destroy these errors with
the truth of being, by exhibiting to the wrong-doer the suffering which
his submission to such habits brings, and by convincing him that there
is no real pleasure in false appetites. A corrupt mind is manifested in
a corrupt body. Lust, malice, and all sorts of evil are diseased
beliefs, and you can destroy them only by destroying the wicked motives
which produce them. If the evil is over in the repentant mortal mind,
while its effects still remain on the individual, you can remove this
disorder as God's law is fulfilled and reformation cancels the crime.
The healthy sinner is the hardened sinner.

Temperance reform

The temperance reform, felt all over our land, results from metaphysical
healing, which cuts down every tree that brings not forth good fruit.
This conviction, that there is no real pleasure in sin, is one of the
most important points in the theology of Christian Science. Arouse the
sinner to this new and true view of sin, show him that sin confers no
pleasure, and this knowledge strengthens his moral courage and increases
his ability to master evil and to love good.

Sin or fear the root of sickness

Healing the sick and reforming the sinner are one and the same thing in
Christian Science. Both cures require the same method and are
inseparable in Truth. Hatred, envy, dishonesty, fear, and so forth, make
a man sick, and neither material medicine nor Mind can help him
permanently, even in body, unless it makes him better mentally, and so
delivers him

<span id="pg_405">p. 405</span>

from his destroyers. The basic error is mortal mind. Hatred inflames the
brutal propensities. The indulgence of evil motives and aims makes any
man, who is above the lowest type of manhood, a hopeless sufferer.

Mental conspirators

Christian Science commands man to master the propensities,--to hold
hatred in abeyance with kindness, to conquer lust with chastity, revenge
with charity, and to overcome deceit with honesty. Choke these errors in
their early stages, if you would not cherish an army of conspirators
against health, happiness, and success. They will deliver you to the
judge, the arbiter of truth against error. The judge will deliver you to
justice, and the sentence of the moral law will be executed upon mortal
mind and body. Both will be manacled until the last farthing is
paid,--until you have balanced your account with God. "Whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap." The good man finally can overcome his
fear of sin. This is sin's necessity, - to destroy itself. Immortal man
demonstrates the government of God, good, in which is no power to sin.

Cumulative repentence

It were better to be exposed to every plague on earth than to endure the
cumulative effects of a guilty conscience. The abiding consciousness of
wrongdoing tends to destroy the ability to do right. If sin is not
regretted and is not lessening, then it is hastening on to physical and
moral doom. You are conquered by the moral penalties you incur and the
ills they bring. The pains of sinful sense are less harmful than its
pleasures. Belief in material suffering causes mortals to retreat from
their error, to flee from body to Spirit, and to appeal to divine
sources outside of themselves.

<span id="pg_406">p. 406</span>

The leaves of healing

The Bible contains the recipe for all healing. "The leaves of the tree
were for the healing of the nations." Sin and sickness are both healed
by the same Principle. The tree is typical of man's divine Principle,
which is equal to every emergency, offering full salvation from sin,
sickness, and death. Sin will submit to Christian Science when, in place
of modes and forms, the power of God is understood and demonstrated in
the healing of mortals, both mind and body. "Perfect Love casteth out
fear."

Sickness will abate

The Science of being unveils the errors of sense, and spiritual
perception, aided by Science, reaches Truth. Then error disappears. Sin
and sickness will abate and seem less real as we approach the scientific
period, in which mortal sense is subdued and all that is unlike the true
likeness disappears. The moral man has no fear that he will commit a
murder, and he should be as fearless on the question of disease.

Resist to the end

Resist evil--error of every sort--and it will flee from you. Error is
opposed to Life. We can, and ultimately shall, so rise as to avail
ourselves in every direction of the supremacy of Truth over error, Life
over death, and good over evil, and this growth will go on until we
arrive at the fulness of God's idea, and no more fear that we shall be
sick and die. Inharmony of any kind involves weakness and suffering,--a
loss of control over the body.

Morbid cravings

The depraved appetite for alcoholic drinks, tobacco, tea, coffee, opium,
is destroyed only by Mind's mastery of the body. This normal control is
gained through divine strength and understanding. There is no enjoyment
in getting drunk, in becoming a

<span id="pg_407">p. 407</span>

fool or an object of loathing; but there is a very sharp remembrance of
it, a suffering inconceivably terrible to man's self-respect. Puffing
the obnoxious fumes of tobacco, or chewing a leaf naturally attractive
to no creature except a loathsome worm, is at least disgusting.

Universal panacea

Man's enslavement to the most relentless masters passion, selfishness,
envy, hatred, and revenge - is conquered only by a mighty struggle.
Every hour of delay makes the struggle more severe. If man is not
victorious over the passions, they crush out happiness, health, and
manhood. Here Christian Science is the sovereign panacea, giving
strength to the weakness of mortal mind,--strength from the immortal and
omnipotent Mind,--and lifting humanity above itself into purer desires,
even into spiritual power and good-will to man.

Let the slave of wrong desire learn the lessons of Christian Science,
and he will get the better of that desire and ascend a degree in the
scale of health, happiness, and existence.

Immortal memory

If delusion says, "I have lost my memory," contradict it. No faculty of
Mind is lost. In Science, all being is eternal, spiritual, perfect,
harmonious in every action. Let the perfect model be present in your
thoughts instead of its demoralized opposite. This spiritualization of
thought lets in the light, and brings the divine Mind, Life not death,
into your consciousness.

Sin a form of insanity

There are many species of insanity. All sin is insanity in different
degrees. Sin is spared from this classification, only because its method
of madness is in consonance with common mortal belief.

<span id="pg_408">p. 408</span>

Every sort of sickness is error,--that is, sickness is loss of harmony.
This view is not altered by the fact that sin is worse than sickness,
and sickness is not acknowledged nor discovered to be error by many who
are sick.

There is a universal insanity of so-called health, which mistakes fable
for fact throughout the entire round of the material senses, but this
general craze cannot, in a scientific diagnosis, shield the individual
case from the special name of insanity. Those unfortunate people who are
committed to insane asylums are only so many distinctly defined
instances of the baneful effects of illusion on mortal minds and bodies.

Drugs and brain-lobes

The supposition that we can correct insanity by the use of purgatives
and narcotics is in itself a mild species of insanity. Can drugs go of
their own accord to the brain and destroy the so-called inflammation of
disordered functions, thus reaching mortal mind through matter? Drugs do
not affect a corpse, and Truth does not distribute drugs through the
blood, and from them derive a supposed effect on intelligence and
sentiment. A dislocation of the tarsal joint would produce insanity as
perceptibly as would congestion of the brain, were it not that mortal
mind thinks that the tarsal joint is less intimately connected with the
mind than is the brain. Reverse the belief, and the results would be
perceptibly different.

Matter and animate error

The unconscious thought in the corporeal substratum of brain produces no
effect, and that condition of the body which we call sensation in matter
is unreal. Mortal mind is ignorant of itself,--ignorant of the errors it
includes and of their

<span id="pg_409">p. 409</span>

effects. Intelligent matter is an impossibility. You may say: "But if
disease obtains in matter, why do you insist that disease is formed by
mortal mind and not by matter?" Mortal mind and body combine as one, and
the nearer matter approaches its final statement,--animate error called
nerves, brain, mind,--the more prolific it is likely to become in sin
and diseasebeliefs.

Dictation of error

Unconscious mortal mind - alias matter, brain - cannot dictate terms to
consciousness nor say, "I am sick." The belief, that the unconscious
substratum of mortal mind, termed the body, suffers and reports disease
independently of this so-called conscious mind, is the error which
prevents mortals from knowing how to govern their bodies.

So-called superiority

The so-called conscious mortal mind is believed to be superior to its
unconscious substratum, matter, and the stronger never yields to the
weaker, except through fear or choice. The animate should be governed by
God alone. The real man is spiritual and immortal, but the mortal and
imperfect so-called "children of men" are counterfeits from the
beginning, to be laid aside for the pure reality. This mortal is put
off, and the new man or real man is put on, in proportion as mortals
realize the Science of man and seek the true model.

Death no benefactor

We have no right to say that life depends on matter now, but will not
depend on it after death. We cannot spend our days here in ignorance of
the Science of Life, and expect to find beyond the grave a reward for
this ignorance. Death will not make us harmonious and immortal as a
recompense for ignorance.

<span id="pg_410">p. 410</span>

If here we give no heed to Christian Science, which is spiritual and
eternal, we shall not be ready for spiritual Life hereafter.

Life eternal and present

"This is life eternal," says Jesus,--is, not shall be; and then he
defines everlasting life as a present knowledge of his Father and of
himself,--the knowledge of Love, Truth, and Life. "This is life eternal,
that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
Thou hast sent." The Scriptures say, "Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God," showing that
Truth is the actual life of man; but mankind objects to making this
teaching practical.

Love casteth out fear

Every trial of our faith in God makes us stronger. The more difficult
seems the material condition to be overcome by Spirit, the stronger
should be our faith and the purer our love. The Apostle John says:
"There is no fear in Love, but perfect Love casteth out fear. . . . He
that feareth is not made perfect in Love." Here is a definite and
inspired proclamation of Christian Science.

MENTAL TREATMENT ILLUSTRATED

Be not afraid

The Science of mental practice is susceptible of no misuse. Selfishness
does not appear in the practice of Truth or Christian Science. If mental
practice is abused or is used in any way except to promote right
thinking and doing, the power to heal mentally will diminish, until the
practitioner's healing ability is wholly lost. Christian scientific
practice begins with Christ's keynote of harmony, "Be not afraid!"

<span id="pg_411">p. 411</span>

Said Job: "The thing which I greatly feared is come upon me."

Naming diseases

My first discovery in the student's practice was this: If the student
silently called the disease by name, when he argued against it, as a
general rule the body would respond more quickly, - just as a person
replies more readily when his name is spoken; but this was because the
student was not perfectly attuned to divine Science, and needed the
arguments of truth for reminders. If Spirit or the power of divine Love
bear witness to the truth, this is the ultimatum, the scientific way,
and the healing is instantaneous.

Evils cast out

It is recorded that once Jesus asked the name of a disease,--a disease
which moderns would call dementia. The demon, or evil, replied that his
name was Legion. Thereupon Jesus cast out the evil, and the insane man
was changed and straightway became whole. The Scripture seems to import
that Jesus caused the evil to be self-seen and so destroyed.

Fear as the foundation

The procuring cause and foundation of all sickness is fear, ignorance,
or sin. Disease is always induced by a false sense mentally entertained,
not destroyed. Disease is an image of thought externalized. The mental
state is called a material state. Whatever is cherished in mortal mind
as the physical condition is imaged forth on the body.

Unspoken pleading

Always begin your treatment by allaying the fear of patients. Silently
reassure them as to their exemption from disease and danger. Watch the
result of this simple rule of Christian Science, and you will find that
it alleviates the symptoms of every disease. If you succeed in wholly
removing the fear,

<span id="pg_412">p. 412</span>

your patient is healed. The great fact that God lovingly governs all,
never punishing aught but sin, is your standpoint, from which to advance
and destroy the human fear of sickness. Mentally and silently plead the
case scientifically for Truth. You may vary the arguments to meet the
peculiar or general symptoms of the case you treat, but be thoroughly
persuaded in your own mind concerning the truth which you think or
speak, and you will be the victor.

Eloquent silence

You may call the disease by name when you mentally deny it; but by
naming it audibly, you are liable under some circumstances to impress it
upon the thought. The power of Christian Science and divine Love is
omnipotent. It is indeed adequate to unclasp the hold and to destroy
disease, sin, and death.

Insistence requisite

To prevent disease or to cure it, the power of Truth, of divine Spirit,
must break the dream of the material senses. To heal by argument, find
the type of the ailment, get its name, and array your mental plea
against the physical. Argue at first mentally, not audibly, that the
patient has no disease, and conform the argument so as to destroy the
evidence of disease. Mentally insist that harmony is the fact, and that
sickness is a temporal dream. Realize the presence of health and the
fact of harmonious being, until the body corresponds with the normal
conditions of health and harmony.

The cure of infants

If the case is that of a young child or an infant, it needs to be met
mainly through the parent's thought, silently or audibly on the
aforesaid basis of Christian Science. The Scientist knows that there can
be no hereditary disease, since matter is not intelligent

<span id="pg_413">p. 413</span>

and cannot transmit good or evil intelligence to man, and God, the only
Mind, does not produce pain in matter. The act of yielding one's
thoughts to the undue contemplation of physical wants or conditions
induces those very conditions. A single requirement, beyond what is
necessary to meet the simplest needs of the babe is harmful. Mind
regulates the condition of the stomach, bowels, and food, the
temperature of children and of men, and matter does not. The wise or
unwise views of parents and other persons on these subjects produce good
or bad effects on the health of children.

Ablutions for cleanliness

The daily ablutions of an infant are no more natural nor necessary than
would be the process of taking a fish out of water every day and
covering it with dirt in order to make it thrive more vigorously in its
own element. "Cleanliness is next to godliness," but washing should be
only for the purpose of keeping the body clean, and this can be effected
without scrubbing the whole surface daily. Water is not the natural
habitat of humanity. I insist on bodily cleanliness within and without.
I am not patient with a speck of dirt; but in caring for an infant one
need not wash his little body all over each day in order to keep it
sweet as the new-blown flower.

Juvenile ailments

Giving drugs to infants, noticing every symptom of flatulency, and
constantly directing the mind to such signs,--that mind being laden with
illusions about disease, health-laws, and death,--these actions convey
mental images to children's budding thoughts, and often stamp them
there, making it probable at any time that such ills may be reproduced
in the very ailments feared. A child may have worms, if you say so, or
any other malady, timorously held in the beliefs con

<span id="pg_414">p. 414</span>

cerning his body. Thus are laid the foundations of the belief in disease
and death, and thus are children educated into discord.

Cure of insanity

The treatment of insanity is especially interesting. However obstinate
the case, it yields more readily than do most diseases to the salutary
action of truth, which counteracts error. The arguments to be used in
curing insanity are the same as in other diseases: namely, the
impossibility that matter, brain, can control or derange mind, can
suffer or cause suffering; also the fact that truth and love will
establish a healthy state, guide and govern mortal mind or the thought
of the patient, and destroy all error, whether it is called dementia,
hatred, or any other discord.

To fix truth steadfastly in your patients' thoughts, explain Christian
Science to them, but not too soon,--not until your patients are prepared
for the explanation, lest you array the sick against their own interests
by troubling and perplexing their thought. The Christian Scientist's
argument rests on the Christianly scientific basis of being. The
Scripture declares, "The Lord He is God \[good\]; there is none else
beside Him." Even so, harmony is universal, and discord is unreal.
Christian Science declares that Mind is substance, also that matter
neither feels, suffers, nor enjoys. Hold these points strongly in view.
Keep in mind the verity of being,--that man is the image and likeness of
God, in whom all being is painless and permanent. Remember that man's
perfection is real and unimpeachable, whereas imperfection is
blameworthy, unreal, and is not brought about by divine Love.

Matter is not inflamed

Matter cannot be inflamed. Inflammation is fear, an

<span id="pg_415">p. 415</span>

excited state of mortals which is not normal. Immortal Mind is the only
cause; therefore disease is neither a cause nor an effect. Mind in every
case is the eternal God, good. Sin, disease, and death have no
foundations in Truth. Inflamation as a mortal belief quickens or impedes
the action of the system, because thought moves quickly or slowly, leaps
or halts when it contemplates unpleasant things, or when the individual
looks upon some object which he dreads. Inflammation never appears in a
part which mortal thought does not reach. That is why opiates relieve
inflammation. They quiet the thought by inducing stupefaction and by
resorting to matter instead of to Mind. Opiates do not remove the pain
in any scientific sense. They only render mortal mind temporarily less
fearful, till it can master an erroneous belief.

Truth calms the thought

Note how thought makes the face pallid. It either retards the
circulation or quickens it, causing a pale or flushed cheek. In the same
way thought increases or diminishes the secretions, the action of the
lungs, of the bowels, and of the heart. The muscles, moving quickly or
slowly and impelled or palsied by thought, represent the action of all
the organs of the human system, including brain and viscera. To remove
the error producing disorder, you must calm and instruct mortal mind
with immortal Truth.

Effects of etherization

Etherization will apparently cause the body to disappear. Before the
thoughts are fully at rest, the limbs will vanish from consciousness.
Indeed, the whole frame will sink from sight along with surrounding
objects, leaving the pain standing forth as distinctly as a
mountain-peak, as if it were a separate

<span id="pg_416">p. 416</span>

bodily member. At last the agony also vanishes. This process shows the
pain to be in the mind, for the inflammation is not suppressed; and the
belief of pain will presently return, unless the mental image
occasioning the pain be removed by recognizing the truth of being.

Sedatives valueless

A hypodermic injection of morphine is administered to a patient, and in
twenty minutes the sufferer is quietly asleep. To him there is no longer
any pain. Yet any physician - allopathic, homoeopathic, botanic,
eclectic - will tell you that the troublesome material cause is
unremoved, and that when the soporific influence of the opium is
exhausted, the patient will find himself in the same pain, unless the
belief which occasions the pain has meanwhile been changed. Where is the
pain while the patient sleeps?

The so-called physical ego

The material body, which you call me, is mortal mind, and this mind is
material in sensation, even as the body, which has originated from this
material sense and been developed according to it, is material. This
materialism of parent and child is only in mortal mind, as the dead body
proves; for when the mortal has resigned his body to dust, the body is
no longer the parent, even in appearance.

Evil thought depletes

The sick know nothing of the mental process by which they are depleted,
and next to nothing of the metaphysical method by which they can be
healed. If they ask about their disease, tell them only what is best for
them to know. Assure them that they think too much about their ailments,
and have already heard too much on that subject. Turn their thoughts
away from their bodies to higher objects. Teach them that their being is
sustained by

<span id="pg_417">p. 417</span>

Spirit, not by matter, and that they find health, peace, and harmony in
God, divine Love.

Helpful encouragement

Give sick people credit for sometimes knowing more than their doctors.
Always support their trust in the power of Mind to sustain the body.
Never tell the sick that they have more courage than strength. Tell them
rather, that their strength is in proportion to their courage. If you
make the sick realize this great truism, there will be no reaction from
over-exertion or from excited conditions. Maintain the facts of
Christian Science,--that Spirit is God, and therefore cannot be sick;
that what is termed matter cannot be sick; that all causation is Mind,
acting through spiritual law. Then hold your ground with the unshaken
understanding of Truth and Love, and you will win. When you silence the
witness against your plea, you destroy the evidence, for the disease
disappears. The evidence before the corporeal senses is not the Science
of immortal man.

Disease to be made unreal

To the Christian Science healer, sickness is a dream from which the
patient needs to be awakened. Disease should not appear real to the
physician, since it is demonstrable that the way to cure the patient is
to make disease unreal to him. To do this, the physician must understand
the unreality of disease in Science.

Explain audibly to your patients, as soon as they can bear it, the
complete control which Mind holds over the body. Show them how mortal
mind seems to induce disease by certain fears and false conclusions, and
how divine Mind can cure by opposite thoughts. Give your patients an
underlying understanding to support them

<span id="pg_418">p. 418</span>

and to shield them from the baneful effects of their own conclusions.
Show them that the conquest over sickness, as well as over sin, depends
on mentally destroying all belief in material pleasure or pain.

Christian pleading

Stick to the truth of being in contradistinction to the error that life,
substance, or intelligence can be in matter. Plead with an honest
conviction of truth and a clear perception of the unchanging, unerring,
and certain effect of divine Science. Then, if your fidelity is half
equal to the truth of your plea, you will heal the sick.

Truthful arguments

It must be clear to you that sickness is no more the reality of being
than is sin. This mortal dream of sickness, sin, and death should cease
through Christian Science. Then one disease would be as readily
destroyed as another. Whatever the belief is, if arguments are used to
destroy it, the belief must be repudiated, and the negation must extend
to the supposed disease and to whatever decides its type and symptoms.
Truth is affirmative, and confers harmony. All metaphysical logic is
inspired by this simple rule of Truth, which governs all reality. By the
truthful arguments you employ, and especially by the spirit of Truth and
Love which you entertain, you will heal the sick.

Morality required

Include moral as well as physical belief in your efforts to destroy
error. Cast out all manner of evil. "Preach the gospel to every
creature." Speak the truth to every form of error. Tumors, ulcers,
tubercles, inflammation, pain, deformed joints, are waking
dream-shadows, dark images of mortal thought, which flee before the
light of Truth.

<span id="pg_419">p. 419</span>

A moral question may hinder the recovery of the sick. Lurking error,
lust, envy, revenge, malice, or hate will perpetuate or even create the
belief in disease. Errors of all sorts tend in this direction. Your true
course is to destroy the foe, and leave the field to God, Life, Truth,
and Love, remembering that God and His ideas alone are real and
harmonious.

Relapse unnecessary

If your patient from any cause suffers a relapse, meet the cause
mentally and courageously, knowing that there can be no reaction in
Truth. Neither disease itself, sin, nor fear has the power to cause
disease or a relapse. Disease has no intelligence with which to move
itself about or to change itself from one form to another. If disease
moves, mind, not matter, moves it; therefore be sure that you move it
off. Meet every adverse circumstance as its master. Observe mind instead
of body, lest aught unfit for development enter thought. Think less of
material conditions and more of spiritual.

Conquer beliefs and fears

Mind produces all action. If the action proceeds from Truth, from
immortal Mind, there is harmony; but mortal mind is liable to any phase
of belief. A relapse cannot in reality occur in mortals or so-called
mortal minds, for there is but one Mind, one God. Never fear the mental
malpractitioner, the mental assassin, who, in attempting to rule
mankind, tramples upon the divine Principle of metaphysics, for God is
the only power. To succeed in healing, you must conquer your own fears
as well as those of your patients, and rise into higher and holier
consciousness.

True government of man

If it is found necessary to treat against relapse, know that disease or
its symptoms cannot change forms, nor

<span id="pg_420">p. 420</span>

go from one part to another, for Truth destroys disease. There is no
metastasis, no stoppage of harmonious action, no paralysis. Truth not
error, Love not hate, Spirit not matter, governs man. If students do not
readily heal themselves, they should early call an experienced Christian
Scientist to aid them. If they are unwilling to do this for themselves,
they need only to know that error cannot produce this unnatural
reluctance.

Positive reassurance

Instruct the sick that they are not helpless victims, for if they will
only accept Truth, they can resist disease and ward it off, as
positively as they can the temptation to sin. This fact of Christian
Science should be explained to invalids when they are in a fit mood to
receive it, - when they will not array themselves against it, but are
ready to become receptive to the new idea. The fact that Truth overcomes
both disease and sin reassures depressed hope. It imparts a healthy
stimulus to the body, and regulates the system. It increases or
diminishes the action, as the case may require, better than any drug,
alterative, or tonic.

Proper stimulus

Mind is the natural stimulus of the body, but erroneous belief, taken at
its best, is not promotive of health or happiness. Tell the sick that
they can meet disease fearlessly, if they only realize that divine Love
gives them all power over every physical action and condition.

Awaken the patient

If it becomes necessary to startle mortal mind to break its dream of
suffering, vehemently tell your patient that he must awake. Turn his
gaze from the false evidence of the senses to the harmonious facts of
Soul and immortal being. Tell him that he suffers

<span id="pg_421">p. 421</span>

only as the insane suffer, from false beliefs. The only difference is,
that insanity implies belief in a diseased brain, while physical
ailments (so-called) arise from the belief that other portions of the
body are deranged. Derangement, or disarrangement, is a word which
conveys the true definition of all human belief in ill-health, or
disturbed harmony. Should you thus startle mortal mind in order to
remove its beliefs, afterwards make known to the patient your motive for
this shock, showing him that it was to facilitate recovery.

How to treat a crisis

If a crisis occurs in your treatment, you must treat the patient less
for the disease and more for the mental disturbance or fermentation, and
subdue the symptoms by removing the belief that this chemicalization
produces pain or disease. Insist vehemently on the great fact which
covers the whole ground, that God, Spirit, is all, and that there is
none beside Him. There is no disease. When the supposed suffering is
gone from mortal mind, there can be no pain; and when the fear is
destroyed, the inflammation will subside. Calm the excitement sometimes
induced by chemicalization, which is the alterative effect produced by
Truth upon error, and sometimes explain the symptoms and their cause to
the patient.

No perversion of Mind-science

It is no more Christianly scientific to see disease than it is to
experience it. If you would destroy the sense of disease, you should not
build it up by wishing to see the forms it assumes or by employing a
single material application for its relief. The perversion of
Mind-science is like asserting that the products of eight multiplied by
five, and of seven by ten, are both forty, and that their combined

<span id="pg_422">p. 422</span>

sum is fifty, and then calling the process mathematics. Wiser than his
persecutors, Jesus said: "If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do
your children cast them out?"

Effect of this book

If the reader of this book observes a great stir throughout his whole
system, and certain moral and physical symptoms seem aggravated, these
indications are favorable. Continue to read, and the book will become
the physician, allaying the tremor which Truth often brings to error
when destroying it.

Disease neutralized

Patients, unfamiliar with the cause of this commotion and ignorant that
it is a favorable omen, may be alarmed. If such be the case, explain to
them the law of this action. As when an acid and alkali meet and bring
out a third quality, so mental and moral chemistry changes the material
base of thought, giving more spirituality to consciousness and causing
it to depend less on material evidence. These changes which go on in
mortal mind serve to reconstruct the body. Thus Christian Science, by
the alchemy of Spirit, destroys sin and death.

Bone-healing by surgery

Let us suppose two parallel cases of bone-disease, both similarly
produced and attended by the same symptoms. A surgeon is employed in one
case, and a Christian Scientist in the other. The surgeon, holding that
matter forms its own conditions and renders them fatal at certain
points, entertains fears and doubts as to the ultimate outcome of the
injury. Not holding the reins of government in his own hands, he
believes that something stronger than Mind--namely, matter--governs the
case. His treatment is therefore tentative. This mental state invites
defeat. The belief

<span id="pg_423">p. 423</span>

that he has met his master in matter and may not be able to mend the
bone, increases his fear; yet this belief should not be communicated to
the patient, either verbally or otherwise, for this fear greatly
diminishes the tendency towards a favorable result. Remember that the
unexpressed belief oftentimes affects a sensitive patient more strongly
than the expressed thought.

Scientific corrective

The Christian Scientist, understanding scientifically that all is Mind,
commences with mental causation, the truth of being, to destroy the
error. This corrective is an alterative, reaching to every part of the
human system. According to Scripture, it searches "the joints and
marrow," and it restores the harmony of man.

Coping with difficulties

The matter-physician deals with matter as both his foe and his remedy.
He regards the ailment as weakened or strengthened according to the
evidence which matter presents. The metaphysician, making Mind his basis
of operation irrespective of matter and regarding the truth and harmony
of being as superior to error and discord, has rendered himself strong,
instead of weak, to cope with the case; and he proportionately
strengthens his patient with the stimulus of courage and conscious
power. Both Science and consciousness are now at work in the economy of
being according to the law of Mind, which ultimately asserts its
absolute supremacy.

Formation from thought

Ossification or any abnormal condition or derangement of the body is as
directly the action of mortal mind as is dementia or insanity. Bones
have only the substance of thought which forms them. They are only
phenomena of the mind of mortals. The so-called substance of bone is
formed first

<span id="pg_424">p. 424</span>

by the parent's mind, through self-division. Soon the child becomes a
separate, individualized mortal mind, which takes possession of itself
and its own thoughts of bones.

Accidents unknown to God

Accidents are unknown to God, or immortal Mind, and we must leave the
mortal basis of belief and unite with the one Mind, in order to change
the notion of chance to the proper sense of God's unerring direction and
thus bring out harmony.

Opposing mentality

Under divine Providence there can be no accidents, since there is no
room for imperfection in perfection. In medical practice objections
would be raised if one doctor should administer a drug to counteract the
working of a remedy prescribed by another doctor. It is equally
important in metaphysical practice that the minds which surround your
patient should not act against your influence by continually expressing
such opinions as may alarm or discourage,--either by giving antagonistic
advice or through unspoken thoughts resting on your patient. While it is
certain that the divine Mind can remove any obstacle, still you need the
ear of your auditor. It is not more difficult to make yourself heard
mentally while others are thinking about your patients or conversing
with them, if you understand Christian Science--the oneness and the
allness of divine Love; but it is well to be alone with God and the sick
when treating disease.

Mind removes scrofula

To prevent or to cure scrofula and other so-called hereditary diseases,
you must destroy the belief in these ills and the faith in the
possibility of their transmission. The patient may tell you that he has
a humor in the blood, a scrofulous diathesis. His

<span id="pg_425">p. 425</span>

parents or some of his progenitors farther back have so believed. Mortal
mind, not matter, induces this conclusion and its results. You will have
humors, just so long as you believe them to be safety-valves or to be
ineradicable.

Nothing to consume

If the case to be mentally treated is consumption, take up the leading
points included (according to belief) in this disease. Show that it is
not inherited; that inflammation, tubercles, hemorrhage, and
decomposition are beliefs, images of mortal thought superimposed upon
the body; that they are not the truth of man; that they should be
treated as error and put out of thought. Then these ills will disappear.

The lungs re-formed

If the body is diseased, this is but one of the beliefs of mortal mind.
Mortal man will be less mortal, when he learns that matter never
sustained existence and can never destroy God, who is man's Life. When
this is understood, mankind will be more spiritual and know that there
is nothing to consume, since Spirit, God, is All-in-all. What if the
belief is consumption? God is more to a man than his belief, and the
less we acknowledge matter or its laws, the more immortality we possess.
Consciousness constructs a better body when faith in matter has been
conquered. Correct material belief by spiritual understanding, and
Spirit will form you anew. You will never fear again except to offend
God, and you will never believe that heart or any portion of the body
can destroy you.

Soundness maintained

If you have sound and capacious lungs and want them to remain so, be
always ready with the mental protest against the opposite belief in
heredity. Discard all notions about lungs, tubercles, in

<span id="pg_426">p. 426</span>

herited consumption, or disease arising from any circumstance, and you
will find that mortal mind, when instructed by Truth, yields to divine
power, which steers the body into health.

Our footsteps heavenward

The discoverer of Christian Science finds the path less difficult when
she has the high goal always before her thoughts, than when she counts
her footsteps in endeavoring to reach it. When the destination is
desirable, expectation speeds our progress. The struggle for Truth makes
one strong instead of weak, resting instead of wearying one. If the
belief in death were obliterated, and the understanding obtained that
there is no death, this would be a "tree of life," known by its fruits.
Man should renew his energies and endeavors, and see the folly of
hypocrisy, while also learning the necessity of working out his own
salvation. When it is learned that disease cannot destroy life, and that
mortals are not saved from sin or sickness by death, this understanding
will quicken into newness of life. It will master either a desire to die
or a dread of the grave, and thus destroy the great fear that besets
mortal existence.

Christian standard

The relinquishment of all faith in death and also of the fear of its
sting would raise the standard of health and morals far beyond its
present elevation, and would enable us to hold the banner of
Christianity aloft with unflinching faith in God, in Life eternal. Sin
brought death, and death will disappear with the disappearance of sin.
Man is immortal, and the body cannot die, because matter has no life to
surrender. The human concepts named matter, death, disease, sickness,
and sin are all that can be destroyed.

<span id="pg_427">p. 427</span>

Life not contingent on matter

If it is true that man lives, this fact can never change in Science to
the opposite belief that man dies. Life is the law of Soul, even the law
of the spirit of Truth, and Soul is never without its representative.
Man's individual being can no more die nor disappear in unconsciousness
than can Soul, for both are immortal. If man believes in death now, he
must disbelieve in it when learning that there is no reality in death,
since the truth of being is deathless. The belief that existence is
contingent on matter must be met and mastered by Science, before Life
can be understood and harmony obtained.

Mortality vanquished

Death is but another phase of the dream that existence can be material.
Nothing can interfere with the harmony of being nor end the existence of
man in Science. Man is the same after as before a bone is broken or the
body guillotined. If man is never to overcome death, why do the
Scriptures say, "The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death"? The
tenor of the Word shows that we shall obtain the victory over death in
proportion as we overcome sin. The great difficulty lies in ignorance of
what God is. God, Life, Truth, and Love make man undying. Immortal Mind,
governing all, must be acknowledged as supreme in the physical realm,
so-called, as well as in the spiritual.

No death nor inaction

Called to the bed of death, what material remedy has man when all such
remedies have failed? Spirit is his last resort, but it should have been
his first and only resort. The dream of death must be mastered by Mind
here or hereafter. Thought will waken from its own material declaration,
"I am dead," to catch this trumpet-word of Truth, "There

<span id="pg_428">p. 428</span>

is no death, no inaction, diseased action, overaction, nor reaction."

Vision opening

Life is real, and death is the illusion. A demonstration of the facts of
Soul in Jesus' way resolves the dark visions of material sense into
harmony and immortality. Man's privilege at this supreme moment is to
prove the words of our Master: "If a man keep my saying, he shall never
see death." To divest thought of false trusts and material evidences in
order that the spiritual facts of being may appear,--this is the great
attainment by means of which we shall sweep away the false and give
place to the true. Thus we may establish in truth the temple, or body,
"whose builder and maker is God."

Intelligent consecration

We should consecrate existence, not "to the unknown God" whom we
"ignorantly worship," but to the eternal builder, the everlasting
Father, to the Life which mortal sense cannot impair nor mortal belief
destroy. We must realize the ability of mental might to offset human
misconceptions and to replace them with the life which is spiritual, not
material.

The present immortality

The great spiritual fact must be brought out that man is, not shall be,
perfect and immortal. We must hold forever the consciousness of
existence, and sooner or later, through Christ and Christian Science, we
must master sin and death. The evidence of man's immortality will become
more apparent, as material beliefs are given up and the immortal facts
of being are admitted.

Careful guidance

The author has healed hopeless organic disease, and raised the dying to
life and health through the understanding of God as the only Life. It is
a sin to believe

<span id="pg_429">p. 429</span>

that aught can overpower omnipotent and eternal Life, and this Life must
be brought to light by the understanding that there is no death, as well
as by other graces of Spirit. We must begin, however, with the more
simple demonstrations of control, and the sooner we begin the better.
The final demonstration takes time for its accomplishment. When walking,
we are guided by the eye. We look before our feet, and if we are wise,
we look beyond a single step in the line of spiritual advancement.

Clay replying to the potter

The corpse, deserted by thought, is cold and decays, but it never
suffers. Science declares that man is subject to Mind. Mortal mind
affirms that mind is subordinate to the body, that the body is dying,
that it must be buried and decomposed into dust; but mortal mind's
affirmation is not true. Mortals waken from the dream of death with
bodies unseen by those who think that they bury the body.

Continuity of existence

If man did not exist before the material organization began, he could
not exist after the body is disintegrated. If we live after death and
are immortal, we must have lived before birth, for if Life ever had any
beginning, it must also have an ending, even according to the
calculations of natural science. Do you believe this? No! Do you
understand it? No! This is why you doubt the statement and do not
demonstrate the facts it involves. We must have faith in all the sayings
of our Master, though they are not included in the teachings of the
schools, and are not understood generally by our ethical instructors.

Life all-inclusive

Jesus said (John viii. 51), "If a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death." That statement is not con

<span id="pg_430">p. 430</span>

fined to spiritual life, but includes all the phenomena of existence.
Jesus demonstrated this, healing the dying and raising the dead. Mortal
mind must part with error, must put off itself with its deeds, and
immortal manhood, the Christ ideal, will appear. Faith should enlarge
its borders and strengthen its base by resting upon Spirit instead of
matter. When man gives up his belief in death, he will advance more
rapidly towards God, Life, and Love. Belief in sickness and death, as
certainly as belief in sin, tends to shut out the true sense of Life and
health. When will mankind wake to this great fact in Science?

I here present to my readers an allegory illustrative of the law of
divine Mind and of the supposed laws of matter and hygiene, an allegory
in which the plea of Christian Science heals the sick.

A mental court case

Suppose a mental case to be on trial, as cases are tried in court. A man
is charged with having committed livercomplaint. The patient feels ill,
ruminates, and the trial commences. Personal Sense is the plaintiff.
Mortal Man is the defendant. False Belief is the attorney for Personal
Sense. Mortal Minds, Materia Medica, Anatomy, Physiology, Hypnotism,
Envy, Greed and Ingratitude, constitute the jury. The courtroom is
filled with interested spectators, and Judge Medicine is on the bench.

The evidence for the prosecution being called for, a witness testifies
thus:

I represent Health-laws. I was present on certain nights when the
prisoner, or patient, watched with a sick friend. Although I have the
superintendence of human affairs, I was personally abused on those
occasions. I was told that

<span id="pg_431">p. 431</span>

I must remain silent until called for at this trial, when I would be
allowed to testify in the case. Notwithstanding my rules to the
contrary, the prisoner watched with the sick every night in the week.
When the sick mortal was thirsty, the prisoner gave him drink. During
all this time the prisoner attended to his daily labors, partaking of
food at irregular intervals, sometimes going to sleep immediately after
a heavy meal. At last he committed liver-complaint, which I considered
criminal, inasmuch as this offence is deemed punishable with death.
Therefore I arrested Mortal Man in behalf of the state (namely, the
body) and cast him into prison. At the time of the arrest the prisoner
summoned Physiology, Materia Medica, and Hypnotism to prevent his
punishment. The struggle on their part was long. Materia Medica held out
the longest, but at length all these assistants resigned to me,
Health-laws, and I succeeded in getting Mortal Man into close
confinement until I should release him.

The next witness is called:

I am Coated Tongue. I am covered with a foul fur, placed on me the night
of the liver-attack. Morbid Secretion hypnotized the prisoner and took
control of his mind, making him despondent. Another witness takes the
stand and testifies:

I am Sallow Skin. I have been dry, hot, and chilled by turns since the
night of the liver-attack. I have lost my healthy hue and become
unsightly, although nothing on my part has occasioned this change. I
practise daily ablutions and perform my functions as usual, but I am
robbed of my good looks.

<span id="pg_432">p. 432</span>

The next witness testifies:

I am Nerve, the State Commissioner for Mortal Man. I am intimately
acquainted with the plaintiff, Personal Sense, and know him to be
truthful and upright, whereas Mortal Man, the prisoner at the bar, is
capable of falsehood. I was witness to the crime of liver-complaint. I
knew the prisoner would commit it, for I convey messages from my
residence in matter, alias brain, to body.

Another witness is called for by the Court of Error and says:

I am Mortality, Governor of the Province of Body, in which Mortal Man
resides. In this province there is a statute regarding disease, -
namely, that he upon whose person disease is found shall be treated as a
criminal and punished with death.

The Judge asks if by doing good to his neighbor, it is possible for man
to become diseased, transgress the laws, and merit punishment, and
Governor Mortality replies in the affirmative.

Another witness takes the stand and testifies:

I am Death. I was called for, shortly after the report of the crime, by
the officer of the Board of Health, who protested that the prisoner had
abused him, and that my presence was required to confirm his testimony.
One of the prisoner's friends, Materia Medica, was present when I
arrived, endeavoring to assist the prisoner to escape from the hands of
justice, alias nature's so-called law; but my appearance with a message
from the Board of Health changed the purpose of Materia Medica, and he
decided at once that the prisoner should die.

<span id="pg_433">p. 433</span>

Judge Medicine charges the jury

The testimony for the plaintiff, Personal Sense, being closed, Judge
Medicine arises, and with great solemnity addresses the jury of Mortal
Minds. He analyzes the offence, reviews the testimony, and explains the
law relating to liver-complaint. His conclusion is, that laws of nature
render disease homicidal. In compliance with a stern duty, his Honor,
Judge Medicine, urges the jury not to allow their judgment to be warped
by the irrational, unchristian suggestions of Christian Science. The
jury must regard in such cases only the evidence of Personal Sense
against Mortal Man.

As the Judge proceeds, the prisoner grows restless. His sallow face
blanches with fear, and a look of despair and death settles upon it. The
case is given to the jury. A brief consultation ensues, and the jury
returns a verdict of "Guilty of liver-complaint in the first degree."

Mortal Man sentenced

Judge Medicine then proceeds to pronounce the solemn sentence of death
upon the prisoner. Because he has loved his neighbor as himself, Mortal
Man has been guilty of benevolence in the first degree, and this has led
him into the commission of the second crime, liver-complaint, which
material laws condemn as homicide. For this crime Mortal Man is
sentenced to be tortured until he is dead. "May God have mercy on your
soul," is the Judge's solemn peroration.

The prisoner is then remanded to his cell (sick-bed), and Scholastic
Theology is sent for to prepare the frightened sense of Life,
God,--which sense must be immortal, - for death.

Appeal to a higher tribunal

Ah! but Christ, Truth, the spirit of Life and the friend of Mortal Man,
can open wide those prison doors

<span id="pg_434">p. 434</span>

and set the captive free. Swift on the wings of divine Love, there comes
a despatch: "Delay the execution; the prisoner is not guilty."
Consternation fills the prison-yard. Some exclaim, "It is contrary to
law and justice." Others say, "The law of Christ supersedes our laws;
let us follow Christ."

Counsel for defence

After much debate and opposition, permission is obtained for a trial in
the Court of Spirit, where Christian Science is allowed to appear as
counsel for the unfortunate prisoner. Witnesses, judges and jurors, who
were at the previous Court of Error, are now summoned to appear before
the bar of Justice and eternal Truth.

When the case for Mortal Man versus Personal Sense is opened, Mortal
Man's counsel regards the prisoner with the utmost tenderness. The
counsel's earnest, solemn eyes, kindling with hope and triumph, look
upward. Then Christian Science turns suddenly to the supreme tribunal,
and opens the argument for the defence:

The prisoner at the bar has been unjustly sentenced. His trial was a
tragedy, and is morally illegal. Mortal Man has had no proper counsel in
the case. All the testmony has been on the side of Personal Sense, and
we shall unearth this foul conspiracy against the liberty and life of
Man. The only valid testimony in the case shows the alleged crime never
to have been committed. The prisoner is not proved "worthy of death, or
of bonds."

Your Honor, the lower court has sentenced Mortal Man to die, but God
made Man immortal and amenable to Spirit only. Denying justice to the
body, that court com

<span id="pg_435">p. 435</span>

mended man's immortal Spirit to heavenly mercy,--Spirit which is God
Himself and Man's only lawgiver! Who or what has sinned? Has the body or
has Mortal Mind committed a criminal deed? Counsellor False Belief has
argued that the body should die, while Reverend Theology would console
conscious Mortal Mind, which alone is capable of sin and suffering. The
body committed no offence. Mortal Man, in obedience to higher law,
helped his fellowman, an act which should result in good to himself as
well as to others.

The law of our Supreme Court decrees that whosoever sinneth shall die;
but good deeds are immortal, bringing joy instead of grief, pleasure
instead of pain, and life instead of death. If liver-complaint was
committed by trampling on Laws of Health, this was a good deed, for the
agent of those laws is an outlaw, a destroyer of Mortal Man's liberty
and rights. Laws of Health should be sentenced to die. Watching beside
the couch of pain in the exercise of a love that "is the fulfilling of
the law,"--doing "unto others as ye would that they should do unto
you,"--this is no infringement of law, for no demand, human or divine,
renders it just to punish a man for acting justly. If mortals sin, our
Supreme Judge in equity decides what penalty is due for the sin, and
Mortal Man can suffer only for his sin. For naught else can he be
punished, according to the law of Spirit, God. Then what jurisdiction
had his Honor, Judge Medicine, in this case? To him I might say, in
Bible language, "Sittest thou to judge . . . after the law, and
commandest . . . to be smitten contrary to the law?" The only
jurisdiction to which the prisoner can submit is that of Truth, Life,
and Love. If they condemn him not, neither shall Judge Medicine condemn
him; and I ask that the prisoner be restored to the liberty of which he
has been unjustly deprived.

<span id="pg_436">p. 436</span>

The principal witness (the officer of the Health-laws) deposed that he
was an eye-witness to the good deeds for which Mortal Man is under
sentence of death. After betraying him into the hands of your law, the
Health-agent disappeared, to reappear however at the trial as a witness
against Mortal Man and in the interest of Personal Sense, a murderer.
Your Supreme Court must find the prisoner on the night of the alleged
offence to have been acting within the limits of the divine law, and in
obedience thereto. Upon this statute hangs all the law and testimony.
Giving a cup of cold water in Christ's name, is a Christian service.
Laying down his life for a good deed, Mortal Man should find it again.
Such acts bear their own justification, and are under the protection of
the Most High.

Prior to the night of his arrest, the prisoner summoned two professed
friends, Materia Medica and Physiology, to prevent his committing
liver-complaint, and thus save him from arrest. But they brought with
them Fear, the sheriff, to precipitate the result which they were called
to prevent. It was Fear who handcuffed Mortal Man and would now punish
him. You have left Mortal Man no alternative. He must obey your law,
fear its consequences, and be punished for his fear. His friends
struggled hard to rescue the prisoner from the penalty they considered
justly due, but they were compelled to let him be taken into custody,
tried, and condemned. Thereupon Judge Medicine sat in judgment on the
case, and substantially charged the jury, twelve Mortal Minds, to find
the prisoner guilty. His Honor sentenced Mortal Man to die for the very
deeds which the divine law compels man to commit. Thus the Court of
Error construed obedience to the law of divine Love as disobedience to
the law of Life. Claiming to protect Mortal Man in right-doing, that
court pronounced a sentence of death for doing right.

One of the principal witnesses, Nerve, testified that he

<span id="pg_437">p. 437</span>

was a ruler of Body, in which province Mortal Man resides. He also
testified that he was on intimate terms with the plaintiff, and knew
Personal Sense to be truthful; that he knew Man, and that Man was made
in the image of God, but was a criminal. This is a foul aspersion on
man's Maker. It blots the fair escutcheon of omnipotence. It indicates
malice aforethought, a determination to condemn Man in the interest of
Personal Sense. At the bar of Truth, in the presence of divine Justice,
before the Judge of our higher tribunal, the Supreme Court of Spirit,
and before its jurors, the Spiritual Senses, I proclaim this witness,
Nerve, to be destitute of intelligence and truth and to be a false
witness.

Man self-destroyed; the testimony of matter respected; Spirit not
allowed a hearing; Soul a criminal though recommended to mercy; the
helpless innocent body tortured,--these are the terrible records of your
Court of Error, and I ask that the Supreme Court of Spirit reverse this
decision.

Here the opposing counsel, False Belief, called Christian Science to
order for contempt of court. Various notables - Materia Medica, Anatomy,
Physiology, Scholastic Theology, and Jurisprudence - rose to the
question of expelling Christian Science from the bar, for such
high-handed illegality. They declared that Christian Science was
overthrowing the judicial proceedings of a regularly constituted court.
But Judge Justice of the Supreme Court of Spirit overruled their motions
on the ground that unjust usages were not allowed at the bar of Truth,
which ranks above the lower Court of Error.

The attorney, Christian Science, then read from the supreme
statute-book, the Bible, certain extracts on the

<span id="pg_438">p. 438</span>

Rights of Man, remarking, that the Bible was better authority than
Blackstone:

Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have
dominion.  

Behold, I give unto you power . . . over all the power of the enemy: and
nothing shall by any means hurt you.  

If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

Then Christian Science proved the witness, Nerve, to be a perjurer.
Instead of being a ruler in the Province of Body, in which Mortal Man
was reported to reside, Nerve was an insubordinate citizen, putting in
false claims to office and bearing false witness against Man. Turning
suddenly to Personal Sense, by this time silent, Christian Science
continued:

I ask your arrest in the name of Almighty God on three distinct charges
of crime, to wit: perjury, treason, and conspiracy against the rights
and life of man.

Then Christian Science continued:

Another witness, equally inadequate, said that on the night of the crime
a garment of foul fur was spread over him by Morbid Secretion, while the
facts in the case show that this fur is a foreign substance, imported by
False Belief, the attorney for Personal Sense, who is in partnership
with Error and smuggles Error's goods into market without the inspection
of Soul's government officers. When the Court of Truth summoned Furred
Tongue for examination, he disappeared and was never heard of more.

Morbid Secretion is not an importer or dealer in fur, but we have heard
Materia Medica explain how this fur is manufactured, and we know Morbid
Secretion to be on friendly terms with the firm of Personal Sense,
Error, &

<span id="pg_439">p. 439</span>

Co., receiving pay from them and introducing their goods into the
market. Also, be it known that False Belief, the counsel for the
plaintiff, Personal Sense, is a buyer for this firm. He manufactures for
it, keeps a furnishing store, and advertises largely for his employers.

Death testified that he was absent from the Province of Body, when a
message came from False Belief, commanding him to take part in the
homicide. At this request Death repaired to the spot where the
liver-complaint was in process, frightening away Materia Medica, who was
then manacling the prisoner in the attempt to save him. True, Materia
Medica was a misguided participant in the misdeed for which the
Health-officer had Mortal Man in custody, though Mortal Man was
innocent.

Christian Science turned from the abashed witnesses, his words flashing
as lightning in the perturbed faces of these worthies, Scholastic
Theology, Materia Medica, Physiology, the blind Hypnotism, and the
masked Personal Sense, and said:

God will smite you, O whited walls, for injuring in your ignorance the
unfortunate Mortal Man who sought your aid in his struggles against
liver-complaint and Death. You came to his rescue, only to fasten upon
him an offence of which he was innocent. You aided and abetted Fear and
Health-laws. You betrayed Mortal Man, meanwhile declaring Disease to be
God's servant and the righteous executor of His laws. Our higher
statutes declare you all, witnesses, jurors, and judges, to be
offenders, awaiting the sentence which General Progress and Divine Love
will pronounce. We send our best detectives to whatever locality is
reported to be haunted by Disease, but on visiting the spot, they learn
that Disease was never there, for he could not

<span id="pg_440">p. 440</span>

possibly elude their search. Your Material Court of Errors, when it
condemned Mortal Man on the ground of hygienic disobedience, was
manipulated by the oleaginous machinations of the counsel, False Belief,
whom Truth arraigns before the supreme bar of Spirit to answer for his
crime. Morbid Secretion is taught how to make sleep befool reason before
sacrificing mortals to their false gods.

Mortal Minds were deceived by your attorney, False Belief, and were
influenced to give a verdict delivering Mortal Man to Death. Good deeds
are transformed into crimes, to which you attach penalties; but no
warping of justice can render disobedience to the so-called laws of
Matter disobedience to God, or an act of homicide. Even penal law holds
homicide, under stress of circumstances, to be justifiable. Now what
greater justification can any deed have, than that it is for the good of
one's neighbor? Wherefore, then, in the name of outraged justice, do you
sentence Mortal Man for ministering to the wants of his fellow-man in
obedience to divine law? You cannot trample upon the decree of the
Supreme Bench. Mortal Man has his appeal to Spirit, God, who sentences
only for sin.

The false and unjust beliefs of your human mental legislators compel
them to enact wicked laws of sickness and so forth, and then render
obedience to these laws punishable as crime. In the presence of the
Supreme Lawgiver, standing at the bar of Truth, and in accordance with
the divine statutes, I repudiate the false testimony of Personal. Sense.
I ask that he be forbidden to enter against Mortal Man any more suits to
be tried at the Court of Material Error. I appeal to the just and
equitable decisions of divine Spirit to restore to Mortal Man the rights
of which he has been deprived.

Charge of the Chief Justice

Here the counsel for the defence closed, and the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court, with benign and imposing

<span id="pg_441">p. 441</span>

presence, comprehending and defining all law and evidence, explained
from his statute-book, the Bible, that any so-called law, which
undertakes to punish aught but sin, is null and void.

He also decided that the plaintiff, Personal Sense, be not permitted to
enter any suits at the bar of Soul, but be enjoined to keep perpetual
silence, and in case of temptation, to give heavy bonds for good
behavior. He concluded his charge thus:--

The plea of False Belief we deem unworthy of a hearing. Let what False
Belief utters, now and forever, fall into oblivion, "unknelled,
uncoffined, and unknown." According to our statute, Material Law is a
liar who cannot bear witness against Mortal Man, neither can Fear arrest
Mortal Man nor can Disease cast him into prison. Our law refuses to
recognize Man as sick or dying, but holds him to be forever in the image
and likeness of his Maker. Reversing the testimony of Personal Sense and
the decrees of the Court of Error in favor of Matter, Spirit decides in
favor of Man and against Matter. We further recommend that Materia
Medica adopt Christian Science and that Health-laws, Mesmerism,
Hypnotism, Oriental Witchcraft, and Esoteric Magic be publicly executed
at the hands of our sheriff, Progress. The Supreme Bench decides in
favor of intelligence, that no law outside of divine Mind can punish or
reward Mortal Man. Your personal jurors in the Court of Error are myths.
Your attorney, False Belief, is an impostor, persuading Mortal Minds to
return a verdict contrary to law and gospel. The plaintiff, Personal
Sense, is recorded in our Book of books as a liar. Our great Teacher of
mental jurisprudence speaks of him also as "a murderer from the
beginning." We have no trials for sickness before the tri

<span id="pg_442">p. 442</span>

bunal of divine Spirit. There, Man is adjudged innocent of transgressing
physical laws, because there are no such laws. Our statute is spiritual,
our Government is divine. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right?"

Divine verdict

The Jury of Spiritual Senses agreed at once upon a verdict, and there
resounded throughout the vast audiencechamber of Spirit the cry, Not
guilty. Then the prisoner rose up regenerated, strong, free. We noticed,
as he shook hands with his counsel, Christian Science, that all
sallowness and debility had disappeared. His form was erect and
commanding, his countenance beaming with health and happiness. Divine
Love had cast out fear. Mortal Man, no longer sick and in prison, walked
forth, his feet "beautiful upon the mountains," as of one "that bringeth
good tidings."

Christ the great physician

Neither animal magnetism nor hypnotism enters into the practice of
Christian Science, in which truth cannot be reversed, but the reverse of
error is true. An improved belief cannot retrograde. When Christ changes
a belief of sin or of sickness into a better belief, then belief melts
into spiritual understanding, and sin, disease, and death disappear.
Christ, Truth, gives mortals temporary food and clothing until the
material, transformed with the ideal, disappears, and man is clothed and
fed spiritually. St. Paul says, "Work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling:" Jesus said, "Fear not, little flock; for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." This truth is Christian
Science.

Christian Scientists, be a law to yourselves that mental malpractice
cannot harm you either when asleep or when awake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII - Teaching Christian Science](sah13) 
